THE LAW UNSEALED: OR, A PRACTICAL EXPOSITION OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. WITH A
resolution of several Momentous Questions and Cases of Conscience.

By the Learned, Laborious, Faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. JAMES DURHAM,
Late Minister of the Gospel at GLASGOW.

Thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

Psalm 119. 96. The second Edition revised and corrected, To which are prefixed
the Commendatory Epistles of two famous English Divines, Dr. Owen and Mr.
Jenkin: There is also affixed an Alphabetical Table of the principal matters
handled in the whole Book; likewise the Errata that are escaped in the third
Edition, they are printed and amended in their right place in this second
Edition.

LORD LET GLASGOW FLOURISH THROUGH THE PREACHING OF THY WORD.



GLASGOW, Printed by Robert Sanders, Printer to the City and University, and
are to be sold in his Shop. 1676.

To the Right Honorable, Truly Noble, and Renownedly Religious Lady, My Lady
Marquess of ARGILE.
Noblest Madam,
HAD it so seemed good to the Sovereign, Holy, and Infinite Wise God, he might
at the first moment of his Peoples Conversion, have quite expelled all, even
the very least remainders of indwelling Corruption, and perfectly conformed
them to his own Image in Holiness; but he has in the depth of his insearchable
Wisdom, otherwise disposed for ends best known to himself: concerning which
(what ever may be, even here, our strongely-probable, and, in a good measure,
quieting Conjecturs as to some of them) it will be our Wisdom to make a
reference for full satisfaction to the day of that great Solemn and Celebrious
general Assembly of the Firstborn, wherein all such references shall be called
and satisfyingly discussed: And seeing he has thought it fit that some relicts
of sin (but exauctorated of its ringe and dominion) should indwell; and that
thereby the spiritual constitution of sojourning-Saints should be a mixture of
Grace and Corruption (each of these, notwithstanding, retaining still its own
natural irreconcilable Antipathy with the other, and lusting against the
other; so that in all their actings, both gracious and sinful, they are still
divided; and neither one, as they were before Regenerating Grace, nor as they
shall be in Glory) its highly congruous and suitable to the same ins^nit Wisdom,
that there should be a proportionable and correspondent mixture in the
dispensations of his Providence toward them while one this side, Heaven, some
more smiling, and some more cross: the Flesh and Unregenerate part requiring
crosses to whip it up, and drive it forward; and the Spirit and Regenerate part
calling for them also, to keepit awake and on its guard, against the surprising
prejudice and hurt it may sustain from the restless ill Neighbor, and
troublesome Companion, a Body of Death, that cleaves close to them, as a
Girdle does to the Loins of a Man, by reason of which they have not many hours,
let be days, to do well to an end: When their Constitution comes to be purely
Grace, perfectly defecat and refined from all the dreggy and dro^sy mixture of
indwelling Corruption then will their Lot be pure Solace and Joy, even
perfection and perpetuity of Joy, without any the least mixture of Sorrow or
Trouble of what ever sort; but till then (and Blessed Eternally be God, it is
not long to that, even but a moment) Trouble and Sorrow, less or more, will
wait on them who through much Tribulation must enter into the Kingdom of God*
Yet on a just reckoning there will be found no real nor well grounded Reason of
dissatisfaction with this wise disposal of Divine Providence, since He never
afflicts, nor are they in heaviness through one or more, or even manifold
Temptations; but when there is Need, and such need that a few serious
reflections will constrain the Patient to acknowledge it, and to say, This same
particular Cross so and so circumstantiated, could not well have been wanted
without a greater prejudice; nay, considering the inseparable connection that
God in his Eternal and Unalterable Decree, has established betwixt the end and
all the means that lead to it; When ever such and such a Cross is actually met
with, there is ground to think that it is as necessary as the Salvation of the
Christians is* that Cross being appointed as one mean with others, to bring
about the purposed end, to wit, the Salvation of such a Person: which one
consideration (That they are appointed thereunto, as the Apostle, writing to
the Thessalon^ans, asserteth) well pondered, would contribut, not a little to
reconcile the most sadly Crossed and afflicted Children of God, a great deal
more to their respective Crosses; and would make them to be taken up and borne
more patiently, pleasantly, and cheerfully; and would with all make them to
look out on them with a less formidable and more amiable Aspect than ordinarily
they do. And since, in the second place, all there Afflictions are afflictions
only of this present time, for a season, and but for a moment, not protracted
according to desert one minute beyond Death, let be Eternities length; Since
moreover the heaviest Loads, and greatest measures of them are but light and
moderate Afflictions, and His severest correctings of them are in measure with
Judgment and Discretion; He stays his rough Wind in the day of his East Wind,
and does in great Wisdom suite and proportion the trials of his People to their
strength and standing; in His faithfulness, not suffering them to be tempted
above what they are able, but with the temptation making a way to escape that
they may be able to bear it: Its not his manner to put new Wine into old
Bottles, nor to sew a piece of new Cloth unto an old Garment. He that teaches
the Husband man discretion, about the fit time and season of Plowing, Tilling,
Sowing, Harrowing, and Reaping of every kind of Seed and Grain, according to
its Nature; and how to Thresh out these several sorts of Seed and Grain by fit
means and instruments, can, being wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in
Working, with infinitely more wisdom, skill, judgment, discretion, and
tenderness, pitch the fittest seasons, kinds, measures and durations of his
People Afflictions, according to their several Necessities, Dispositions,
Standings, Capacities, and Abilities. And since withal, our Sovereign Lord the
King, the King of Saints, out of the absoluteness of his Dominion, and the
super-aboundance of his richest Grace has imposed upon every Cross that his
People meet with, not excepting (to say so) Vessels of the greatest Burden of
Affliction that Sail up and down the Sands, as it were, of the troublesome Sea
of this World, the Tole and Custom of some spiritual Good to be Paid to them;
Allowing, Warranting, and Commanding them by his Commission granted to them
under his Great Seal for that effect, to demand, require, and exact it from
every occurring Cross and Affliction: And if there shall be any demur or delay,
let be seeming denial to pay this Custom to wait and search for it, and with a
piece of holy peremptoriness, to persist in the exacting of it, as being most
certainly, without a possibility of misgiving, to be got therefore which the
Commission (more and more endeavored to be really believed and made use of
according to the Granter's mind) should be produced; wherein he has given the
highest security that All things (having a special look at all their
Afflictions, as the context, in the confession of most, if not all Judicious
Commentators puts beyond debate) shall work together for good to them that
love God, and are the called according to his purpose; where he has, to speak
so with reverence to his Majesty, condescended some way, to abridge his own
Sovereignty and absolute Dominion, engaging himself by Covenant, that though he
may do what he will, yet he shall will to do nothing but what shall be for his
Peoples good; so that in all his dispensations toward them, his absolute
Dominion and his good Will shall be commensurable, and of equal extent, the one
of them never to be stretched one hairs breadth beyond the other; and even in
the most dark, involved, intricate, abstruse and mysterious providence wherein
they can read and take up least of his mind; and wherein he (seeming to walk
either in the greatest absoluteness of his Dominion, or in the sharpest
severity of his Justice) refuses to give a particular account of his matters
and motions, has wonderfully stooped and condescended to give this general,
sweetly-satisfactory Account, That they shall work for good, even their
spiritual good and profit, The purging of sin, and their further participation
of his Holiness: O! that all the graciously sincere Lovers of God, and the
effectually called according to his purpose, might from the lively Faith of
this, be persuaded and prevailed with, to set themselves down at the Rece^t of
these Customs from the many Crosses and Afflictions that come in their way,
with a fixed resolution to suffer none of them to pass without paying the
Custom imposed by the King; The faithful, diligent, close, and constant
following of this employment would inspeakably enrich, and more than make up
all their Losses, infinitely beyond what gathering in the Customs of the rarest
and richest Commodities of both the In^^es could possibly do, were they all
engrossed and monopolized to that most honorable Society of the Godly; and
would help them to bear out a great spiritual rank and port, suitable to the
state of the King, and as it becomes them that are privileged to be
Collectors of such Customs under Him.

It is now, Noble Madam, a long time, not far from toward 30. years (what ever
was before) since your Ladyship was known by some to be helped, through Grace,
seriously to sit down at the receipt of these Customs from the cross and
afflicting dispensations which then occurred to yo^, whereby ye did observably
improve, better, and increase your spiritual stock and state, some-way to the
admiration of Standers by; and since that time, for most part of it, you have
been in the holy Providence of God, tried with a tract of Tribulations, each of
them more trying than another; and some of them such, that I think (as once the
blessed Author of this Treatise on occasion of a sad and surprising stroke, the
removal of the desire of his eyes, his gracious and faithful Wi^e, after a
whiles silence, with much gravity and great composure of spirit, said, Who
could persuade me to believe that this is good, if God had not said it:) if all
the world had said and sworn it, they could very hardly, if at all, have
persuaded you to believe that they were good: But since God, that cannot lie,
has said it, there is no room left to debate or doubt of it, let be to deny
it* and if your Ladyship (as I hope yo^ have) has been all this while
gathering up the Customs (...) spiritual good and gain, imposed upon these
many, various, and great tribulations, wherewith the Lord, no doubt, on a
blessed design of singular good to you, has thought fit to exercise you beyond
most persons living, at least of your so noble station and extraction: O! what
a vast stock and Treasure of rich and soul-inriching precious experiences of
the good and profit of all these Afflictions and Tribulations must you needs
have lying by you? What humility and soft walking, what contrition and
tenderness of heart; what frequency and fervency, what seriousness and
spirituality in Prayer? what sitting alone and keeping silence because he has
done it? what justifying of God, and ascribing Righteousness to Him in all that
he has done? what sweet Soli-loquies communings with the heart one the Bed,
self-searchings and examinations? what delight-some meditations on God, and on
his Law? what Mortification of Lusts, what deadness and denyedness to, and what
weanedness from all Creature Comforts and delights of the sons of Men? What
solicitous securing of the grand Interest amid'st these shakings-loose of all
other interests? what coveting of, and complacency in fellowship with God the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, while your other fellowship is made
desolate? what accounting of all things, so much in account amongst men, to be
but loss and dung in comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ the Lord? what growing disconformity to the World, by the renewing of
your mind? what transforming into the Image of God from Glory to Glory, as by
the Spirit of the Lord? what examplary holiness in all manner of conversation?
what postponing of all particular and self-interests to the public interest of
his Glory? what waitings and longings for the Coming of his Kingdom? what
desires and designs faithfully to serve your Generation according to His Will;
and when that is done, what groanings to be uncloathed and clothed upon with
your House from above? and what lively longings, with sweet submissions to his
Will to be dissolved, and to be with Jesus Christ, which is best of all? How
much in the mean time of a Stranger's and Pilgrim's deportement with published
practical plain declarations to the world that this is not your Country? but
that you are in expectation of one, even a Heavenly Country, so that God is not
ashamed to be called your God? finally, What practical and experimental
knowledge of, and clear insight in that notable and nonesuch art of making out
of God, and making up in Him what is missing amongst the Creatures? a little of
whom can go far, inconceivably far, to fill up much empty and void room,
through the removal of many and most choice Creature Comforts? What possible
loss or want is it that cannot be made up in him? who is God all-sufficient,
and in whom, whatever is desirable and excellent amongst them all, is to be
found in an eminently transcendent, and infinitely more excellent way; and from
whom, as the inexhaustibly full Fountain, and incomprehensibly vast, immense,
shoarless, boundless, and bottomless Ocean of all delightful, desirable,
imaginable, and possible perfections, the small drops, and little rivulets of
seeming and painted perfections scattered amongst the Creatures, issue forth:
O! beautiful and blessed fruits of afflictions, yet not brought forth by
afflictions of themselves, but by his own grace working together with, and by
them; a part of whose Royal and Incommunicable Prerogative, it is (not
communicate nor given out of his own hand to any dispensation, whether of
Ordinances, or of Providence more smiling or more cross, abstractly from his
Blesing and Grace) to teach to profit. If your Ladyship be not thus enriched,
and if your Stock and Revenue be not thus bettered, I take it for granted that
it is your burden, and more afflicting to you than all your other Afflictions;
and that it is with-all singly aimed at by you, and diligently driven as your
greatest design in the world. I could from my own particular certain knowledge
and observation, long ago, and of late (having had the honor and happiness to
be often in your company, and at some of the lowest ebbs of your outward
prosperity) and from the knowledge of others more knowing and observing than I,
say more of your rich incomes of gain and advantage, of your improvements, of
the countervailings of your damage, and of the up-makings of all your losses
this way, than either my fear of incurring the construction of a Flatterer with
such as do not know you as I do, will permit; or your Christian modesty,
sobriety, and self-denial will admit; and to undertake to say all that might
truly, and without complementing (too too ordinary in Epistles Dedicatory) be
said to this purpose, would be thought by your Lady-ship as far below you to
crave, or expect, as it would be above me suitably to perform.

Now Madam, being fully persuaded that this savoury, sound, solid,
soul-searching, and soul-setling Treatise, will be acceptable to, and improved
by your Ladyship, for furtherance of this your spiritual good and advantage,
beyond what it will be to, and by most others: I find no need of any long
consultation with my self, To whom to address its Dedication, you having in my
poor esteem on many accounts, the deserved preference of many (to say no more)
Ladys of Honor now living; and since with-all I nothing doubt, had the
precious, and now perfected Author been alive, and minded the publication of it
with a Dedication to any Noble Lady, Your Self would have been the Person, of
whom, I know, he had a high esteem, having himself, before his Death, signified
his purpose of Dedicating his piece on the Canticles to your Lady-ships Noble
and much noted Sister in Law, my Lady V^-Countess of Kenmure. It needs no
Epistles of commendation to you, who was so thoroughly acquainted with its
Author; the reading of it will abundantly commend it self, and as a piece,
though posthumous, of his work, commend him in the Gates. I shall only now say,
which will much indear it to you, and to all the honest-hearted Students of
Holiness, that it is for most part, very practical (and what is polemick in it)
at that time much called for) is by a true information of the judgment
directly levelled at a suitable practice) and your Ladyship knows that the
power, yea, the very soul and life of Religion lies in the dew practice of it;
and indeed we know no more in God's account than we do through Grace, singly
and seriously design and endeavor to practice; they all and they only having a
good understanding, that do his Commandments, and to do, and keep them, being
his Peoples Wisdom and Understanding in the sight of the Nations who here of
these Statutes, and are constrained to say, Surely this is a Wise and
Understanding People; The greatest measure of merely apprehensive and
speculative knowledge of the Truths and Will of God, does not make truly Wise,
because not Wise to Salvation, nor evidenceth the Persons that have it to be
really Happy, the Lord not having pronounced them to be such that only know,
but who knowing these things do them; though, alase, many not at all, or but
very little considering this seek to know only, or mainly, that they themselves
may know, or that they may make it known to others that they do know (a notable
disappointment of the end of all sound Scripture-Theologie, which is as to the
Whole, and every Part, Head and Article thereof, Practice, and nor mere
Speculation) the great Soul-ruining practical error of many Professors of this
knowing age upon the one hand; as there is another error in practice,
lamentably incident to not a few well-meaning Souls, on the other hand, whereby
desiring and delighting only to hear, read, and know what speaks to their
present case and spiritual exercise, or immediately presses somewhat in
practice, they much weary of, and listen but little to what serves for more
full and clear information of their Judgments in the literal meaning of the
Scriptures, in the Doctrinal part of Religion, and in what may increase,
better, and advance their knowledge in the principles thereof, till they be
sound in the Faith, established in the present Truth, and have their loins girt
about with it; whereby it comes to pass, that although some such may, through
grace, have chosen the better part which will not be taken from them; yet they
are not only through their ignorance filled with many confusions, and with
perplexing, and almost inextricable fears and doubts about their own spiritual
state and condition, but are also eminently exposed to the dreadful hazard of
being catched and carried a away as a ready prey, by every error and Sect
master, plausibly pretending but any the least respect to the practice and
power of Godliness; which has been very prejudical to the Church of God in all
Ages, and most observably in this, as there is much ground to fear it may yet
further be, if we be tried with warm and suitable tentations. Happy therefore,
yea, thrice happy they, who are by the skill and conduct of him that is given
to be a Leader and Pilot to his People, helped to stemm the Port, and to steer
a straight and steady course betwixt the Shelves and Rocks of these Extremes,
on the right and left hand, on which thousands have spilt and made Shipwarck;
and to make it their business as to seek diligently after knowledge of the
truths of Religion; to cry and lift up their voice for it as for Silver and for
hid Treasure; and to run to and fro through the use of all Divinely appointed
means that knowledge may be increased; so, vigorously to drive it as their
design, to practice all they know, and to have their practice foot-side with,
and marching up, the full length of their knowledge and profession. That your
Ladyship may more and more (as you, through Grace, already in a great measure
do) thus stemm the Port, fetching some more Wind to fill your Sails from God's
Blessing on this Judgement-instructing and affection-moving practical Treatise,
till you arrive with a plerophory of Faith with up-Sails Top and Top-gallant,
at that peaceful Port and Heavenly Harbor of Rest, prepared for the People of
God, is the serious Desire of

Noble Madam, Your Ladyships much Obliged,

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE subject matter of this Treatise must without all controversy be passing
excellent, it being not only a portion of Divinely-inspired Scripture, but such
portion of it as is the Moral Law; the most straight infallible, perfect, an
perpetually*binding rule of life and manners, that short summary and abrid
gment of all called*for duties and forbidden sins (whatever S^^inions (with
whom Anabaptists and Arminian-Remonstrants on the matter join hands (on a
woeful design to transform the Gospel into a new Law or Covenant of Works, that
thereby in place of the righteousness of Faith, and righteousness of Works may
be established, by their alleged Supplements and Amendments of, and
Addi^aments to it, to be made in the New Testament; and Papists by their vainly
boasted-of Works of Super-e^ogation and Counsels of Perfection, whereby they
would have the Law out done by doing more than it requires, audaciously averr
to the contrary;) even these Ten-words (afterward contracted by the Lord Christ
into two Words or Commandments) immediately pronounced by God himself, and twice
written with his own finger on Tables of stone, comprising a great many various
matters and purposes; so that it may without any the least hesitation or
Hyperbole be asserted, There was never so much matter and marrow, with so much
admirably-holy, cunning, compended, couched, and conveyed in so few words, by
the most Laconick concise, sententious and singularly significant spokesman in
the World: And no wonder, since it is He that gave men tongues, and taught them
to speak, that speaks here, who has infinitely beyond the most expert of
them, (being all but Battologists and Bablers, beside Him) the art of speaking
much, marvellously much in few words; and would even in this have us according
to our measure humbly to imitate him: And no doubt it is one of the many more,
and more gross evidences of the declension of this Generation from the
ancient, lovely, and laudable simplicity, that many men forgetting that God at
first appointed words to be the external signs of the internal conceptions of
their minds, and foolishly fancing that because they love and admire to hear
themselves talk, others do or are obliged to do so; affect to multiply, words,
if not without knowledge, yet without necessity, and with vast disproportion to
the matter; And whereas a few of their words rightly disposed, might
sufficiently serve to bring us to the very outmost border and boundary of their
conceptions, and also to make suitable impressions of them (all the end of
words) yet ere we can come that length, we must needs wear away our time, and
weary our selves in wandering through the wast Wilderness of the unnecessary and
superfluous remainder of them: And this does usher in, or rather is ushered in,
by other piece of neighbour-vanity, whereby men wearing of wonted and long worn
words, though sufficiently significant, grow fond upon ^ovel, new coined and
never before heard of ones, stretching their wit (if supperfluity of words,
though both n^w and neat, be worthy to be placed amongst the productions of
wit; for thereby we are made never a whit the wiser, nor more knowing) and
putting their invention on the Tenters to find out (no new matter but) n^w
words, whereby often old, plain and obvious matters are intricated and
ob^cured, at least to more ordinary Readers and Hearers, a notable perversion
of the end of words for which the instituter of them will call to an account;
neither are they satisfied with such curi sity in coa^ser and more comm^n
matters* but this Alien and Fo^raign, yea even Romantic and wanton stil^ of
language is introduced into, and malepartly obtruded upon Theologick^ and most
sublimely spiritual purposes, whether discoursed by vive voice, or committed to
writing* (which ought I grant to be spoke as becomes the Oracles of God, with
a grave appositness, of phrase, keeping some proportion with the Majesty of the
matter, that they may not be exposed to cont^mpt by any unbecoming incongruity
or baseness) by which it comes to pass to the inspeakable prejudice and
obstruction of Edification, that many in their niceness, n^useating* form of
simple and sound words, are ready to ^iss and ho^^ off the Theater of the
Church the most precious and profitable points of Truth though abundantly
beautiful, Majestic and powerful in their own native spiritual simplicity, ^s
unfit to act their part, and as being but dull and blunt things, if not
altogether unworthy to be owned* and received as truths; if they appear not,
whether in the Pulpit or Press, clothed with this strange and gaudi^ attire,
with this Comedians Coat dressed up with the Feathers of Arrogant humane
Eloquence, and be*daubed with this Rethorick and affectedly belabored Elegancy
of speech (which our truly, manly, and magnanimous Christian-Author did
undervalue: And no great wonder, since even the Heathen moral Philosopher
Senec^ did look at it as scarce worthy of a man; for writing to his Lucil^us,
he wills him in stead of being busied about words to cause himself have a
feeling of the substance thereof in his heart; and to think those whom he sees
to have an affected and labored kind of speech to have their spirits occupied
about vain things* comparing such to diverse young m^n well trimmed and
frizli^, who seem as they were newly come out of a box; from which kind of men
nothing firm nor generous is to be expected. And further affirms that a
virtuous man speaks more remis^y, but more securely, and whatever he says
^ath more confidence in it than curiosity; that speech being the Image of the
mind, if a man disguise and polish it too curiously, it is a token that the
speaker is an Hypocrit and little worth: And that it is no manly Ornament to
speak affectedly) nay, this has of late with other extravagancies risen to
such a prodigious hight amongst the wisdom of words, or word-wisdom
Monopolizing men of this age, that if the great Apostle Paul who spoke wisdom
(though not of this s^rt, nor of this world) amongst them that were perfect,
and did upon design, not from any defect, decline all wisdom of words, all
enticing words of men's wisdom and excellency of speech, that the cross of
Christ might not be made of none ^ff^ct, and that the faith of his hearers
might not stand in the wisdom of men but in the power of God, and who loved to
speak in the Demonstration of the Spirit and of power, wherein the Kingdom of
God consist^th and not in word^^ if that great Apostle were now Preaching, he
would probably be looked at by such words and wi^e heads as but a weak man, and
of rude and contemptible speech, (as he was by the big talking Doctors of the
Church of Corinth,) if not amere Bable^, as he was by the Philosophers and
Orators at Athens* The subject matter I say of this Treatise must needs be most
excellent, being the Spiritual, Holy, Just and good Law; the Royal Law, binding
unto the Obedience of God our King; the Law which Jesus Christ came not to
destroy but to fulfill: whereof he is the end for Righteousness to every on that
believes; which does as a School moster lead to Him (by discovering the holy
nature and will of God, and men's duty to walk conformly to it, by convincing of
the most sinful pollution of our nature, heart, and life, of universal
disconformity to it, and innumerable transgressions of it, of the obligation to
the wrath and curse of God because of the same, of u^^er inability to keep it
and to help our selves out of this sinful and wrathful estate; by humbling
under the conviction and sense of both, by putting on to the Renunciation of
selfrighteousness or righteousness according to this Law; And finally by
convincing of the absolute and indi^^^nsable necessity of an other
righteousness, and so of this imputed righteousnes^); the law that is so very
necessary to all men in common, and to every Regenerate and unr^generate man in
particular; from which, ^re one jote or title can pass unfulfilled, Heaven and
Earth must pass* and which the Prince of Pastors, infinitely skilful to pitch
perti^^nt subjects of Preaching, amongst many others made choice of, to be a
main subject of that solemn Sermon of his on the Mount; wherein he did not, as
many would ^ave expect^d* soar alost in abstruse contemplations, but graciously
stooped and condescended to our c^^^^ity for catching of us, by a plain
familiar and practical exposition of the Commands (as indeed Religion lies not
in high flown notions and curious speculations, nor in great swellings of
words, but in the single and sedulous practice of these things that are
generally looked on (...) low and common, as the great art of Preaching lies
in the powerful pressing thereof) infin^^ting of how much moment the right
uuderstanding of them is, and how much Religion ly^^^ in the serious study of
suitable obedience thereto, not in order to justification, but for glorifying
God, who justifies freely by his grate through the Redemption that is in
Jesus* without which Obedience or holiness no man shall see the Lord. And if
the Treatise bear but any tolereable proportion to such a Text and Theme, it
cannot but have its own excellency; and, that thou ma^st be induced to think it
does, I shall need only to tell thee that it is (though, alas, posthumous and
for any thing I know never by him intended for the Press, otherwise it had been
much more full, for ^e is much shorter on the commands of the second Table,
then on these of the first, touching only on some chief heads, not judging it
fit belike at that time and in that exercise, to wit, Sabbathday-morning
Lectures before Sermon, to dwell long on that subject (which a particular
prosecution would have necessitated him to) especially since he was at that
same time to the same auditory Preaching Sabbath afternoons on the third
chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, a subject much of the same nature,
but what he says is material and excellent) great Mr. Durhams; who had some
excellency peculiar to himself in what he spoke or writ* as appears by his
singular and some way*S^raphick comment on the Revelation, wherein with
Aquiline-sharp-sightedness from the top of the high mountain of fellowship with
God, he has deeply pryed into, and struck up a great light in several
mysterious things much hid even from many wise and sagacious men before; And by
his most sweet and savoury, yet most solid exposition of the Song of Solomon,
smelling strong of more than ordinary acquaintance with, and experience of
th^se several influxes of the love of Jesus Christ upon the Soul, and effluxes
of its love (the fruit and effect of His (toward Him, wherewith that
delightful discourse is richly as it were imbroydered; The greatest realities
(though indeed sublime spiritualities) most plainly asserted by God, and most
powerfully experienced by the Godly (whose Souls are more livelily affected
with them, than their very external senses are by the rarest and most
remarkable objects; and no wonder since every thing the more spiritual it is,
has in it t^^ greater reality, and works the more strongly and
efficaciously) however of late, by an unparalieledly-bold black*mouthed
blasphemous Scribler nefariously neck named, Fine Romances o^ the secret Amouts
betwixt the Lord Christ and the believing Soul, told by the
Non-conformistspreachers. What? are these and the like, Let him kiss me with
the kisses of his mouth, for his love is better than Wine; Thy name is as an
Ointment poured forth, therefore the Virgins love thee; We will remember thy
love more than Wine, the upright love thee; Behold thou art fair my beloved,
yea pleasant, also our bed is green. A bundle of myrrh is my beloved unto me,
he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts -- I sat down under his shadow with
great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste; He brought me to the
Banqueting House, and his Banner ^ver me was love* Stay me with Flagons,
comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love; His left hand is under my head,
and his right hand does embrace me; My beloved is mine, and I am his; I am my
beloveds, and his desire is toward me; I found him whom my Soul loved, I held
him and would not let him go; Set me as a seal upon thy heart, and as a seal on
thine arm; Love is strong as death -- many waters cannot quench love, neither
can the floods drown it; I charge you O Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my
beloved, that ye tell him, I am sick of love. Come my beloved, let us go up
early to the Vine-yards, let (...) see if the Vines flourish -- there will I
give the my loves; make have my beloved and be thou like to a R^e, or to a
young Heart on the Mountains of Spices. How fair and how pleasant art th^^, O
love for delights! O my Dove -- let*me see thy countenance, let me hear thy
voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely, thou have
ravished my ^eart my Sister my Spouse with one of thine eyes, with one chain of
thy neck; turn away thine eyes from me, for they have over come me -- He that
loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him and manifest my self
to him. If any man love me he will keep my words, and my Father will love him,
and we will come unto him and make our abode with him: As the Father has loved
me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my love: If ye keep my Commandments,
ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers Commandments and
abide in his love. The love of Christ constrains us: we love him because he
first loved (...) the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost given unto us: whom ^aving not seen ye love, and whom though now ye see
him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory* That
ye may with all Saints be able to comprehend what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ that passes knowledge.
Are these I say, Romances: are th^se fancies, factions, and forg^ries? are
these fables cunningly devised and told by the Non conformists-Preachers? Did
the Apostle thunder the great Anathema Ma^an^^h^, against men for their not
h^^ing a mere Romantic end fancied love to the Lord Jesus? (the execution of
which dreadful doom will ^e a solid proof of its reality, and a sad reproof for
denying it to be so.) Dare the most proud, petulant, perverse, and prodigiously
profane prater, pretending but to the name of a Christian, say it? If these
most real love Communications and intercourses betwixt the Lord Christ and the
believing Soul, be but Romances, then the whole Bible (whereof these make so
considerable and so comfortable a part) may be reckoned a Romance (which be
like this Romantic Divine will not so much demurr making small account
therefore, and audaciously alleging the English Bible to be a Book in some
places erroneous, in ^ome scarce sense and of dangerous consequences; loath
would he be to deal so by Grand Cyrus, Cleopatra, and his other darling
Romance^?) if there be no real but Romantic and fained love betwixt Christ and
the Christian, then no real Christianity, no real Christ (whom this new Doctor
dreadfully de^aseth under the poorly palliated pretext of exalting him,
affirming, that his unparalleled civility, and the obliginness of his
deportment, seems to be almost as high an evidence of the Truth and Divinity of
his Doctrine, as his unparalleled miracles were, otherwise he would be a base
and pro^^ig^t Impostor; what would this young Divine) for old Divines, and even
great Calvin b^ name, amongst the rest, he despises as a company of ^^lly
Systematicks) have said and thought of the Divinity of the person end Doctrine
of blessed Jesus, if when on earth he had more frequently (as he might and
probably would have done under the same circumstances) spoke and deals so
roughly and roundly as he did when he called Herod a Fox, and scourged the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and had seemed to be as uncivil and of as
little obliging a Deportment as his harbinger, John Baptist, he would be like
have doubted of his Divinity, and deemed him but ^ ba^e Impostore, if not
peremptorily pronounced that he had a Devil*) No real Redemption, no real
Redeemer; no real misery, no real mercy; no real Heaven, no real Hell (but ah!
the real acting of its story will easily and quickly refute this Romantic
conception of it.) And in fine, no real God: All is but one entire fine Romance
fable and figment; The Lord against whom this mouth is opened thus
wickedly*wide, and is by an other Rabsh^keh railed on at such a rate of rage*
rebuke the Spirit which, prompteth to the venting this damnable and Diabolick,
nay Hyper diabolick Doctrine (for Devils believe that there is one God, and
tremble and that Jesus Christ (...) the Son of God, whom even in his state of
humiliation they acknowledged to be so, and from the dread of him deprecated
his tormenting them before the time; but this Desperado would on the matter
drive us into a disbelief of both and yet droll us out of all dread being
tormented on that or any other account either before the time or a^ it,
(because of which its Teacher,) of late better taught (if (...) would humble
himself to receive Instruction,) by Famous Doctor Owen* by Acute Master Marvel,
and by the Grave author of The Fulfilling of the Scriptures, in his Second
Part) deeply deserves not only to be cast out of the Protestant Churches, but
to be hissed and chased out of the Christian World. And as appears finally, by
that Divinely Politic and Profoundly Wise Treatise of Scandal, in General, and
of Scandalous Divisions, in Particular: which both Preachers and Professors of
the Gospel, should read, and read again, in these sad Times; wherein (Alas!)
there is so much Offense given, and so great a readiness to take Offense. Of
none of which Treatises, nor of any other so brief a Treatise on the Commands,
this piece will, I humbly suppose, be found to fall much, if any thing at all,
short* wherein the Light of the Glory of the Lord, in the Face of Jesus Christ,
that shined in upon the heart of his Servant, has so brightly and radiantly
darted forth it*s Beams, that he has clearly showed us the 7. Abominations of
our Hearts* and by digging, has discovered Great Abominations, and Greater,
and yet, Greater than these He that searches Jerusslem with Candles, has by
putting the Candle of the True Meaning, of the Law of the Lord into his Hand,
made him go down and search into the very Inward Par^s of the Belly, and B^wels
of the Corruption of our Nature* and to Ransack the most Retired Corners of the
Closse Cabinet of the Deep Deceitfulness, and Desperate Wickedness, that is
lodged and locked up in our Hearts* He has given to him as it were, the end of
the Clew of Search, whereby he has ^ollowed and sound us out, in those many
Turnings, and Traversings, Windings and Wanderings, of the Labyrinth of this
great Mystery of Iniquity that works in us. He has therein also,
marvellously helped him with Exquisite Skill, as it were Anatomically to
diffect, even to some of the very smallest C^pillar Veins; a great part of the
Vast Body, of the many and various Duties succinctly summed up in these Ten
Words, of this Holy Law: A Transumpt and Double whereof, was ^s V^vely Written,
and deeply engraven upon the fleshly tables of the Author's heart, and one the
whole of his Visible Deportment, as readily has been on many of the Sinful
Sons of Adam. Not to detain thee long; Let me for provoking, and persuading, to
consider what the Blessed Author, being now dead, yet speaks in this Choice
Treatise (and more especially to the Inhabitants of Glasgow, now the Second
time) only say, that amongst many other distempers of this declined and
degenered Generation, there is a great itching aster some new and more notional
and a loathing of old and more solid and substantial things in Religion;
whereof this is a Demonstration, that though there ^e very few subjects more
necessary and useful than what is treated of here, yet there is almost none
more generally slighted* as being a very common and ordinary subject, and but
the Ten Commands fitter to be read and got by r^^t by Children, or at best to
be studied by rude and ignorant beginners* by Apprentices and Christians of the
lowest form in Christ* School, then by Professors of greater knowledge and
longer standing, who suppose themselves, and are it may be supposed by others,
to have passed their Apprentiship, to be grown Deacons in the Trade of
Religion, and to have commenced masters of Art therein; who someway disdain and
account it below them to stay a while and talk with Moses at the foot of
Mount-Sinai, as if they could per saltum* or by one Falcon-flight come at the
top of Mount Sion, and there converse with and make use of Jesus Christ; whence
it comes to pass that not a few are lamentably ignorant of the very letter of
the Law, and many more but little infight in the spiritual meaning thereof;
which ignorance is waited with many unspeakable great prejudices (that are to
be considered with respect to the various states of men, as regenerate or
unregenerate* and the several degrees of their ignorance) 1. It very much
incapacitateth for selfe-searching and examination, a considerable piece, ^ea a
sort of ^ spring of the exercise of Godliness, How I pray, can a person to any
purpose search and try his heart and ways, being altogether, or in a great
measure ignorant of the rule according to which the search ought to be
accomplished? 2. It keeps men much inacqainted with and great strangers to
the knowledge of themselves, of their state, frame and walk, so that they can
seldom or never be in case to make a knowing distinct and feeling
representation of the posture of their spiritual affairs to God. 3. It is the
Mother and Nurse not of any true Devotion (as Papists ignorantly or impiously
avert) but of much carnal security and false peace; the uninformed or ill
informed conscience of the sinner being misconced from and sadly secured
against the most just and best grounded challenges* being often ignorant when
fin is committed, and when duty is ommitted or unduly performed; every fin
being a transgression of this Law, and every duty a piece of conformity to it;
How can a man be ignorant altogether or in great part of the just extent and
spiritual meaning thereof, be as he ought, challenged and accused by his own
conscience either for the Commission of the one, or for the Omission or
mis-performance of the other? 4. It not ably obstructeth the exercise of
humiliation, repentance and self loathing; for how can the breaches of this Law
in Omissions, and Commissions, be distincty and particularly repented of and
mourned for, when they are not so much as known to be breaches of the Law in
general, let be of what particular command thereof? and though they were some
way confusedly known to be br^a^^es of it in general, if there be not a
distinct knowledge of the command that is broken, the conviction will not
readily be so quick, nor the sorrow so pricking; we have need for our humbling
to be bound with the convincing and undeniable evidence of our being guilty of
the breach of such a Command in particular, that we may not get it shifted nor
shaken off. 5. It manifestly stands in the way of serious and effectual
endeavors in the strength of grace to amend what is amiss, and speedily
without delay to turn our feet unto his Commandments; there being no gr^^^d to
expect that men will in good earnest think of righting wrongs, whereof they are
ignorant* or not so thoroughly* persuaded* 6. It has a mighty tendency to the
cherishing of spiritual pride, and that good opinion and conceit of men's own
rightcousness, which is as natural to us, as it is for sparks of fire to fly
upwards; And when men know not often when they sin, nor how much they sin, they
will be the more easily induced to think they are not so great sinners, nor
haveso much reason as is talked of* to be so very far and altogether out of
conceit with themselves; and what may here be the death*ill of a natural
unrenewed man, may be the dangerous distemper of a child of God 7 (which as the
gr and prejudice does natively and necessarily result from all the six
preceding prejudices thereof, and makes it appear to be exceedingly and out
of measure prejudicial) it keeps much from the through conviction and kindly
sense of the absolute and indispensable necessity, great usefulness and
steadableness and matchless-worth of precious Jesus Christ the Savior, and of
his imputed righteousness; from having daily recourse to him, and making use of
him as made of God unto his people both righteousness and sanctification; from
lying constantly a bleaching as it were, at the fountain opened to the house of
David, and to ^he Inhabitants of Jerusalem for ^in and for uncleanness* from
^o^l edifying-refreshing and someway transporting admiration at the absolute
perfection of his righteousness, that can cover and make as if they had never
been, so very many* and various violation* of the holy Law of God; from new and
fresh convictions on all occasions of the unspeakable obligation the people of
God lie under, to him who has perfectly fulfilled this Law, and in their stead
taken on him our bl^ssed self the curse thereof; from excitements and
provocations to thankfulness, and from expressing the same in a greater care
and solicitude to conform thereto as the rule of Obedie^^e; and finally from
suitable longings and pantings of Soul to be according to his gracious
undertaking i^ the covenant of Redemption, put in case to do his* will
perfectly in our own persons and never any more to transgress this his Law, and
to be brought under the full accomplishment of these exceeding great and
precious promises, he shall redeem Israel from all his Iniquitie^; and his
Servants shall serve him. O! that we could by what is said persuade all to a
more diligent and accurate study of the Law of God, and to the reading and
ruminating upon this solid and Soul-searching Tr^ct^te; and prevail with
several persons (which in reason and conscience might be presumed would not be
so very hard a business to bring to pass, with men and women professing them
selves to be Christians, nay to have immortal Souls that are to be eternally*
and un^licrabl^ ^ither happy or miserable) to ^^ke but as much time to the
reading, perusing and pondering of it and other such pieces, as i^ taken to the
reading of amorous Book* and Romances; To idle visits, and to vain and empty
complements; to over-costly, curious, vain, and concea^y dressing, and decking
of the body, and setting of the hair now after one mode, now after another
(wherein as in other vainities) many men somewhat unmanning themselves, do now
contend with Women, partly by their unnaturally nourished Long Hair, and Horrid
Bushes of Vanity (as Master Bolton call^ them) and partly by their Variously*
and strangly Metamorphosing modes and colors of Periwicks) which made
Te^tullian in the 7th. Chapter of his Book De cultu mul. to expost^lat with the
Women of his time after this manner; What does this cumbersome dressing of the
head contribut to your health? why will ye not suffer your hair to be at rest
and lie quiet? which is sometimes tied up, sometimes relaxed and made to hang
down, sometimes frizled and curled, sometimes tied close and pre^^ down; sometimes
put under a strict restraint (of plaits, knots, and otherways); and sometimes
suffered to escape and slide out from that restraint, and to flitter and fly at
random: And ye affix moreover to your heads I know not what enormities of hair
sewed and woven now this way, now that way; i^ you be not ashamed of the
enormities, be ashamed at least of the defilement, least ye be found to adorn
and cloth a holy and Christian head with the spoil and pillage of the hair of
an others head that is a filth^ person, or it may be of a notorious offender
and condemned to Hell. What would he have said of some Women among us, who
being displeased not only with their own, but with all colors of hair that God
has made to grow on the heads of reasonable Creatures abominably affect to
affix to their fore heads the hair of Beasts. (High extravagan^ies of this age
almost in all ranks of persons, and never at a greater hight then since God
began to contend with us, and to call us to lay aside our ornaments, that He
might know what to do unto us* many alas take more time in these day^ to busk
and dress, and to look in a glass for that end in one week than they do in ^
year, ye^ it may be in many years, to look into this glass of the Law of the
Lord to discover the many spots and blemishes wherewith their Souls are
pitifully deformed, or into such Treatises as this, whereby the dust of
misapprehensions of the meaning of the Law is wiped off, and it made easil^ and
at first view to give a just representation of what manner of persons we are);
To drinking drunk, and healthing, or drinking and pledging healths, prohibited
and much condemned in the Ancient Church particularly by Basil, and Augustine,
on this very ground, that they were the invention of the Devil, and the
observations or relics of Infidels and Pagans: To tippling and four-hoursing,
a conscience*wasting and Soul-weakning practice, though with too many (and with
not a few from whom better things might be expected) but little stuck at; To
Carding and Dycing, which Dice-playing has been condemned by many Fathers by
several Councils, by some Imperial statutes, by almost all Protestant and by
many Popish Divines, yea some Councils have appointed diceplayers to be
excommunicated; To singing and playing of light and wanton Songs and to
lascivious Dancing much also cried out against and condemned by Councils,
Fathers and many Divines, and a^ great length most vehemently by the Waldenses
and Albigenses* who account it no great sign of a Woman's honesty that she is a
skilful and great Dancer: the remark likewise that the writer of Magica de
spectris lib. 1. hist 287. page 285. has of this profane promiscuous dancing
which the wantons of this age so much practice, praise and pride themselves in,
is very remarkable, that there was hardly any meeting betwixt the Devil and
Witches, wherein there was no^ Dancing; such complacency has that unclean
Spirit in this Exercise; And to bring Spectators of prophant Interludes and
Stage Plays, which (as the eminently learned and Pious Doctor Usher late
Archbishop of Armagh affirms) offend against many branches of the 7th.
Command together, in the abuse of Apparel, Tongue, Eyes, Countenance, Gestures,
and almost all parts of the Body* therefore (says the great man) they that go
to see such sights and hea^ such words (what would he have said of the Penners
or Composers of such Plays and of Actors in them? whom the ancient Church
appointed to be excommunicated, and on several of both which remarkable
judgments have lighted (whereof one may speak for many, affirmed by Ludovicus
vives in his notes on Augustine de civ^^, de^ lib. 12. chap. 25. from persons
of good credit, that a certain man who having in a Stage* Play in one of the
Cities of Brabant acted the Devils part, and going home dancing to his house,
and in that Habit accompaning with his Wife, and saying he would beget a Devil
on her, had a Child brought forth to him that Danced so soon as ever it was
born, being shaped as men use to paint the Devil,) of builders and doters of
houses for them, called by the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, the Devils
Temples, Chapels* Shops and Schools; as the Plays are called by them, the
Devils Spectacles, Lectures, Sacrifices, Recreations, etc. and the Players, the
Devils chiefest Factors; of such as have them in their own dwelling-houses (as
some now have) which they give away in a manner to be Sy^agogues to the Devil
to keep his Conven^icles in; and of such as contribute whither to the Act^rs
for their encouragement to follow that lewd way of living, or for liberty to
l^^k on? which Augustine* Vincentius and others call a heinous sin and an
offering or Sacrificing to the Devil, the first inventer of them) show their
neglect of Christian duty and carelessness in sinning, whereas they willingly
commit themselves to the sna^e of the Devil: which has been often sadly
exemplified, particularly in these two Christian women spoken of by Tertullian
in his Book de sp^ctacu is cap. 26. to the truth of which, he says God is
witness.

The one whereof, was at her returning Home from a Stage*Play, immediately
possessed with a Devil; who being by Exercism Expostulated with, How he durst
thus as^ault, and enter into a Believing Woman? Answered bodly, That he had
done it most justly: For, said he, in meo eam inveni, I found here in my own
Temple, or in my own Ground, or in my own Dominion, or Jurisdiction; and as if
he had said, About my own Work and Business. The other who the same Night,
alter hearing a Tragedian, had a Linning-Sheet presented to her, in her Sleep;
The Actor in the Play being also named, with a sharp ^braiding of her, for this
deed of hers; and lived not above five days after. And in Alipi^s, a dear
Friend, and Convert of Augustines; who (as that Father Narrats, in the 6. Book
of his Confession, cap. ^.) being importuned one day by some of his Friends,
and Fellow-Students, meeting him on the way, to go along with them to see a
Sword-Play, earnestly at first withstood them; and being at last drawn a long
with them, he resolved to be absent, while he was present, and to shut his Eyes
all the while he was there: and accordingly did, when he took his place: But
when a great Shout was made, occasioned by some Accident in the Play, he opened
his Eyes; Yet with a Resolution to contemn the sight, whatever it should be:
but forthwith he was smitten with a grievous Wound in his Soul, and was not
now the same man, that he came thither: But a true Companion of them, that
brought him; he beheld, he shouted he grew out-ragious; and brought away
Madness with him; whereby he was excited to return thither again, drawing
others along with him, and even out-stripping these, by whom he was first drawn
away: Yet after this length of Profanity, he was mercifully recovered, but not
till along time after. (Persons* that are once ^mislead by Stage Plays* though
Civil or Religious, being seldom speedily reclaimed from them.) This was also
Examplified, in that late English Gentlewoman of good-rank, Who spending much
of her precious Time, in Attendance on Stage Plays; and falling at last into a
Dangerous Sickness, whereof she dyed, Anno 1631. Friends in her Extremity, sent
for a Minister to prepare her for Death* who beginning to Instruct and Exhort
her to repent and call on God for Mercy* she made him no Reply at all, but
cried out Hieronimo, Hieronimo; O let me see Hieronimo Acted! And so calling
for a Play, instead of calling on God for Mercy, closed her Dying Eyes, and had
a Fearful End, answerable to her Miserable Life. And in these several Persons,
who were distracted with the Visible Apparition of the Devil on the Stage, at
the Bell-Savage-Play-House, in Queen Elizabeth's Days, while they were there
beholding the History of Faustus, prophanly Acted: To which might be added many
other Lamentable Examples and Warnings, of such, who by little and little, have
made Defection from the Faith, being allured hereto by the Dangerous custom,
of beholding such Plays, wherein (Tertullian says) They Communicate with the
Devil. Will any Man or Woman, dare to appear before the Dreadful Tribunal of
God, to maintain and make out the warrantableness of allowing more time to
these and such other Practices, (several of which, are excellently discoursed
by the Author, in the following Tractat; and most of them with their Respective
Authorities, by Master Prin, in his Histrio* Mastix,) then to reading of this
and other such Treatises? If any will, they must answer it: I mind not through
Grace, to take part with them, in so bold and desperate an Adventure.

Now Christian Reader, without further Prefacing, to bring thee in upon the
Treasure of the Treatise it self: If thou will read it seriously, and consider
it suitably; I think I may humbly in the Name of the Lord, bid thee a Defyance,
to come away from it, without a Bosom-full of Convictions, of much guilt; and
without crying out with the Lepper, under the Law, Unclean* Unclean. With Job,
Behold I am vile: With David, looking stedsastly on the Glass of this Law,
brightly shined on, by Gods Light, and reflecting a most clear Discovery, of
Innumerable Transgressions of it, as so many Atoms, in a clear Sun shine: Who
can understand his Errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults: With the
Prophet Isaiah, We are all as ^ne Unclean thing, (as uncleanness it self, in
the Abstrast, most Unclean,) and all our Righteousnesses are as Filthy Rags:
With the Apostle James, In many things we offend all: And finally with the
Apostle Paul, We know that the Law is Spiritual, but I am Carnal* and sold
under Sin -- O Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of
this Death? That thou may also with the same Apostle, be in case, to say and
sing, to the Commendation of his Grace, I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, is the Cordial desire of.

Thy Servant in the Gospel for Christ's sake.

POSTSCRIPT.
Christian and Candid Reader,
THou see that in this Epistle, which for the most part of it was written
above two years ago, I have spoken a word of Stage Plays, profane Interludes,
Comedies, etc. at that time, and several years before, much in use amongst us;
whereto I would now add a few words more, and deduce a little their infamous,
idolatrous, devilish, and damnable Pedigree and Original, and give thee a brief
account of the judgment of the ancient Christian Church about them; that the
Actors in them, with the Patrons and haunters of them, may with the greater
dissatisfaction reflect on there own bypast unsuitable and disconform
practice, and that all others may for ever hereafter learn to fear, and to do
no more so unchristianly: To which I am the rather induced, that the worthy
Author of this Treatise, has only in passing made mention of them as a breach
of the seventh Command, they being then utterly in desuetude with us, and it
having not so much as once entered into his thoughts, that after so bright and
glorious a Sunshine of Gospel Light, the Generation would ever, let be so
quickly, have so far degenerated, as to suffer themselves to be tempted to have
any fellowship with such unfruitful works of darkness: I say then, that
Stage Plays, in their several sorts, were prohibited, reprobated, and
condemned, and the Actors in them appointed to be excommunicated by the Canons
of several more particular, and of some general Councels (which Canons I
forbear for brevities sake, to set down at length) as namely, by the fifth
Canon of the first Council at Arles in France, Anno 314. in the time of
Constantine the Great; by the twentieth Canon of the second Council held there,
Anno 326. or more probable 389. as Fr. Longus a Coriolano reckons in his sum
of all the Councels; by the fifty seventh, sixty second, and sixty seventh
Canons of the Eliberine Council in Spain, Anno 305. by the eleventh and thirty
fifth Canons of the third (to wit, from Constantines time as Spondanus
reckons) Council of Carthage, Anno 397. the very same with the thirteenth and
thirty fifth Canons of the Council of Hippo in Africa, held Anno 393. as Longus
a Coriolano shows; who sets down the sum of the Canons framed at Hippo at the
close of the Canons made in this third Council of Carthage; by the twelfth
Canon of the African Council held Anno 408. where Augustine was present; the
Canons of both which Councels suppose persons to have been excommunicated on
this account, and provide for their reconciliation to the Church, in case of
repentance and turning from these practices to the Lord; and by the fifty first
and sixty second Canons of the sixth general Council (called by some the fifth)
held at Constantinople, Anno 680. the Canons whereof were renewed in that
Council held at Constantinople, Anno 692. which is called Quimsextum; these two
Canons are very express and peremptory in this thing. And can any Christians
warrantably, and without sin, recreate themselves with beholding such plays,
the Actors wherein deserve to be excommunicated? what? is there no better, no
more innocent and inoffensive way? or is this the only or the best way to
recreate men* to refine, sharpen, and polish their wits; to persuade and
prevail with them to hate and flee vice, and to love and follow virtue; to
acquaint them from History with, to impress on them the remembrance and to
excite them to the imitation of, the noble and truly imitable actions of
illustrious Heroes, and other great men; to breed them to a suitable
confidence; to make them eloquent and fine spokesmen; and to help them to a
becoming gest in all actions, places, and societies? the grave Seers, and great
Lights of the Church, did never see any such thing in them; but on the
contrary, have with common suffrage judged them to be the most effectual and
compendious way to make men soft, dissolute, and sensual; nay, even in a manner
quite to emasculate, if not to brutifie them; and have without any discord
declared, that the lightness, lasciviousness, and leudness that in these plays
were touched under, and covered over with such shreds and pieces of Learning,
History, Eloquence, Invention, Wit, and Art, were thereby only made the more
dangerous; and that Satan showed his pernicious and pestilent policy not a
little in thus tincturing, sugaring, and guilding these poysonable Pills, that
they might go the better down, diffuse themselves the less sensibly, and
operate the more strongly. And however some empty and effeminate, vain and
vicious, Roman Emperors reduced such Plays, yet some of the gravest and
soberest, manliest and bravest, even Heathen Emperors, did oppose and
exterminate them (so that Guevara notes it to have been one of the tokens and
characteristicks to know a virtuous or vicious Prince of Rome by, to wit,
whether he maintained Players, Jesters, and J^glers among the people, or not)
as did also many Senators, Christian Emperors, and well regulated Republics,
both Pagan and Christian; as unbeseeming exercises, and effeminate arts, which
did much dishonor and corrupt the state, and as Seminaries of all vice and
intolerable mischiefs in the Commonwealth: And no doubt, whatever good is
pretended to be got in a Playhouse, or at the Stage (hardly without a
predominant mixture of evil) may be learned as well, as easily, and much more
safely, if not more cheap too, elsewhere. As they have been thus forbidden and
censured by Councels, so I say more particularly they have been very
unanimously condemned by the Fathers, on these and other such like grounds; 1.
As being a breach of the seventh Commandment, wherein a multitude of modern
Divines writing on this Command, accord with them. 2. As being a conforming to,
and participating with Pagans in their idolatrous and superstitious practices,
expressly forbidden to the people of God in the Scripture; which put Cyprian
despect. peremptorily to conclude, That the Scripture has everlastingly
condemned all sorts of such Spectacles and Stage Plays, when it took away
Idolatry, the Mother of them, whence all these Monsters of vanity, lightness,
and leudness did proceed. 3. As being cross to, and a practical renunciation
of, the baptismal Vow of Christians, wherein they engage to renounce the Devil
and all his pomps and works, of which sort they account the acting and
beholding popular Stage Plays to be. 4. As being the removal of a
distinguishing character of Christians from Heathen Gentiles, Who (as
Tertullian says, lib. despect. cap. 24.) did most of all discern men by this,
that they abandoned and renounced all Stage Plays. 5. As being unsuitable to,
if not inconsistent with, the Gospel, which forbids Christians to make
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, to be Caterers for their
corruptions, and to be conform to the World; and commands them to walk
circumspectly, accurately, even with spiritual preciseness and strictness, not
as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time; woefully wasted away, and miserably
misspent this way; to abstain from all appearance of evil; to rejoice in the
Lord; and when they are merry, to sing Psalms, and to vent and express their
mirth in Songs of praise to God, and not in this wanton way; and assures them
withal, that evil communications corrupt good manners. 6. As being a corruption
of manners, incentives to lightness and lust, and seminaties and nurseries of
wantonness and uncleanness. And 7. as holding their pedigree, original, and
institution from the Devil* the Inventer of them: and being at first
Idolatrously and superstitiously celebrated to the honor, and for many
hundreds of years together, dedicated, devoted, and appropriated to the worship
and service of the Heathen-Devil-Gods; Who (as Augustine affirms, lib. 4. de
Civ. Dei, cap. 36. entitled De l^di^ Scenicis, etc. that is, concerning
Stage Plays, which the Gods required to be celebrated to them by their
worshippers) did themselves importunately demand these Plays to be exhibited
to them for their honor, fiercely and cruelly command them, denounce
calamities if they were not exhibited, avenge most severely, if any thing about
them was neglected, and if they amended what was formerly omitted or neglected
in them, show themselves pacified and well pleased. Which may further appear by
these few instances taken out of famous Writers, whereof the first may be that
which is mentioned by Pol. Virg. de invent. rerum, l. 4. cap. 14. page 375.
where he says, That Plays were chiefly celebrated for the health and safety
of men with lectisternes (that is, beds that were dressed up in their Temples
for lulling and rocking (as it were) their Gods asleep when they raged with
anger) the beginning of which Plays (says he) it is manifest was the work of
the Devil; For (says he) there was one Valesius a wealthy Roman (sometime
before the institution of the Consular office) who had three sons desperately
sick of the Pestilence, for whom when he prayed to his household Gods, he was by
them bidden go to Tarentum, and take water from before or from beside the Altar
of Pluto and Proserpina, and give them to drink (or as ot hers, to wash them
in) which he having done, they were restored to health; and in gratitude
commanded by these Infernal Spirits to celebrate night Plays to them, which he
and they accordingly did for three nights together. The next may be that which
is reported by Titus Livius, lib. 2. and by Augustine lib. 4. de Civ. Dei, cap.
26. and by Lud. Vives in his notes upon that chapter, concerning one Titus
Latinus or Larinus, who in the second Consulship of M. Minutius and Aur.
Sempronius, Ann. ab urb. cond. 263. when the Gods were displeased, was warned
in a dream to go to the Senate, and tell them that they were not satisfied with
the Presultor or Dancer before, or ringleader in the last Plays, in which
Plays they take pleasure, being recreated by them, and that unless the Plays
were renewed by their order with greater state and sumptuousness (called by
Florus in his Breviary on that Book, Religious Ceremonies) some great calamity
should be inflicted (or as others, the present not be removed) which the man
not doing was sharply rebuked, and yet delaying out of reverence to the Senate,
and from fear that himself should be looked at as frantic, his son was taken
from him; and yet still deferring, he was seized in all his joints with a
tormenting disease, so that he could not stir; and at the last telling his
friends he was by them willed to acquaint the Senate, and being carried to
them, and having done his errand, ^n as presently restored to his health (so
much power may the Devil in the righteous Judgment of God have granted to him,
to seduce men unto, and detain them in his worship and service) wherewith the
Senate was so much taken, that they forthwith commanded the Plays to be
celebrated with greater care, cost, and show, then formerly. The third may be
that spoke of also by Titus Livius, lib. 7. In the Consulship of C. Sulpitius
Petieus, and C. Lucinius Stole, Anno ab urb. cond. 390. in the time of the
great and raging pestilence wherein Furius Camillus, Dictator and Deliverer of
Rome from the Gauls died; wherein for procuring the mercy of the Gods there
was a lectisterne, but when by no device of man, nor help of the Gods, the
violence of the plague could be assuaged, their minds were so possessed with
superstition, that the Stage Plays were, as men say, first invented (that is
belike, Plays in that pompous; ludicrous, effeminate, and luxurious mode on
the Stage, which had never before been used in the City (for several Plays
they had ere this time) a strange device for a martial people, who before time
(for most part at least) accustomed to behold games of activity and strength in
the great lift called Circus; and from this small beginning (says he) in a
second and wholesome State, this folly grew to such a height of madness, as is
untolerable to the most opulent States and Empires; and yet these Plays so
brought in, and set forth (called by Florus in his Breviary on that Book, new
and strange Religions) employed about a religious business, did neither rid
men's minds of scruple and superstition, nor ease their bodies: Thus they are
condemned as superstition and an innovation of their old Religion, by these two
famous Heathen Historians. The fourth may be that which is made mention of by
Tit. Livius also toward the end of his 40-Book concerning Fulvius Flaccus,
fellow-Consul with his own German-brother L. Manlius Occidinus, Ann. ab urb.
cond. 575. Who declared that before he would meddle with his Office, he would
discharge both himself and the City of duty toward the Gods, in paying the
Vows that he had made on that same day, that he had his last battle with the
Celtiberians, anent the celebraeting Plays to the honor of the most mighty
and gracious God Jupiter, and to build a Temple to Fortuna Aequestris; and
accordingly levied a great Tax for that end, which behoved to be retrenched,
because of the exorbitancy of it. The fifth and last shall be that which is
touched by Pol. Virg. ubi prius page 377. concerning the Romans, their taking
care for Apollo his Plays, which were first dedicated to him in the time of
the second punick War for obtaining Victory from him, to drive Hannibal out of
Italy. To these may be added what Spondanus in his Eccles. Annal. page 263.
reports from Zozimus concerning Constantine the Great, when he returned
victorious over the Germans to Millan, That he quite neglected and contemned
such Plays, to the great grief of the Heathens, who alleged that these Plays
were instituted by the Gods for the cure of the pestilence and other diseases,
and for averting of wars. From all which it is manifest, that the original of
these Stage Plays and such others, was from the Devil, and celebrated by the
Heathens to the honor and worship of their Devil-Gods in way of religious
Sacrifices to them, either as pacificatory or gratificatory; with whom in their
Idolatries and superstitions, the Scriptures forbid all symbolizing and
fellowship. Let us hear now in the next place some more of these Fathers speak
their own and the Churches thoughts, a little more particularly of
Stage Plays, with respect to such grounds, having heard some of them already:
Clem. Alex. orat. adhort. adv. Gentes, calls Stage Plays, Comedies, and
amorous Poems, teachers of Adultery, and defilers of men's ears with
Fornications; and says, That not only the use, the sight, the hearing, but
the very memory of Stage Plays should be abolished: And elsewhere (for I do
here purposely forbear very particular citations, because ordinary Readers will
not much, if at all, search after them; and the Learned that have a mind to it,
will easily find them out) tells Christian youths, That their Paedagogues must
not lead them to Plays or Theaters, that may not unfitly be called the chairs
of Pestilence, because these Conventicles, where men and women meet together
promiscuously to behold one another, are the occasion of leudness, and there
they give or plot wicked counsel* Cyprian de spect. styles Theaters the stews
of public Chastity, the mastership of obscenity, which teach these sins in
public, that men may more usually and easily commit them in private, he
learneth to commit who accustometh himself to behold the theatrical
representations of uncleanness: It is not lawful for faithful Christians, yea,
it is altogether unlawful, to be present at these Plays: And elsewhere he
says, She that perchance came a chaste Matron to the Plays, goes away a
Strumpet from the Playhouse: (We may here notice what the Satirical Poet
Juvenal says to this purpose, Sat. 6. That a man in his time could not pick
one chaste woman, whom he might safely love as his wife out of the whole
Playhouse; and that all women, who frequent Stage Plays, are infamous, and
forfeit their good names It were good that our women, who love and haunt such
Plays, would consider this: as also what is reported of Sempronius Sophus, a
noble Roman, who divorced from his Wife for this alone cause, that she
frequented Stage Plays without his knowledge, which might make her an
Adulteress; which Divorce the whole Roman Senate did approve (though it was the
very first they did approve) as being a mean to keep women chaste: So great an
enemy to chastity were these Plays judged to be; which is touched by
Rhodiginus, amongst others, in his Antique Lections, lib. 28. cap. 16.)
Tertullian calls the Playhouse, the Chapel of Venery, the House of Letchery,
the Consistory of uncleanness: And in his Apol. adv. Gent. We renounce your
Spectacles and Stage Plays, even as we reject their original, which we know to
have had their conception from Superstition; we have nothing at all to do with
the fury of your Circus, with the dishonesty of the Theater, we come not at all
to your Plays. Origin in Epist. ad Romans says, That Christians must not lift
up their eyes to Stage Plays, the pleasurable delights of polluted eyes, lest
their lusts be inflamed by them. Lactantius de vero cultu, says, That these
Interludes with which men are delighted, and whereat they are willingly
present, because they are the greatest instigations to Vice, and the most
powerful instrument to corrupt men's minds, are wholly to be abolished from
amongst us. Greg. Naz. de rect. educ. calls Stage Players the Servants of
lewdness, and Stage Plays, the dishonest, unseemly instructions of lascivious
men, who repute nothing filthy but modesty; and Play Houses the Lascivious
chops of all filthiness and impurity. Ambrose in Psalm. 118. styles Stage Plays
spectacles of vanity, by which the Devil conveys incentives of pleasure to men's
hearts; Let us therefore (says he) turn away our eyes from these vanities and
Stage Plays. Hierom. Epist. ad Salvinam, Have nothing to do with Stage Plays,
because they are the pleasing incendiaries of men's lusts. Augustine de Civ.
Dei, brands Stage Plays with this black mark, That they are the spectacles of
filthiness, the overturners of goodness and honesty, the chasers away of all
modesty and chastity; whorish shows, the art of mischievous villainies, which
even modest Pagans did blush to behold, the inventions to lewdness, by which
the Devil uses to gain innumerable companies of evil men to himself. In
another place he calls Theaters, Cages of uncleanness, the public professions
of wickedness; and Stage Plays, the most petulant, the most impure, impudent,
wicked, shameful, and detestable attonements of filthy Devil-gods; which to
true religion are most abominable. And elsewhere he declares, That when the
Gospel came to be spread abroad in the World, Stage Plays and Play Houses, the
very caves of filthiness, went to ruin almost in every City, as inconsistent
with it; whence the Gentiles (says he) complained of the times of
Christianity, as evil and unhappy times. Epiphanius contra haeres. says, That
the Catholic and Apostolic Church does reprobate and forbid all Theaters,
Stage Plays, and such like Heathenish spectacles. Chrysostom. Hom. in Matthew.
says, I wish the Theaters and Play-places were all thrown down, though as to
us they did lie desolate and ruined long ago: Elsewhere he says, That nothing
brings the Oracles and Ordinances of God into so great contempt, as admiring
and beholding Stage Plays: And that neither Sacraments nor any other of Gods
Ordinances (pray mark this diligently, O! how often is it sadly verified?) will
do a man good so long as he goes to Stage Plays. Bernard Sermon. ad milites
templi, says, That all the faithful Soldiers of Jesus Christ abominate and
reject all diceing and Stage Plays, as vanities and false frenzies. Let
Salvian his weighty words, de gub. Dei, shut up this short account of the
judgment of these ancient Fathers anent this matter, who says, That in
Stage Plays there is a certain Apostacy from the Faith. -- For what is the
first confession of Christians in their Baptism, but that they do protest they
renounce the Devil, his Pomps, Spectacles and Works; know thou Christian, when
thou do wittingly and knowingly return to Stage Plays, thou returnest to
the Devil, who is in his Plays, for thou have renounced both of them together:
wherein many Fathers agree with him, they being harmonious in condemning
Stage Plays, as being ordinarily stuffed with the Names, Histories, Persons,
Fables, Rites, Ceremonies, Villainies, Incests, Rapes, Applauses, Oaths,
Imprecations, and Invocations of the Idol-gods; as when the Actors cry, Help
Jove, Juno, Apollo, Bacchus, etc. and exclaim, O Jove! O Cupid! O Venus! O
Apollo! O Mars! O ye Gods! etc. and swear by Jove, Mars, Venus, the c^lestial
Gods, etc. (beside all these, they are often fraughted in these days with
wicked and profane scoffs and jests, abuses of Scripture, and bitter
invectives against piety) and as drawing men on to Profanity; Idolatry, and
Atheism. In fine, to show the perfect agreement betwixt the Primitive and
Protestant Church anent such Plays, it will neither be impertinent, nor I hope
unedifying, to subjoyn here the judgment of the famous Reformed Protestant
Church of France (from which other reformed Protestant Churches in this do not
differ, yea, the stream of Protestant Divines runs this way) declared in a
National Synod held at Rochel, Anno 1571. where this Canon was unanimously
framed; Congregations shall be admonished by their Ministers seriously to
reprehend and suppress all Dances, Mummeries, and Interludes, and it shall not
be lawful for any Christians to act or to be present (mark well) at any
Comedies, Tragedies, Plays, Interludes, or any other such sports, either in
public or in private Chambers, considering that they have always been
opposed, condemned, and suppressed, in and by the Church, as bringing along
with them the corruption of good manners, especially when as the holy Scripture
is profaned, which is not delivered to be acted or played, but only to be
preached. What uses now to be said in Apology for, and defense of
Stage Plays, and for reforming of them, yet so as to retain them still, was
long since objected by the witty and voluptuous Pagans, and solidly answered,
and strongly confuted by the Fathers; as it has been by several Modern
Writers, particularly Doctor John Reynolds, Mr. Stubbs, and notably by Mr. Pryn
(to whose indefatigable diligence in collecting, and great judgment in
disposing of many of the particulars here discoursed, I profess my self much
beholden;) and may be in a great p^^ by what has been here hinted concerning
the invention and original of them, the nature^ end, and use of them; beside
all that has been, and may most justly be said, of the man^ dangerous and
dreadful tendencies, attendants, consequents, and fruits of them, and the
horrid abuses of them, may sufficiently plead against the use of such
Stage Plays, being neither necessary nor profitable, and for the utter
abolition of them: God is jealous, an^ will not be mocked.

Farewell.
July 10. 1675.
TO THE READER.
THe Decay of Religion at this day in the World, is come to such an height, as
that it is observed by all who pretend unto any Concernment therein, and
Complained of by Many. By Religion we understand the Power of it in the Hearts
and Lives of Men, and not any Outward Profession of it only; much less the
general pretense that is made unto it, in them by whom its power is openly
denied. Neither is it manifest only in the fruits of Sinful security and the
flagitious lives of all sorts of men, but begins to be so also in its effects,
in the present state of things in the World filled with Misery and Confusion:
For the Wrath of God is many ways revealed from Heaven against the ungodliness
and unrighteousness of men, who hold the ^^th in unrighteousness: and in many
Nations the Visible tokens and demonstrations of it do abound. For, there is in
them no peace; to them that go out, nor to them that come in; but great
vexation is upon all their Inhabitants. Nation is destroyed of Nation, and City
of City; for God does vex them with all adversity. For whatever may be the
thoughts and counsels of men in these things, the Judgments of God are not
merely subservient unto their lusts and passions; it i^ his own controversy
with the world for neglect of the Gospel and opposition unto it that he
pleads in them, neither can our present respite in the enjoyment of outward
mercies be any evidence unto us, that we are not the objects of the same
displeasure. All men are in the same condition among whom the same sins and the
same relapses from the power of religion are sound; for God is no Respecter of
persons, It is indeed an effect of divine patience, which if abused unto
security, will issue in a more sore revenge. In the mean time the Voice of God
unto us in all the miseries and desolations we hear of in the world, is, that
unless we Repent, we shall all likewise perish. Neither are we altogether left
without pregnant warnings among our selves in many severe dispensations of
divine providence. And those who are not utterly hardened through the
deceitfulness of Sin, may easily see the hand of God lifted up in various
intimations of his displeasure. But hitherto it must be acknowledged, and ought
to be bewailed, that the Security of the world seems to be unshaken, and the
inundation of Sin not to be stemmed in the least measure.

What are the reasons and causes of the present general defection, from the
Truth, Power, Holiness and Glory of the Gospel or Christian Religion, I have
enquired into and declared in a peculiar Treatise designed unto that end. Some
few things suited unto the present occasion may be here observed. All decays in
Religion begin in individual persons, though it extend it self unto families,
and so the infection spreads unto greater societies, Eclesiasticall and
National. For such also is the order in the genuine progress of the power of
Religion whereunto it is opposed. The testimony that God gave unto Abraham was,
that keeping the way of the Lord himself, he taught and commanded his Children
and household after him so to do. And if the living power of Godliness
expressed in the History of Christ, and the Gospel in an holy Conversation, be
not preserved in Individual Persons; the Profession of the purest Religion in
Churches, or the highest Pretense unto it in Public, National Acts are neither
useful to the Souls of men, nor do any way tend unto the Glory of God. And the
sole use of all outward Religious Order and Profession is lost, where they are
not applied unto the Ingenerating and promoting of Holiness, or Evangelical
Obedience in particular Persons. Wherefore if any Revival of the Power of
Religion in the World may be yet hoped for; if any stop may be put unto the
Fatal Declension, which it suffers under, the forming and restoring of the
Principles of it in the Hearts and Consciences of such Persons is the way
whereby it must ^e attempted; from and by them must it be diffused into
Families, and greater Socities: Here must all Reformation begin, or in the use
of means suited thereunto. How this may be effected, we have one instance among
many, proposed unto us in the ensuing Discourse.

The General and undoubted Reason of all sins and miscarriages amongst men, is
the neglect of the Holy and Perfect Rule of Obedience, or of the Law of God,
without a recourse unto a Diligent Conscientious Attendance thereunto, without
a due Sense of the^ Authority of God therein; and of the Account which they
must shortly give of their regard unto it; there can be no just Expectation of
the Re-introduction of the Power and Glory of Religion. And many ways there
are, whereby men are diverted from the due Consideration of, and holy
complyan^e with this Rule.

First, False and Corrupt Interpretations of the Law, do countenance many in
Various Lusts; and the neglect of Mani old Duties. The Pharisees of Old
representing the Design and Sense of the Law, as regarding Outward Acts and
Practices only, laid an Axe to the Roo: of all True H liness and Religion in
the Aposiatizing Church of the Jews. Under a Pretense of Establishing a false
Legal Righteousness, they destroyed the (...) Righteousness of the Law. And
these things go together always. Those who plead for a Righteousness of their
own, as it were by the Works of the Law, do constantly by False Glosses and
Interpretations destroy the Spirituality, and all Animating Principles of the
Law it self. For, rightly to understand the Sense of the Law, and to seek for
Righteousness by it, or as it were by i^ Works, are altogether Inconsistent:
whereas therefore, many men, partly by their Natural Blindness, are not able to
discern the Spiritual Sense of the Law, and partly out of their Dislike of,
and Enmity unto it, will not comply with the Light which is tender*d unto them,
they have sought by False interpretations to Accommodase the Law it self unto
their own Lust and inclination. So evidently was it with the Pharisees of Old.
Nor are the Present Apprehensions of many about those things much different
from theirs. For such Expositions of the Law are embraced, wherein there is
little Respect unto the Spiritual frame of the Heart, or the Internal Actings
of the Adverse Principles of Sin and Obedience: The Extent of the Commandment
is also by many exceedingly strained, nor will any thing scarcely be allowed to
be Commanded or Forbidden in it, but what the Letter does plainly express. And
it is evident how such Apprehension, will insensibly weaken the Sense of a
Necessity of Universal Mortification, and abate the Diligence of the mind in
endeavoring after a renewed Spiritual Frame of Heart; by such means a
Declension from all true Holiness and Piety will be effectually promoted. For,
when men once begine to satisfy themselves in the outward Duties of Divine
Worship and Righteousness, which if alone, are but a dead Carcass of Religion,
they will not long abide in a Conscientious Observation even of them.

2. The separation of the Duties of the Law from the Grace of the Gospel, will
have the like effect. For this will quickly issue in a pretense of Morality,
set up its opposition unto true evangelical Obedience. And there is no way
whereby the whole Rule of Duty can be rendered more ineffectual and useless unto
the souls of men. For take away that Reconciliation which is made in Christ
between the Law and the Gospel, and it will prove a killing Letter only. And so
far as this imagination is gone about it quickly manifests it self in its
Fruits. For every attempt of men against the Grace of God will issue in the
ruin of morality among themselves.

Such Apprehensions as these in a coincidence with abounding tentations suited
unto the Lusts of all sorts of men, cannot but promote the Interest and
prevalency of Sin and Antichrist in the World. However manifest it is* that
that is a great neglect and contempt of the holy Rule of obedience in the most,
with great ignorance and misunderstanding of the design and sense of it in
many. Wherefore an upright endeavor to Declare and Vindicate the Authority and
meaning of it, as also to make Application of it unto the Consciences of
professed Christians, to direct them in, and press them unto the constant
performance of obedience, cannot but be esteemed seasonable, and through the
blessing of God may be singularly useful. So our Lord Jesus Christ himself
observing the mischief that had befaln the Church by the false exposition of
the Law, obtruded on the people by the Pharisees, began his Prophetical
Ministry in the vindication of it from their corrupting glosses, restoring its
pristine Crown of purity and spirituality, as the Jews have yet a Tradition,
that it shall be so in the days of the Messiah. And on the same consideration
it cannot be denied, but that the Endeavor of this worthy servant of Christ in
the work of the Gospel, the Author of the ensuing Exposition of the Decalogue,
is both seasonable and worthy of Acceptance. For as other endeavors also are
required in all them on whom it is incumbent, to take care in their respective
stations for the improvement of Holiness in the Church* and the obstruction of
the progre^s of Sin^, what in them lies; so for the reasons beforementioned,
that in this particular way is peculiarly seasonable and useful. And I am
persuaded, that every pious, humble and unprejudiced Reader, will judge that
much benefit may be obtained by his performance. Some may easily see how short
that measure of Duties which they have prescribed unto themselves does come, of
what is indispencibly required of them; and others may take a plain prospect of
that whole Scheme of Obedience in principles, matter, manner, and end which
they sincerely endeavor to come up unto. And sundry things there are which
appear to me with a notable degree of Excellency in the whole discourse.

1. Plainness and perspicuity in teaching, seems to have been designed by the
Author throughout the whole book. Hereby it is accommodated unto the meanest
Capacities, which is the greatest excellency of Discourses of this nature as
unto outward Form and Order. For, whereas its only end is to direct the
Practice of all sorts of Christians, all Ornaments of Speech, every thing that
diverts from plainness, sobriety, and gravity, is impertinent thereunto.
Wherefore as the things themselves treated of, are such, as the most wise,
knowing, and learned among Believers ought to be exercised in continually: So,
the way and manner of their Delivery or Declaration, is accommodated unto the
understanding and Capacity of the meanest of them that are so, that benefit may
redound unto all.

2. In particular instances and cases relating to daily practice are so
distinctly proposed, stated and determined, as that the whole is a complete
Christian directory in our walking before God in all duties of obedience; let
the pious Reader single out any one duty or head of duties to make his trial
upon, and if I greatly mistake not, he will discern with what wisdom, and
from what deep experience his plain directions are managed, and do proceed. As
to give a particular instance, let him consider what he discovers concerning
public Prayer, and the Miscarriages therein, which men are liable unto, pages
52. 53. or apply himself unto what he supposes himself more immediately
concerned in, unaffected plainness, perspicuous brevity, with solidity of
judgment, will every where represent themselves unto him.

3. Add hereunto, that constant respect which is had in the whole discourse
unto the heart and inward principles of Obedience, with the contrary actings of
the flesh, and temptations of all sorts. And thence it is that these
Discourses, (though delivered with all plainness of speech) will not be well
understood by any, but those who in some measure have their senses exercised to
discern both good and ^vill*

In the whole a full testimony is given, not only against the profligate lives
of many called Christians, but that barren careless profession also, which too
many satisfy themselves withal; who pretend more unto the truth and power of
Religion. And as these who are sincere in their obedience, may in the
examination of themselves, by the rules here laid down, discern the decays
which possibly they have fallen under in this hour of temptation which is come
on the face of the earth, to try them that dwell therein; so also may they be
directed in their Christian course unto the glory of God, and the Comfort of
their own Souls: Which that all may be, is the hearty desire of,

Christian Reader, Thy servant in the Work of JOHN OWEN

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE excellent and useful labors of this worthy Author, have long since
obtained the best Epistle of commendation; even that which the great Apostle
Paul accounted so complete a Testimony, as made all other commendatory Epistles
in his esteem to appear superfluous; that, I mean, mentioned by him, 2 Corinthians.
3. where he tells the believing orinthians, that they were his Epistle, meaning
that their Conversion and graces wrought in them by his ministry, gave a
sufficient witness to the worth and dignity thereof. This Epistle of
commendation (I say) God has so eminently bestowed upon the ministerial
endeavors of this holy man Mr. Durham, both in Press and Pulpit, that the
prefixing my Epistle of commendation to this excellent Exposition of the
Decalogue, was judged by my self to be but an attempt, to make the Sun appear
more resplendent by the faint and feeble light of a Candle. But since some are
pleased to put an undeserved value upon my approbation of this worthy
undertaking, I could not but upon this occasion signify that in my
apprehension, the ensuing Treatise its design and tendency so advances
holiness of heart and life, and withal is compiled with that strength and
clearness of judgment, and holy warmth of affection, as that (by Gods blessing)
it may preserve and reduce many in this sinful age from those impieties, that
so abound therein and may prove an excellent antidote against them, as by the
good providence of God, it is brought forth in a time wherein't is coetameous
with them. In the hopeful expectation whereof, I commit thee and this worthy
work to the blessing of God, in whom

I am thy faithful Friend to serve
London, November. 1675.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS, Delivered in several LECTURES.
EXODUS 20. 1. 2. (And God speak all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy
God. Which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of
Bondage.
BEing (through Gods strength (resolved to Essay the opening of the Ten
Commandments, all that we shall say, by way of Preface, shall be to give you an
account of the Motives which have engaged us in this Work.

The first is the Excellency of this Scripture, it being by the Lord himself
intended as a comprehensive sum of his peoples duty, and commanded to us from
this, that though all the Scripture be his Word, yet this in a singular manner
is so; for he spoke all these words himself, and by a Voice immediately formed
by himself he pronunced them first to his people, and afterward twice by his
Finger (that is, immediately by himself, without making use of any Penman, as
in other Scriptures) he wrote them for his peoples behoof upon two Tables of
Stone, which were afterward commanded in a singular manner to be kept in the
Ark, Deuteronomy. 10. v. 2. 5. and to be learned, Deuteronomy. 5. 1. as also to be written on
the Posts of their Doors, and diligently pressed on their Children, Deuteronomy. 67.
8. 9. 10. In opening of which Commandments, not only the Prophets and Apostles,
but our blessed Lord in that Sermon of his upon the Mount, Matthew. 5. 6. 7. does
much insist,

The second is the usefulness of this Scripture, and of the knowledge of it to
all that would know what is pleasing to God, that they may be fitted for duty
to him and may know what is displeasing to him; that may know sin, and how to
eschew it, and may be stirred up to repentance when they have fallen into it,
this being the Laws property, that thereby is the knowledge of sin, Romans 7. 7.
and so likewise the knowledge of duty; therefore it is summed in so few words,
that it may be the more easily brought into, and retained in the memories and
hearts of his people: For which cause also of old and late, has it always been
recommended, both in the Word, Deuteronomy. 5. 1. and in all Catechisms to be learned
as a Rule of men's walking; and yet so comprehensive is it, that without pains
and diligence to come to the understanding thereof men cannot but come short of
the great scop thereof.

The third is the great ignorance, that is amongst not a few, of the meaning of
the useful and excellent Scripture, and especially in this secure time, many
not knowing they break the Commandments when they break them, at least in many
material things, and this draws with it these sad effects: 1. That there are
few convictions of sin. 2. Little repentance for sin, 3. Much security*
presumption confidence in self-righteousness, and the like, upon which the
ignorance of this Scripture has great influence, even as amongst the Jews the
ignorance of its Spiritually made many neglect the chief part of holiness, and
proudly settle on self-righteousness* and slight Christ the Mediator; as we may
see in Paul's example, Romans 7. 9. and this was one reason why our Lord expounded
it, that by it sinners might see more the necessity of a Mediator, who is the
end of the Law for righteousness to all that believe, Romans 10. 4. And as these
effects are palpable at this time, so we conceive it useful to follow the same
remedy; this evil being not only amongst the profane, but amongst the most
formal and civil, who stumble at this stone; yea, many believers are often so
much taken with cases and light in Doctrinal truths, that they heed not
snfficiently the meaning of the Law, whereby their convictions of sin
tenderness in practice, constant exercise of repentance, and daily fresh
applications to the Blood of Sprinkling are much impeded.

And although it may seem not so to suit the nature of this exercise (for it
would be noticed, that the Author delievered this Doctrine of the Law in
several Lectures on the Sabbath-morning before Sermon, in which time he
formerly used to read and expound a Chapter of the Holy Scriptures, or a
considerable portion thereof; which Lectures are not now distinguished, because
of the close connection of the purposes) yet considering the foresaid reasons,
and the nature of this excellent Scripture, which cannot hastily be passed
through (it having much in few words, and therefore requiring some convenient
time for explication) and consideriing the weight of it, and its usefulness for
all sorts of hearers, we are confident it will agree well with the end of this
Eexercise, (which is the end of opening all Scripture) to wit, peoples
instruction and edification, to insist a little thereon.

Our purpose is not to aim at any great accuracy, nor to multiply questions and
digressions, nor to insist in application and use, but plainly and shortly (as
we are able) to give you the meaning of the Law of God: 1. By holding forth the
Native Duties required every Commandment. 2. The sins which properly oppose and
contradict each Commandment, that by these we may have some direction and help
in duty, and some spur to repentance, at least a furtherance in the work of
Conviction, that so by it we may be led to Christ Jesus, who is the end of the
Law for righteousness to every one that belives, Romans 104. which is the
principal intent of this Law, as it was given to Israel.

To make way for the Exposition, we shall 1. Lay down some Conclusions which
arise from the Preface. 2. Give you some ordinary distinctions. 3. Clear and
confirm some Rules or Observations useful for understanding of the whole Law.

The first Conclusion that we take for granted is, that this Law (as it is
Moral) does tie even Christians and Believers now, as well as of old; which
appears from this, that he who is God the Lawgiver here, Acts 7. 38. is the
Angel Christ, and it is his Word, as is clear, verse. 30. 31. as also the matter
of it being connatural to Adam, it did bind before the Law was given, and that
obligatory force cannot be seprated from its nature, (though the exercise of
Right Reason in Nature be much obliterate since the Fall) therefore Christ was
so far from destroying this Law in its Authority, and Paul so far from making
it void by the Doctrine of Faith, that our Lord tells he came to fulfill it,
Matt. 5. 17. and Paul shows, that his preaching of Faith was to establish it,
Romans 3. 31. which truth being confirmed by them both in their Practice and
Doctrine, shows that the breach of the holy Law of God, is no less sinful to
us now, then it was to them before us.

The second Conclusion is, that though this Law, and obedience thereto, lie on
Christians, and be called for from them, yet it is not laid on them as a
Covenant of Works, or that by which they are to seek or expect Justification;
no but on the contrary, to overturn self-righteousness, by this Doctrine which
manifests sin and of it self works wrath? which is also clear, in that he
is here called, Our God, which he cannot be to sinners but by Grace: And also
it appears from the Lords owning of this sinful people as his, and his
adjoining to this Law so many Ceremonies and Sacrifices which point out and
lead to Christ: and from his adding the Law on Mount Sinai, as a help to the
Covenant made with Abraham, Genes. 17. (which was a Covenant of Grace, and was
never altered, as to its substance) in which the people of Israel, as his Seed,
was comprehended; therefore it appears that this was never the Lords intent in
covenanting thus with his people, that they should expect righteousness and
life by the adjoined Law, but only that it should be useful in the Hand of
Grace to make the former Covenant with Abraham effectual: So then, though we be
bound to obey the Law, we are not to seek righteousness or life by the duties
therein enjoined.

The third Conclusion is, that both Ministers in preaching, and people in
practicing of this Law, would carry with subordination to Christ* and that the
duties called for here are to be performed as a part of the Covenant of Grace,
and of the obligation that lies upon us thereby, and so all our obedience to
God ought still to run in that Channel.

If we ask how these two differ, to wit, the performing the duties of the Law,
as running in the Channel of the Covenant of Grace, and the performing of them
as running in the* Channel of the Covenant of Works, or how we are to go about
the duties of the Law with subordination to Christ and his Grace? I answer,
they differ in these four things, which show, that these duties are not only
to be done, but to be done in a way consistent with, and flowing from Grace:
which also follows from this, that in the Preface to the Commandments, he
styles and holds himself forth as Redeemer to be the object of our duty, and
the motive of it.

1. They differ, I say first, in the End or account upon which they are
performed; we are not to perform duties that life, pardon, or enjoying of God
may be meritoriously obtained by them, but to testify our respect to him who
has provided these freely for us, that we should not rest in duties which are
engraven on these Covenant-Blessings.

2. They differ in the Principile by which we act them, it is not in our own
strength as the works of the first Covenant were to be performed, but in the
strength of Grace, and by virtue of the promises of Sanctification comprehended
in the second Covenant 2 Cor. 7. 1.

3. They differ as to the manner of their acceptance, duties by the first
Covenant are to abide their trial upon the account of their own worth, and the
inherent perfection that is in them, and accordingly will be accepted, or
rejected, as they are conform or disconform to the perfect Rule of Gods Law;
but by the second Covenant, the acceptance of our performances, prayers,
praises. are founded on Christ's Righteousness, and Gods mercy in him, in whom
only are they sweet smelling Sacrifices, and accepted as our persons are, for
he has made us to be accepted as to both only in the beloved Ephesians. 1. 4.

4. They differ in respect of the motive from which they proceed; or the great
motive of our obedience in the Covenant of Grace, is not fear of threatenings
and wrath in case of disobedience, which by the Covenant of Works is the main
thing sways men to duties, no^ is it a purchase of Heaven to themselves by
their holiness, which also by that Covenant is a predominant motive of men's
obedience, but it is love and gratitude, and that not simply to God as Creator,
but as Redeemer, as the Text here shows. I brought thee out of the House of
Bondage, it is that we may set forth the praises of him who called us, and that
we may glorify him that has bought us: where Duties have these qualifications,
they are consistent with Grace, and subservient to it; but when those are
wanting or excluded, Christ is wronged, and men turn legal, and in so far fall
from and overturn Grace.

These Conclusions as necessary Caveats being laid down, we shall propose these
distinctions for clearing of them,

1. We would distinguish betwixt a Law and a Covenant, or betwixt this Law,
considered as a Law, and as a Covenant; a Law does necessarily imply no more
then 1. To direct. 2 To command, enforcing that obedience by Authority; a
Covenant does further necessarily imply promises made upon some condition, or
threatenings added if such a condition be not performed: now this Law may be
considered without the consideration of a Covenant, for it was free to God to
have added, or not to have added promises, and the threatenings (upon
supposition the Law had been kept) might never have taken effect; but the first
two are essential to the Law, the last two, to Believers, are made void throngh
Christ; in which sense it is said, that by him we are freed from the Law as a
Covenant, so that Believers life depends not on the promises annexed to the
Law, nor are they in danger by the threatening adjoined to it: Hence we are to
advert when the Covenant of Works is spoken of, that by it is not meaned this
Law simply, but the Law propounded as the condition of obtaining life by the
obedience of it; in which respect it was only so formally given to Adam: This
then is the first destinction betwixt the Law, and the Covenant of Works.

2. Distinguish betwixt these Ten Commandments simply and strictly taken in the
matter of them, and more complexly in their full Administration, with Preface,
Promises, Sacrifices, etc, in the first sense they are a Law having the matter,
but not the form of the Covenant of Works: so Moses by it is said to describe
such righteousness as the Covenant of Works does require, yet he does not
propond it as the righteousness they were to rely on, but his scope is to put
them to a Mediators, by revealing sin through the Law, Romans 10. 3. In the
second sense it is a Covenant of Grace, that same in substance with the
Covenant made with Abraham, and with the Covenant made with Believers now, but
differing in its Administration.

3. Distinguish betwixt Gods intention in giving, and the Believers in Israel
their making use of this Law, and the carnal multitude among that people their
way of receiving it, and corrupt abusing it contray to the Lords mind: In the
first sense it was a Covenant of Grace, in the second, it turned to be a
Covenant of Works to them; and therefore it is that the Lord rejects as we may
see Jsaiah 1. 13. 66. 2. 3. Jer. 7. 22. their Sacrifices and Services as not
commanded, because rested on by them to the prejudice of Grace, and contrary to
the strain and scope of this Law complexly considered.

4. Distinguish betwixt the Moral, and Ceremonial, and Judicial Law; the first
concerns manners, and the right ordering of a Godly Conversation; and because
these things are of perpetual equity and rectitude, the obligation of this Law
as to that is perpetual; and therefore in the exponding of it, these two terms,
Moral, and of Perpetual Authority, are all one, and to be taken so* 2. The
Judical Law is for regulating outward Society, and for Government, and does
generally (excepting what was peculiar to the people of Israel) agree with the
Moral Law; this as given to them is not perpetual, their policy being at an
end. 3* The Ceremonial Law is in Ceremonies, Types, and Shadows, pointing at a
Savior to come* this is also abrogate, the substance being come; but there is
this difference, that the Judicial Law is but Mortua, dead; and may, where't is
thought fit, with the foregoing caution, be used under the New Testament; but
the Ceremonial Law is Mortifera, deadly, and cannot without falling from grace,
Gal. 5. 2* 4. be revived.

5. When we speak of things Moral, we are to distinguish between things
Naturally Moral, that is* such (as love to God and our Neighbor, and
suchlike) which have an innate rectitude and holiness in them, which cannot be
separate from them, and things positively Moral, that have their obligation by
a special positive superadded Sanction, sothat their rectitude flows not from
the nature of the things themselves, as in the former: As for instance, in the
fourth Commandment it is naturally Moral that God should be woshipped, Nature
teaches it; but that he is to be worshipped on such a day particularly, that
comes to pass by virtue of his positive Command; the first cannot be altered,
the second by the Lord may; but till he alter it, the Authority lies still on
all, and it is equally sin to sin against any of them, though without the
positive Sanction, there is no obligation naturaly requiring obedience in some
of them.

6. The sixth distinction is of the Moral Law in two Tables, first and second;
The first contains our immediate worship, and service and obedience to God
himself, and is comprehended in the first four Commandments; the second
contains our mediate obedience to God in all the duties we owe to other, in the
last six* they were at first so divided by the Lord himself, for there are Ten
in all, Dent. 4. 13* From this distinction take notice: 1. That all the
Commandments of the second Table are of like Authority with the first, God
spoke all these words; yea, as it appears from Acts 7. 38. it was our Lord
Jesus. 2. The sins immediately against the first Table, are greater then those
against the second; for this cause, Matthew. 22. 38. the first is called the
First and Great Commandment: Therefore 3. In Morals (if they be things of the
same nature) the duties of the second Table cede and give place to the duties
of the first Table, when they cannot stand together; as in the case of love to
God, and the exercise of love to our Father and Neighbor, Luke 14. 26. Matthew.
^0. 37. when obedience to God and obedience to our superiors cannot consist*
we are to obey God rather then man, Acts 4. 19. and we are to lore the Lord,
and hate Father and Mother* Luke 14. 6. 4. Yet take notice, that Ceremonials or
positives of the first Table, for a time cede and give place to Morals in the
second; as for relieving or preserving our Neighbors life in hazard, we may
travel on the Sabbath day, according to that Scripture, I will have Mercy and
not Sacrifice, and the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath,
etc.

7. The seventh distinction (which is ordinary) is of the Commandments into
affirmative and negative, as ye see all the Commandments in the first Table are
negatively set down, forbidding sin directly: Thou shall not have an other
gods, etc. only the fourth is both negative and affirmative, forbidding sin,
and commanding duty directly; as also the fifth only, which is the first of the
second Table, is affirmative, all the rest are negative.

This distinction is not so to be understood, as if nothing were commanded or
enjoined in negative Precepts, or as if nothing were forbidden in affirmative
Precepts (for what ever be expressed as forbidden, the contrary is always in
plied as commanded, and whatsoever is expressly commanded, the contrary is
always employed as forbidden) but the distinction is taken from the manner of
setting them down, concerning which take these Rules or general Observations
for your better understanding, many whereof are in the larger Catechism.

1. However the Commandments be expressed, affirmatively or negatively, every
one of them has two parts* one affirmative, employed in negative Precepts,
requiring the duties that are contray to the sins forbidden; another negative,
employed in the affirmative Precepts, forbidding the sins that are contrary to
the duties commanded; as for example the third Commandment, Thou shall not take
the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; it implies a Command reverently to use
his Name: So, to remember to keep Holy the Satbbath day, implies a Prohibition
of profaning it; in which sense all the Commandments may in some respect be
called negative (and so a part of the fourth Commandment is negatively
expressed, Thou shall d^no work) or affirmative; in which respect Christ
comprehends all the negatives under these two great affirmative Commandments,
of love to God and our Neighbor, for every Commandment does both enjoin and
forbid; the like may be said of promises and threatenings, there being in every
promise a threatening, and in every threatening a promise conditionally employed:
And this may be a reason why some Commandments are negatively expressed, some
positively, to show us that both are compredended.

2. Though the positive Commandment, or (the positive part of the Commandment)
be of alike force and Authority with the negative, as to the obligation it
lays on us to duty, yet it does not tie us to all occasions and times, as
negatives do: Hence is that common Maxim, that affirmative Commands tie and
oblige semper ever, that is, they never want their Authority, and we are never
absolved from their obedience* but they do not oblige and tie ad semper, that
is, in all differences of time we are not tied to the exercise of the duties
enjoined; negatives again oblige both somper and ad semper, that is, always,
and in all differences of time: For instance, in the third Commandment, the
affirmative part is to use the Lords Name and Ordinances holily and reverently
in prayer, reading and hearing, etc. So in the fourth Commandment we are
required to sanctify the Sabbath, by wating on Ordinances, etc. This makes
these still duties, so as to pray, hear, etc. are still duties, but we are not
to be, and should not be always exercised in these duties, for we must abound
in other duties also of necessity, and mercy, we must eat, and sleep, etc. and
when we sleep, we can neither act love, nor sear. Again, the negative part is,
not to profane the Lords Name in his Ordinances; this may not be done at any
time: The reason of the difference is this, because in affirmatives we are not
always tied to the acts of Duties and Graces* but to the Disposition and
Habit. Habits are a Spiritual Quality, a (Vis) or Power sitting and enabling
for bringing forth these acts; and for the bringing them forth in the due time
and season, when they shall be called for; but in sinful things we are
prohibited, not only the habits, but the acts also: the one is always and ever
a sin, but the other is not always called for as duty. If any desire Rules to
know when a duty is called for; as for instance, when we are to pray, hear,
etc. it is hardly possible to be particular in this, yet we may try it by these
Generals.

1, Any affirmative Precept binds to present practice, when the duty required
tends to Gods glory, unto which every thing should be done (as 1 Corinthians* 10.
31.) and when the omission of the duty may dishonor him.

2. When it tends to others edification, and omitting will some way stumble and
offend.

3. When some special Providence meet and concur, to give opportunity for such
a duty; as for instance, the giving of Aims when we have it, and some indigent
person offers, whose necessity calls for it, Gal. 6. 10. So when secrecy for
prayer is offered, (and no other more necessary duty at that time is called
for) which we are to watch unto, Col. 4. 2. or when we meet with some special
occasion or Dispensation, pointing out to us this or that as a duty called for,
such a Providence invites us to the practice of that duty: for though
Providence will not make these things to become duties which are not duties,
yet they will serve to time and circumstantiate duties that lie on us, by
virtue of affirmative Precepts.

4. Some special occasions and times are set down in the Word, as for praying
Morning and Evening, for hearing the Word on Sabbath days; and in these, and
other the like duties, the examples of the Saints, so recorded for imitation in
Scripture, would be observed as a Copy and pattern.

5. When they have not such inconveniences with them, as cross and hinder other
Moral duties of Edification, love* etc. for if they do that, they must yield
and give place to these; but if no other duty be called for, then they ought to
be done, for we should be in some duty. And though such dnties be in themselves
Moral, suppose praying, hearing, and such others, which might be instanced, yet
the timing of them, or going about them at such a time, and in such a manner*
is not Moral simply, but as these are by circumstances called for.

6. When without sin such a duty cannot be omitted; and although there be not
any inward exercise of mind, or frame of spirit suitable thereto, yet the
Conscience calls for it, or there is some on special occasion or other that
puts us to it.

3. Observe, that this Rule of Negatives tying ad semper, or obliging in all
circumstances of time, is not to be understood, but where the matter is Moral;
therefore we would distinguish again betwixt negative Morals, and negative
Positives, for Positives, whether negative or affirmative, give still place to
Morals, As for instance, that part of the fourth Commandment is negative* In it
(that is, one the seventh day) ^^ou shall do no manner of work, yet sometimes,
when necessity calls for it, some manner of works is lawful on that day,
because it is only a negative Positive, and not a negative Moral: And so
David's eating of Shewbread, was against a negative Command, though not
against a negative Moral, but a negative Positive.

4. Take this Rule, that in all Commands, jointly and severally, we would have
special respect unto the scope God aims at by them all in general, or by such a
Command in particular: now the general scope is (2 Cor. 7. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 15.
16*) perfect and absolute holiness, even as he is holy; and therefore whatever
he requires, he requires that* it be absolutely perfect in its kind, as that
our love to him be with the whole heart, etc. and so our love to others be as
to our selves; our Chastity and Purity, all must be absolute. (see 1 Timothy 1.
5.) This Rule will teach us what we are to aim and level at: And whatever
Exposition of the Commandments comes not up to this scope, is no doubt
defective; and by this Rule only can we be helped to the right meaning of every
Commandment, for each of them has its peculiar scope, both as to the duties it
requires, and sins it condemns. And by this Rule it is that our Lord Christ
(whose Exposition with that of the Prophets is best) draws in the least and
smallest branches of filthiness to the seventh Commandment, which discharges
all things contrary to perfect and complete Purity.

5. The fifth Rule is, that the Law is spiritual, Romans 7. 14. and that not only
outward obedience to such duties, or outward abstinence from such sinful acts
is called for, but the Law, having a spiritual meaning, calls for spiritual
service, and that in these three: 1. As it requires spiritual duties, such as
Faith, Fear, Love to God, and ^^ others; right habits, as well as right
affections, and outward actions, and therefo^^ Paul, to prove the spirituality
of the Law, instanceth in the habit of Lust, Romans 7. ^^ a thing thereby
discharged. 2. The Law is spiritual, in that the obligation thereof reaches to
the Spirit, and very inwards of the Heart, affections and thoughts, as wel^ as
to the outward man; the love it requires, is love with all the Soul, Heart and
Mind. Hence there is Heart-Idolatry, Murder, and Adultery, as well as outward,
therein condemned. 3. It is spiritual, in respect of the manner; it requires as
to all outward duties, that they be done to a spiritual end, from a spiritual
principle, and in a spirital way, opposite to the carnal way, to which the
unrenewed heart of man is inclined, in which sense we are commanded to walk in
the spirit, Gal. 5. 16. and so praying and praising, which this Law calls for,
is praying and praising in the spirit, 1 Corinthians. 14, verse. 14, 15, 16.

6. A sixth Rule is, that beside the duty expressed, there is more employed in
the affirmative Commands; and beside the sin pitched on, there is more
forbidden in the negative Precepts, even all duties and sins of these kinds, in
whatsoever degree: As for example, in the affirmative Commands: 1. Where the
duty is commanded, all the means that may further it are commanded likewise:
Hence under care to preserve our Brother, Levit. 19. 17. 18. it is commanded
that we should reprove him, etc. 2. Where any thing is commanded as a duty, all
duties of that kind are commanded, as keeping holy the Lords Day, is commanded
in the fourth Commandment: there hearing, praying, watchfulness all the Week
over, and all things belonging unto the Worship of God that day, such as
Tithes, that is, maintenance for a Ministry, calling of fit Ministers, bulding
Churches, etc. are required, though they be not all duties of that day. 3.
Where a duty is required, the owning and suitable avowing of the duty is
required also: and so believing in God, and the profession of Faith are
required in the same Commandment, Romans 10. 10. 4. Where the duty of one
Relation is repuired (as of Childrens subjection) there is required the duty of
the other Relation (as of Parents) yea, and also of all under that name.

Again, in negative Precept; observe: 1. Where great sins are forbidden, all
the lesser of that sort are forbidden also: as under Adultery, Murder, and
Idolatry, all light, obscene Whorish words, wanton looks, unchaste thoughts,
revenge, rash anger, wordly affections, etc. are forbidden; and they are
comprehended and prohibited under the grossest terms, to make them the more
detestable, odious, and dreadful. 2. All means that may prevent these sins are
commanded, and all snares, or occasions, or incitements to them are prohibited.
3. Where any sin is forbidden, there the least scandal about it, or the least
appearance of the guilt of committing it, is forbidden also; for God will have
his people holy, and shining in holiness, unspotted, and without scandal, and
abstaining not only from all evil, but from all appearance of it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
22. 4. We are not only forbidden the committing of such sins our selves,
delighting in them, and inclining to them, but accounting light or little of
them in others; yea, we are commanded and ought to mourn for them, when
committed by them.

7. The seventh Rule is, whatever duty lies upon others, we are commanded in
our places to further them in it, as Masters are to further their Servants,
Husbands their Wives, one Neighbor another; by advice, direction,
encouragement, prayer, and other helps, as in the fourth Commandment is clear,
where the Servants duty, and the Strangers, is imposed on the Master; and
whatever sin is discharged in our selves, we are discharged any manner of way
to partake in the same with others, whether by advice, example, connivance,
ministering occasion, or by sporting and laughing at it in them; for so the Rule
is, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Keep thy self pure, partake not of other men's ^ins: Men may
be free themselves* as to their own personal breaches, and yet high^y partake
of others breaches of the Law.

8. The breach of one Commandment virtually breaks all; there is such a
connection and linking together of the Commandments, that if the Authority of
God be ^lighted in one, it is so in all, Jam. 2. 10. 1. John 4. 20.

9. On thing may in diverse respects (as an end or means) be commanded or
forbidden in many, yea in all the Commandments* as ignorance and drunkenness
are, because they disable for all duties, and dispose to all sins: Of this kind
is idleness also; and so knowledge, sobriety, watchfulness* etc. are commanded
in all the Commandments; for without these men are unfitted and incapacitated
for performing any commanded duty.

10. The tenth and last Rule is, the Law is holy, just, and good: therefore the
least motion against it, or coffeehouse with it, is sin, Romans 7. 12. In sum:
take these few watch-words concerning the obligation of the Law.

1. That it obliges to all duties, and to all sorts of duties, public,
private to God, to others, and to our selves: and that words, actions,
gestures, yea thoughts, and the least motions of the heart, come under its
obligation: his Commandment is exceeding broad, so that there is nothing so
little, but it ought to be ruled by this Word, and that in all persons of all
Ranks, whether as to doing or suffering.

2. That it obliges to the right manner of duties, as well as to the matter,
and to every thing that belongs to duties; and thus in its true extent it
reaches to the forbidding of all the sins that are contrary to duties
commanded.

3. That it obliges the whole man, the outward, in deeds, words, gestures, and
appearances or shows; the inward, in the understanding, will, affections,
memory; consciences; and so it requires that the mind, will, and whole nature
be sanctified, and conform to all these Commands.

5. That it obliges to obedience in all these always, and in the highest
degree, so that the least disconformity in habit or act is a transgression, the
obedience it requires is perfect in all these respects, that not only there
must be no breach of any of these Commands directly, much lose a continuance in
a breach; but that also 1. There must be no appearance of breaking them, 1
These. 3. 2. 2. There must be no consent to break them, though it come not forth
to act, Matthew. 5. 28. There must be no casting our selves in the way of any
temptation or snare, whereby we may be enticed or occasioned (to speak so) to
break them; as Davil was by his looking on a woman, 2 Samuel 11. 2. which Job
guards against, Job 31. Verse. 1* 4. there must be no corrupt motion, affection,
or inclination to evil, even where it gets not assent, there must be no
tickling of delight in the thing, though the heart dare not consent to act it,
nor any coffeehouse with the restraint that keeps from such a thing, or
secret wishing that such a thing were lavvful; but on the contrary, we must
account every commanded thing right, Psalm 119. 128.

5. The involuntary motions of the mind which never get assent to any of these
evils, nor are delighted in, yet even these are prohibited by this Law, because
they flow from a corrupt Fountain, and are the Evidences of disconformity to
Gods Image in our nature, and they ought not so much as to be in us. Hence does
the Apostle complain of lust, Romans 7. though resisted by him.

6. It teaches not only to streams of actual corruption, but to the Fountain
of original sin, whereby we entertain within us the seed and incentives unto
actual evils that contradict this holy Law. By all which we may see what
holiness it calls for, and how often (if we were examined in all the Commands
by these Rules) we would be found defective and faulty, and what matter of
humiliation and repentance we may have for what is past, and what challenges we
may have hereafter from this Law, with what need of continual applications to
the Blood of Sprinkling, and of Washings in that open Fountain, to the House of
David, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and uncleanness, and what need of
endeavors to have our steps ordered more exactly according to it.

Before we close the Preface, I shall first add two distinctions more, then two
more Rules: 3. Give you some Scriptures for your memories cause, 4. Give some
directions or helps to those who make conscience to study this Law. 5. Answer
and clear a special case.

1. Then ye would distinguish betwixt this Law as given to Adam, and as given
to Israel: for as given to him it was a Covenant of Works, but as given to them
it is a Covenant of Grace, and so from us now it calls for Gospel-duties, as
Faith in Christ, 1 Timothy 1. 5. Repentance, Hope in God, etc. and although it
call for legal duties, yet in a Gospel manner; therefore we are in the first
Commandment commanded to have God for our God, which cannot be by sinners
obeyed, but in Christ Jesus, the Covenant of Works being broken, and the tie of
Friendship thereby between God and Man made void; so that now men, as to that
Covenant, are without God in the World, and without Christ and the Promises,
Ephesians. 2. 12. 13. And so our having God for our God, (which is pointed at in
the Preface to the Commandments) and Christ for our Savior, and closing with
his Righteousness, and the Promises of the Covenant (which are all Yea and Amen
in him) must go together.

2. Distinguish betwixt the diverse Administrations of the Covenant of Grace,
and of the Law, in respect of Positives, falling under the second Commandment;
for that Commandment tied the Israelites before Christ to Circumcision,
Sacrifices, the seventh day of the Week, and other Ceremonies agreeable to the
Administration of the Law, and Covenant of Grace then* but now it forbids
them to us, and requires other duties, for the Priesthood being changed,
there is of necessity a change also of the Laws belonging thereto; yet that
Commandment, as a part of the Moral Law, does perpetually oblige and tie to
worship God, and none other, and that according to the manner which he
prescribes.

Next unto the Rules already laid down for the better understanding of the
Commandments, we add two more.

The first is, that the Commandments are so to be expounded, as that none of
them may contradict another, that is, there is nothing commanded in one that is
forbidden in another, or contrary; one duty does not justle with not thrust out
another, but they differ only; and then two duties coming together, in that
case one of them cease to be a duty for that time* as is said in that
distinction of affirmative and negative Commands.

The second Rule is, that all these Commandments bind and call for obedience
from men, according to their places, and other qualifications and
circumstances: The fifth Commandment calls for one thing from a Magistrate,
another from a Subject; a Magistrate is to edify one way, a Minister another,
a private Christian another* a Servant is one way to reprove his
Fellow Servants, a Master another way: The Law requires more from a man of
parts, power and riches, then from another, as to exercise and improvement of
these gifts: The Law being just, has in it a proportionableness to places,
parts, etc. and sets bounds to stations, but alters them not, nor confounds
them.

3. For the help of your memories, and that ye may have these Rules more
obvious, ye may draw them all under these five Scriptures.

The first Scripture is, Psalm 119. v. 96. Thy Commandment is exceeding broad;
which though it be more extensive in its meaning, yet it does certainly include
this Law, which in an especial way is the Commandment, and in the sense and
comprehensive meaning thereof is exceeding broad; for it takes in the fullness
and extent of the whole Law, in its obligation, as to all things, persons, and
duties of all sorts.

The second Scripture is, Romans 7. 14. which speaks to the Spirituality of the
Law in the obedience which it calls for, the Law is Spiritual,

The third Scripture is, Romans 7. 12. which speaks the perfection of its nature,
the Law is Just; therefore fretting against what it commands, or wishing it
were otherwise, is a breach thereof; It is holy; therefore to be discomformable
unto it, is to be unholy; it is good, and therefore it ought to be loved and
delighted in.

The fourth Scripture is, 1 Timothy 1. 5. and it speaks the great end of the
Law; The end of the Commandment is Charity out of a pure Heart, and a good
Conscience* and Faith unfeigned; which threefold End speaks out the absolute
purity and holiness called for in our love to God and others, so as to have a
good conscience in this before God: all which must flow from unfeigned Faith
without presumption, resting on Jesus Christ, who is in this sense the end of
the Law.

The fifth Scripture is, 1 Timothy 1. 8. The Law is good, if a man use it
lawfully: and this guards against abusing of the Law, and puts us to the
lawful use of it: There are extremes in abusing the Law; as 1. When it is used
to see Righteousness by it. Again 2. When the Authority of it is pretended for
something it Warrants not, such as the Traditions of the Fathers, Matt. 15.
seeking of Salvation by the observation of Circumcision, etc. 3. When its
Authority in practice is denied. 4. When it is turned from practice to vain
speculations and questions. 5. When it is so used as it deters and scares from
Christ. 6. When it is so made use of, as it oppresses and discourages a
Believer, for whose sake (1 Timothy 1. 19.) it was never made or appointed, as to
its threatenings and condemning Power: And lastly, in a word, when it is not
used to the ends, and in the manner expressed, in the former Scriptures.

Fourthly, Because the study of this Law is so singularly useful, we not only
press and commend it, but add further some few directions, whereby we may be
helped rightly to use it, and to guard against the abuse of it in our hearing
and reading of it.

1. The first direction is, ye would look on it as Gods Word, and take it as if
ye heard himself from Sinai pronounce it, that so ye may tremble; and be more
affected with holy fear when ever ye read, hear it, or meditate upon it; for so
was the people affected when it was first promulgate.

2. Be much in prayer for grace to take up its meaning; David (Psalm. 119. 18,
etc.) prayed often for this, and thought it not unbecoming a King, yea a
believing King, and a Prophet, to study this Law, and pray much for opened eyes
to understand the meaning thereof.

3. In your reading seek to understand so as to practice it, for that is the
end of knowledge, and the end the Law it self aims at, Deuv. 5. 1. 2. we
knowing no more in Gods account then what we endeavor honestly to practice;
and not aiming at practice, indisposeth both for understanding and practice,
and makes men exceeding careless.

4. As ye hear and learn any thing to be duty or sin, reflect on your selves,
and try whether that be sin in you, and how far short ye are in that duty, for
this is the proper use of the Law, to reveal sin and transgression, Romans 1. ^8.
and therefore it is ca^^ed a Glass, Jam. 1. 23. 24. and ye would look in it so
as ye may know what manner of persons ye are, and may know what sports are upon
you.

5. When the Law discovers sin, ye would open your Bosom to let in Convictions;
for the Law entered that sin might abound, not in practice, but in sense
feeling, and conscience, Romans 5. 20. and follow these Convictions by
repentance, till they necessitate you to fly to Christ, and leave you there.

6. Take help from Christ's Sermons, and the Prophets, to understand this
Scripture, for they are the only Canonical; and therefore the best Commentary
upon the Commandments; yet ye would not despise the light holden forth in
humane writings, such as the larger Catechism, which is very full as to this,
and if concionably improved, will prove exceeding profitable for your
instruction.

Lastly, The Grave Case that we would speak unto, before we enter particularly
on the Commandments is* whether any of these Commandments may be broken in our
sleep, by Dreams, Imaginations, Actions, etc. which otherwise are unlawful, or
whether when a man is sleeping and dreaming he be subject to the Rule of the
Law, and if its obligation extend to him even then? This question has its own
difficulty, and althought it be not good to be curious in it, yet it wants not
its own profit, as to the peace and quietness of Gods people, or to their
humbling and stirring up unto repentance, if it be rightely decided. I know
almost all run on the negative, as if men were not in the least guilty of sin
by such Dreams* upon this ground, upon this ground, because they are not then
in a capacity to use and exercise their reason, but that they are in this case
as mad, distracted, o^ frantic men. I desire to be sober in speaking to this;
yet I shall adventure to speak my mind a little about it, with the reasons of
it.

And 1. we say there is a great difference betwixt sleeping dreaming men, and
madmen. 1. Because madness is wholly in it self penal, and is a disease
following sinful man as other diseases: but so it cannot be said of such
dreaming; for as sleep was natural (there being before Adams Fall a Day and a
Night as well as now, and there being an instance then of Adams sleeping) so
must dreaming be, being procured by the restlesness of the Fancy; and the
roving of the Imaginations, which is some way natural; but that men dream of
such subjects, or that their dreams are of such a nature (as filthy or
prophaine) seems clearly to follow sin, which dreaming simply does not; and
therefore man is not so passive in this, as in madness. 2. Because in dreams
men have more use of Reason, then in madness, though (as the Schoolmen say)
that use be imperfect, yet as they grant (and Experience confirms it, and
Augustine lib. 10. Confess^ acknowledges it in himself) their may reason and
debate in sleep, yea sometimes reject some motions, and though dreaming yet not
give consent unto them; and that upon reasons which at other times possibly
they will embrace. Hence is it that there is a sort of sutableness and likeness
betwixt men's dreamings* and their rational actings when walking; children and
mad men, or men in a distemper, having more foolishnese and less reason in
dreams, then these who have more use of reason; but wise men in a distraction,
and natural fools, have no such difference then: Beside, we conceive that
dreaming is more proper to reasonable men then Beasts* and to men that have
exercise of reason then to children, but madness may be in all. 3. Because a
man's former carriage in moral things has much more influence on his dreams
when he has clear use of reason, then it can be said to have upon him when in
madness, as to the things committed by him in it. 4. Neither is it without some
weight, that under the Law, Levit. 15. Deuteronomy. 23. 10. Sacrifices and Washing*
were appointed for some sins committed in sleep and dreaming (whatever they be
in themselves) which were not appointed for the sins of such as were frantic:
All which put together, and duly considered, we cannot look upon sins, I mean
things otherwise unlawful, in dreaming; and sins in distraction, as equal.

Yet secondly, there be some things that we willingly grant in this matter: As
1. That we do not comprehend under these sinful dreams every passing transient
thought or motion in sleep, which has merely an idleness and unprofitableness
with it, which though it might possibly be siuful in men waking, (when they
should aim in the least thought at something edifying) yet we think dreams that
are merely (so to say) negative, that is* not sinful on the matter, are not to
be accounted sins; nay, not yet sins historically, as it were, objected to the
fancy, or only objectively proposed* I say they are not sinful, because man's
fancy at such a time is open to such Representations* and cannot hold them out,
especially seeing they may possibly be carried in by the Devil, who certainly
waits these times; but there are other sinful dreams, such as that spoken of,
Levit. 15. through occasion of which there is effusion of seed, rising in
passion, delighting in revenge, it may be (as we have heard) to the committing
of some act, such have (as it were) a more diliberate consent with them, and
sometimes delight, yea, sometimes external motion of the body endeavoring the
accomplishments of its desires: in all which it seems hard to say, that a man
is passive only; and when the subject of the dreams are such things as a
natural Conscience will scare and tremble at, it is of these we speak.

2. We conceive there is a great difference, as to degrees of sinfulness,
betwixt such sinful motions, desires, delectations, etc. that are in a waking
man, and the same in one a sleep; the guilt is much less by many degrees in the
one, then in the other.

3. A difference is to be made betwixt gross sins objectively represented to
the fancy in sleep, and the same sins which are not only sorepresented, but
also have more settled motions following thereon.

4. There is a difference also betwixt distempered men in their dreams of this
kind, and men who are sober, and well at themselves; yet we cannot but incline
to think, that there is some guilty that may and ought to be repented of in
such dreams, and so that men may in their sleep sin against these holy
Commandments, seeing that in many dreams, as in many words, there are diverse
(even sinful) vanities, Eccles. 5. 7.

This Truth is something clear from the grounds already laid down; but we shall
for further clearing and confirming of it, and these following Arguments. The
first is this.

1. That tickling delight, as an evil against the Law of God, is a fruit of
original sin, which sin infects all our imaginations, and make them evil,
Genes. 6. 5. yea, they are the flowings out of habitual lust, which is now
natural to us; and if they be a Fruit of that Tree, or a Daughter of that
Mother, must they not be of the same nature, and so sinful? and that they must
flow from Original sin, may thus be made out; That none can imagine such dreams
to have been incident to Adam, in the state of Innocence, while all was pure,
even though sleep and dreams were natural to him: And this may be confirmed
from that one Maxim of the Schoolmen, that Adams Innocence was capable of no
deception, nor of any thing which might make him sad, either sleeping or
waking; but such dreams certainly imply both. If it be said, such dreams may be
from an external cause, as the Devils objecting such and such things to men in
sleep: I answer, I grant in part it may be so; but 1. Though he object them to
us sleeping as well as waking, yet it is, we that entertain these objected
Representations, it is we that delight in them, and move by them, though
tempted thereto by him: we may say he is Father and as it is, Acts 5. 3. he
fills the heart, and furnishes fuel; but we are the Mother (I say it is our
corruption) that brings forth, and can any say, that if there were no
corruption within us, that these would be so entertained? 2. Though they come
from him as an external cause, yet considering that our nature is inclined to
such things, so that Powder or Flax takes no sooner with Fire cast into them,
then our corrupt nature does with these temptations: Is it possible to imagine
that a Dart of temptation should be thrown in, and not at least awake and stir
the savor of corruptions? Indeed, pure Nature in our blessed Lord (who was
without Original sin) was like water, presently to quench all such Fiery Darts.
3. If they come from the Devil, to what end can he object them to men; it must
either be because they are sinful, that being his aim to defile them thereby,
and draw them to sin, or because they are troublesome and heavy to men, he
having delight also in men's misery, but such dreams are no way weighty and
troublesome to the most part of men, that therefore is not his aim, nor would
they be so much burdensome to others, were it not from their apprehension of
guilt under them; and therefore Satan's aim must be thereby to defile men with
sin.

2. Argument which confirms the former, (and let us consider it with
reverence) our blessed Lord Jesus was made in all things like unto us, except
sin, none of the fruits of original sin, which are sinful, are to be found in
him; and yet, I suppose, none can without horror imagine such dreams to have
been incident to him, or that his absolute Holiness was capable of them. He is
the only instance of one free from original sin, yet may he be supposed liable
to any other penal thing, excepting 1. What implies sin. 2. What implies
distempers and infirmities in the contemperature and constitution of his body
from inward causes, because he had no inward cause, being free of sin as Adam
before his Fall; and therefore not naturally (I mean from inward principles, or
necessity, as we are) subject to sickness or death.

3. The third Argument is, That men are often accessory to these sinful dreams
themselves, either 1. By excess, disposing themselves to such inclinations, or
2. By a loose mind that delights in following such things throughout the day in
their more reasonable meditations, and more determinate purposes; it being
ordinary, that dreams follow much the constitution of the body, or the habitual
strain of our practice: in which respect men's Callings, or particular
Employments, will run up and down before the Fancy in their sleep, and so their
sinful exercises also: or 3. By not praying to God to guard against them, and
neglecting to press more after mortification for that end: or 4. By not being
suitably affected with them after they are past and gone: In which cases even
the Schoolmen (who are not the most rigid and tender Casuists) will grant (all
things being considered) sin to be ex consequenti in dreams; and we suppose few
fall in such dreams, who may not in one circumstance or other read their
accession to sin therein, and though our frame and constitution be in it self
natural, yet that it should incline us sleeping or waking to any thing sinful,
that is and must be from corrupt nature, seeing it clearly speaks the
inordinateness of our natural inclination.

4. The fourth Argument is from the Law of Washings and Sacrificings for the
sin of uncleanness in men's dreams, when they pass seed in their sleep, which
seems to say thus much, that both sleeping and waking men should be holy; and
although there be sacrifices and cleansings appointed for somethings that are
not morally sinful, as the touching of a dead body, having Leprosy, etc. yet
simply to say so of the case in hand were hard: For 1. If it be said there was
no moral sinfulness in that kind of pollutions, what then could these
Sacrifices and Washings signify? If any say, as they must say, they looked to
secret actings of original sin, it does confirm what we have said: But 2. Is
there in any such things as are not accounted sinful in themselves, such a
dependency upon, or likeness to any Commandment, as there is in that which is
mentioned Levit. 15. to the seventh Commandment, to which it seems to have a
direct reference?

5. The fifth Argument may be taken from the extent of the Law, which reaches
to the whole man outward and inward, soul, heart, mind, and if to the whole
man, then why not to the fancy, memory, imagination, etc. And we are sure when
Spirits are made perfectly comform to the Law of God, there will not be found
in them any such fancy imaginable as consistent with it: Besides, does not this
Law oblige and tie always? even sleeping men (as we conceive) are under the
negative Precepts of it, that is, although they be not bound to pray and hear
in their sleep, yet they are bound not to Murder, nor commit Adultery, etc. in
their sleep; and the more renewed and holy Christians are in their ordinary
walk, so are they in their dreams; and even in this sanctified persons differ
from unrenewed ones.

6. The sixth Argument it this, we suppose these grounds that prove involuntary
lust in the first motions thereof, and before they can come to consent to be
sin, will infer these motions in sleeping men (of which we speak) to be sinful
also: For 1. Though these motions of lust be involuntary, and weaken not the
deliberate use of Reason more then the other: And 2. Though they be in the
Regenerate wrestled against, and not approved more then the other, yet because
these are not according to reason, (though not brought forth by it) and not
answerable to that simple purity and Angelick holiness which should be in man,
and it is hard to imagine the most passing motions of lust running never so
swiftly through us, not to leave behind them some dreg of defilement by reason
of our corruption, that sideth still in less or more with temptation (which
cannot be said of sins objected by the Tempter to our Lord) and such lusts, or
motions of lust, have still by the Orthodox, according to Paul's Doctrine, Romans
7. been thought sinful upon the foresaid reasons, and we see not but these same
reasons will hold here.

Lastly, we add, that generally the Consciences of the Godly look on this kind
of practices, although committed in sleep, with horror, and no reasoning or
disputing will truly quiet them, till they be humbled before God under them,
and yet they use not to be so troubled in other things that are merely
Ceremonial: How does Augustine complain of this, yea confess and lament it,
Confess. lib. 10. cap. 30. (though elsewhere he accounts it no sin) yet he cries
out of it, and that he thought it a mercy, that he had not done what in sleep
he consented to act, reperimus nos non fecisse, doleamus tamen quoquo modo in
nobis factum suisse, It grieves him that it should be any way done in him, and
he aggreadgeth it thus, that he had not always rejected these as sometimes he
had done: And do not the Godly sometimes in their sleep make opposition to
these motions? and how often do they in prayer wrestle against this evil, and
that (as I conceive) from another apprehension of it then simply, because of
any punishment or affliction that is in it? for many things more afflicting do
not so effect them; and yet even these know the reasons that are made use of
against the sinfulness of it, which makes me think there is something directly
against Conscience and Purity in these sinful actions or motions.

To conclude, sure we are this Opinion is not unsuitable to the end of the Law,
and that absolute Purity and Angelical Holiness God calls for in it; namely,
that not only when we are awake we are to be still with him, but that our sleep
should not break our Communion with him: And certainly it is most safe for man
to humble himself under the sense of his sinful nature, and the sad necessity
of sinning, both waking and sleeping, he has brought on himself* that thereby
he may the better press on himself the necessity of a Mediator for
Righteousness, which are the great ends and uses of the Law.

We come now more particurarly to the words which the Lord himself spok:
concerning the number of these Commandments, and general scope of them (as has
been said) there is no question: but there be four things we would speak a
little to, for further clearing of the Text, before we come to speak
particularly to the first Commandment. The first is, whether these words, I am
the Lord thy God, etc. be a part of the first Commandment, or a Preface to all
the Ten? Answ; We think it is a ground laid down for pressing and drawing forth
our obedience to all the Commandments, yet it has relation more especially to
the first Commandment* as the negative expression there clears, which is,
Th^^ shall have no other god^ before (...) that is, no other then Me: what Me?
even Me the Lord thy God that brought thee ^ut of the Land of Egypt: So then
there is a special relation betwixt this Commandment and the Preface, as
including the positive part of this negative Commandment, and it does
especially clear these three things.

1. What is the right object of worship, it is Jehova, Elohim, the Lord, that
shows the Unity of the Divine Essence; for so ^^hovah, being a word in the
singular number, is ordinarely looked on as pointing out this, then Elo^im,
which is a word in the plural number, speaks the plurality of Persons in the
God*head; so that the Lord commanding and requiring obedience, here is one God,
and three Persous.

2. It clears what is the right Channel in which our service should run, it
is in the Channel of the Covenant, our obedience is to be directed, not to God
abstractly considered, but to God as our God, I am the Lord thy God, says he,
and thy God by Covenant; so the expression is, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. That thou m^^st
fear this glorious and fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD. This makes our service
and worship sweet and kindly; and without this relation there can be no
acceptable service performed by sinful man to God; and that relation (that by
the Covenant of Works once stood betwixt them) being broken, it says it must
be made up again, which only can be done in Christ: and it says also, that
this relation to God in him, and obedience to the Law, can consist well
together.

3. It clears what is the right and great motive of obedience, to wit, the
benefit of Redemption, love and thankfulness, upon that account, constraining
to the performing of these duties that are commanded, that they may be done
willingly, and in a cheerful manner.

Secondly, It may be asked, why the second Commandment, and the fourth
Commandment, have reasons pressing obedience annexed to them, which none of the
other has, at least expressly set down by the Lord? Answ. This may be a reason,
because all the other Commandments are by the Law of Nature determined in men's
Consciences, and the sins against them are by Natures Light seen to be evil;
but the substance of these two, to wit, what way he will be worshipped in
externals, and on what day as the solemn time of worship, being determined by
Gods positive Law, they are not so impressed on men's Consciences as the duties
required in the other Commandments are; therefore the Lord adds reasons to
each of these to persuade to the obedience of them, as to the second, I am a
jealous God; and therefore will not admit of any the least appearance of
declining from me, even in externals, and to the fourth, keep the Sabbath day,
for I have put a difference betwixt it and other days, though before there was
none, which is further amplified in the Text: Now by this reason (which is also
given by the Schoolmen) it may appear, that the second Commandment concerning
outward worship, according to our way of distinguishing them, i^ distinct from
the first, which requires the inward worship due to God: for the first
Commandment is Moral-Natural, and can never be altered, and has as much
impression on a Natural Conscience as any; and therefore, according to this
ground, needed no reason.

Thirdly, It may be observed also, that some Commandments have Promises added
to them, which others have not; not that any Commandment wants implied
encouragements, but in some they are expressed, as in the second. He shows
mercy to thousands, etc. and in the fifth, That thy days may be long, etc. The
reason given why Promises are particularly expressed in these two is, that
obedience to these two seems to bring most hurt to men, and is most contrary
to their corrupt wills and affections; it seems not so prejucidial, nor is it
so obnoxious to the hatred of the World, that men love God, and fear him in
their hearts, etc. as it is outwardly to confess him before men, and that by
adhering close to the true manner of worshipping him: This makes men obnoxious
to persecutions, crosses, losses, etc. to be seriously taken up in the
externals of godliness, sometimes brings much prejudice with it, and is to
many troublesome, and so to be obedient to Superiors, and tender of
Inferiour^, is not easily condescended unto; therefore God to counterbalance
the difficulties that accompany the obedience of these two Commandments, has
added Promises to them, the more to encourage and stir up to the obedience of
them.

The fourth thing we would take notice of is, that some Commandments have
threatenings expressed in them, which others have not, as the second, and the
third, not that any Commandment wants implied threatenings, but the reason is,
because men ordinarily count light of the breach of these two Commandments, if
they be (as they think) honest at the heart, though they be very negligent and
careless in many outward things; and though in the manner of worship they be
very slight and perfunctorious, yet if it be to the true God, they think the
less of it: And so also men are given to count very light of reverent using
Gods Holy Name; therefore he has put a threatening to both these Commandments,
to make men know he will not so easily pass them, as men oft-times imagine; and
that all these three, reasons, promises, threatenings, are added to the second
Commandment, it does very clearly and convincingly show of what concernment
that Commandment is, and how ready men are to break it, and that there is
special consideration and regard to be had to it, so far is it from being to be
attempted to be expunged out of the number,

Exodus 20. 3. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.
IN this first Commandment we may consider these two: 1. The thing commanded.
2. The qualification of the Command.

The thing Commanded is negatively set down, Thou shall have no other Gods,
directing to the right object of worship, and differencing the true God from
all supposed Gods; for though there be but one God, yet are there many who are
called Gods, 1 Corinthians. 8. 4, 5, 6. The qualification added, is in these words,
before me, which tend not only to the aggravation of the sin here discharged,
as being done in his presence, and done, as it were, in contempt and despite of
God who always sees; but especially to show the extent of the Prohibition*
that it tyeth up not only from outward Idolatry, but even from that which is
inward and secret, and that men see not, and is known to God only; and so this
Commandment requires not only external worship, but that which is inward and
spiritual before God. Hence the scope of this first Commandment lies clearly
in these two things, (wherein it differs from the second) to wit, 1. That it
shows who is the right object of worship, and directs men thereto. 2. That
it regulateth men's internal worshipping of God, and calls for that, whereas
the second Commandment supposes both these, and directs as to the manner of
worshipping the true God in externals, and regulateth these.

This Commandment, as all the rest, has a positive part requiring something,
and a negative part prohibiting something: We shall, in the first place, speak
to what is required here, and we take it up in these three things.

1. And first it requires the right knowledge of God; for there can be no true
worship given to him, there can be no right thought or conception of him, or
faith in him, till he be known: He must be known to be one God in Essence,
Deuteronomy. 6. 4. and three Persons, 1 John 5. 7. He must be known in his Attributes
and Essential Properties, Jnfiniteness, Immenseness, Unchangeableness,
Eternity, Omnipotence, Omniscience, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, and
Faithfulness: He must also be known in his special works, whereby his
Sovereignty and Majesty appears, as his works of Creation, Providence,
Redemption, and what concerns it; as the Covenant of Grace, and its terms;
the Mediator, and his Offices: no service or worship can be offered to God, nor
can we have any ground of Faith in him, without some measure of distinct
knowledge of these.

2. It requires from us a suitable acknowledging of God in all these his
Properties: As 1. That he be highly esteemed above all. 2. Loved. 3. Feared. 4.
Believed and trusted in. 5. Hoped in. 6. Adored. 7. Honored. 8. Served and
obeyed. And so 9. He must be the Supreme end in all our actions, that should
mainly be aimed at by us.

3. It requires such duties as result from his Excellency, and our
acknowledging him to be such a one: As 1. Dependence upon him. 2. Submission to
him, and patience under cross Dispensations from him. 3. Faith resting on him.
4. Prayers put up to him, 5. Repentance for wronging him. 6. Communion, and a
constant walking with him. 7. Delighting in him, 8. Meditating on him; and such
other as necessarily may be inferred as duties incumbent to Creatures in such a
relation to such a God, whose Excellency and worth calls and inviteth men to
all suitable duties.

Next, it is necessary that we add some Advertisements to these Generals.

And 1. That the Commandment requires all these, and in the highest and most
perfect degree.

2. That it not only requires them in our selves, but obliges us to further
them in all others, according to our Places and Callings.

3. That it requires the diligent use of all means that may help and further
us in these; as Reading, Meditation, Study, etc.

4. That these things which in some respect may be given to Creatures, as love,
fear, etc. yet when they are required as duties to God, they are required in a
far more eminent way; so that Creatures must yield and give place when God
comes in competition with them in these; and these things which are proper to
God, as resting on him, adoring of him, are to be given to no other.

5. All these things are so required, as none of them thrust out another; but
that all so consist, as every duty may keep its own place, without prejudice to
any other.

In the next place, we would consider the negative part of this Commandment,
for the extent thereof will be best discerned by considering what is forbidden
therein, and how it may be broken: It is indeed the Commandment, in reference
to which, beyond all the rest, almost the generality of men think themselves
most innocent; and yet upon trial it will be found, that men are most guilty of
the breach thereof: We may look upon the breach of this Commandment more
largely, as God is any way wronged in that which is his due; or more strictly,
as it relates to that which is more properly Idolatry.

Being more largely considered, it is broken two ways.

1. When what is proper and Essential to God, is denied to him in effect, or
practically; as when he is not accounted Eternal, Omnipotent, one blessed God
in three Persons: And thus men are guilty, either in Opinion or in practice,
when they walk so before God, as if they thought him not Omnipotent,
Omniscient, etc. And so Tit. 1. 16. it is said of some, that they profess to
know God, but in works they deny him.

2. It is broken, when any thing unbecoming the Holy Majesty of God is
attributed unto him; as that he changes, favors prophanity, etc. So Psalm
50. 21. it is said of some profane men, that they thought him like unto
themselves. These two may be called more general Idolatry; we shall speak
further to them afterward.

3. The third way it is broken (considering the breach of this Commandment
strictly) is by attributing that which is due to God, and properly belongs to
him, to Creatures; as trusting in them, calling on them by prayer, accounting
them Omnipotent, Omniscent, or believing that they have influence or power to
guide the World, which some do attribute to Stars, to the Heavens, to Fortune,
to Saints, to Angels, yea to Devils, this is properly Idolatry: And because it
is the chief scope of this Commandment, and we are bidden expressly to keep our
selves from Idols, 1 John. 5. we shall insist a little on it.

And 1. We shall premit some distinctions of Idolatry, 2. Show how men fall in
it. 3. What are the special Idols men commit Idolatry with. 4. Which are the
most subtle and dangerous Idols. 5. Give some rules whereby ye may try this sin
of Idolatry, even when it is most subtle.

And 1. Idolatry may be distinguished, 1. Into Idolatry against the first
Commandment, when worship is not directed to the right, but to the wrong
object* and Idolatry against the second Commandment, which strikes against the
prescribed manner of worshipping God: We are now to speak to the first*

2. This Idolatry is either 1. Doctrinal, or Idolatry in the Judgment, when
one professedly believes such a thing beside God to have some Divinity in it;
as Heathens do of their Mars and Jupiter* and Papists do of their Saints: Or 2.
It is practical, when men believe no such thing* and will not own any such
Opinion* yet on the matter they are guilty of the same thing as covetous men,
etc. The first takes in all Heathens, Turks, Heretics, that by their
Doctrines and Opinions wrong the true God, or his worship: The second takes in
all self-seeking, ambitious, covetous, and voluptuous persons, etc. who fall in
with the former in their practice, though not in Opinion.

3. It may be distinguished into Idolatry that has something for its object,
as the Egyptians worshipped Beasts, and the Persians the Sun or Fire, and that
which has nothing but men's imaginations for its object, as these who worship
feigned Gods; in which respect the Apostle says, an Idol is nothing, 1 Cor. 8.
4.

4. We would distinguish betwixt the objects of Idolatry, and they are either
such as are in themselves simply sinful, as Devils, profane men, or they are
such as are good in themselves, but abused and wronged when they are made
objects of Idolatry, as Angels, Saints, Sun, Moon, etc.

5. Distinguish betwixt Idolatry that is more gross and professed, and that
which is more latent, subtle, and denied: This distinction is like that before
mentioned into Opinion and practice, and much coincideth with it.

6. Distinguish betwixt Heart-Idolatry, Ezekiel. 14. Exodus 14. 11. 12. and 16 2,
3. and external Idolatry, the former consists in an inward heart-respect to
some Idol, as this tumultuous people were inslaved to their case and bellies in
the last two forecited places; the other in some external Idolatrous gesture
or action.

In practical Idolatry we are to distinguish betwixt the letting out of our
affections upon simply sinful objects, and the letting them out excessively
upon lawful objects. Thus men are guilty of Idolatry with sinful objects, when
they love and covet another man's House, Wife, or Goods, when things unlawful
and forbidden have the heart. Again, men are guilty of Idolatry in making
lawful objects Idols; as when by excess or inordinateness of love to their own
Means, Wife, House, etc. they put them in Gods room, as Nebuchadnezzar did with
Babylon, Dan. 4. 30. So then, in the former sense, men make their lusts or
sins. whatever they be, their Idols, Gluttons that serve their appetite,
Drunkards their drunkenness, make their Bellies and Appetite their Idol; for to
whatever men yield themselves to obey, they are servants unto that which they
obey, Romans 6. 16. An Idol is something excessively esteemed of, and Idolatry is
the transferring of Gods due, outwardly or inwardly, to what is not God,
whether we esteem it God or not.

We shall first speak of practical Heart-Idolatry, especially when lawful
things are made Idols, which is the most subtle kind of Idolatry, and that
which men most ordinarily fall into: And it may be cleared these five ways, by
all which, men give that which is due to God unto Creatures. There are five
things that are incontrovertibly due to God, to wit, 1. Estimation and honor
above all. 2. Love with all the heart. 3. Confidence and trust. 4. Fear and
reverence. 5. Service and obedience.

First then men commit Idolatry, when any thing, even any lawful thing, gets
too much respect from them; so that their happiness is placed in it, and they
can less abide to want it in effect, whatever they may say in words, then
Communion with God himself: When men have such an excessive esteem of Wife,
Children, Houses, Lands, great Places, etc. and when they are taken from them,
they cry as Micah, Judge 18. 24. Ye have taken away my Gods from me, and what
have I more? When all the other contentments a man has, yea all the Promises,
and God himself also* proves but of little value to him, in respect of some
particular he is deprived of by some cross Despensation; it is a token it had
too much of his heart: Try this by two things. 1. When any beloved thing is
threatened to be removed, it then appears how it is affected, and stuck unto.
2. What is made use of to make up that; see a notable difference betwixt David
and his men, or most of them, 1 Samuel 30. 6. when he wanted as much as they, they
know no way to make it up, therefore they think of stoning him, but he
incourageth himself in the Lord his God: they had no more left at all, its
like, he has his God abiding, in whom he may yet be comforted.

The second way whereby men commit Idolatry with Creatures, is in their love
which is due to God with all the heart; but men ordinarily give away their
hearts to Creatures, in being addicted to them in their desires, seeking
excessively after them, in their doting on them, or sorrowing immoderately for
want of them. Hence the covetous man who loves the world, 1 John 2. 15. is
called an Idolater, Coloss. 3. 5. Ephesians. 5. 5. Thus it discovered it self in
Achab, who so loved Naboths Vineyard, that he could not rest without it: So
Demas idolized the World, when for love of it, he forsook his service with the
Apostle (though it had been but for a time) 2 Timothy 4. 10. Men's love to
Creatures is excessive. 1. When their contentment so depends upon them, as
they fret when they cannot come at the enjoyment of them, as we may see in
Achab, when he cannot get Naboths Vineyard, and in Rachel for want of Children.
2. When it stands in competition with God, and duty to him is shufled out from
respect and love to the World, or any thing in it, as we see in Demas, 2 Timothy
4. 10. 3. Though duty be not altogether thrust out, yet when love to these
things marreth us in that zealous way of performing duty to God, as it did in
Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 24. who is said to honor and love his Children above God, verse.
29. not that he forbore them altogether, but because his sharpness was not such
as it should have been, and (as it is like) it would have been, had not they
been his own Sons whom he too much loved; whereas to the contrary it is spoken
to Abraham's commendadation, that he loved God, because he withheld not his
only Son when God called for him.

3. The third is, when confidence and trust is placed in any thing beside God,
(to wit, excessively, as before we said of love.) Thus when a man's protection
is placed in men, though Princes, Psalm 146. 3. or in Multitudes, or in Horses
and Armies, it is idolizing of them. Thus rich men may make (as it is Joh 31,
24. gold their confidence, and fine gold their hope; that is, when men account
themselves secure, not because God has a Providence, but because they have
such means; as A^a trusted to the Physicians, and not to God; namely, in that
particular, the cure of his disease; or as the rich man, Luke 12. 19. who
founded his taking rest to his Soul on his full Barns, and so some trust their
standing to such a great Man who is their Friend: And this is known; 1. By the
means to which men betake them in a strait, as when they stand not to make use
of sinful means. 2. By what noise they make when they are disappointed. 3. It
is known by this, when their leaning on such a Creature marreth their resting
on God, and on his Providence. Hence it is hard for men to be rich, and not to
place their confidence in riches; and so Christ speaks of the difficulty of
rich men's being saved. 4. Then men trust in their riches, when the having of
them makes them to think themselves the more secure, and makes them proud and
jolly, as if they added some worth to those who possess them, which could not
be, if they were not something too much thought of.

4. The fourth way how Creatures are idolized by men, is in their fear, when
men or events are feared more then God, and fear makes men sin, or at least
keeps them back from duty, in less or more like those Professors, who for
fear of the Jews Ioh. 12. 42.) did not confess Christ. Thus men may idolize
their very Enemies whom they hate, when they fear more him that can kill the
body, then him that can dest^oy both soul and body. Thus great men and powerful
in the World are often idolized, and good and well-qualified men may be made
Idols also, when men become so addicted and devoted to them, as to call them
Rabbi, and to be (as it were) sworn to their words and Opinions (as the
Sectaries in Corinth were, and such at all times, for the most part, are to
their Leaders) when it is not the matter or reason that swayeth, but the person
that teaches such Doctrine, or holds such an Opinion.

5. The fifth way of committing this Idolatry is by service, when a man is
brought under the power of any thing; so whatever a man serves this way is an
Idol, every predominant, every person or humor that a man sets himself thus
to please is an Idol: in this respect it is said men cannot serve two Masters,
God and Ma^mon; and if we yet serve men, we are not the Servants of Christ,
Gal. 1. 10. This may be known, 1. By what men are most excessively taken up
with, and most careful to fulfill and accomplish. 2. By looking to what it is
for which they will take most pains that they may attain it. 3. By what gets
most of their time and labor. 4. By what overswayeth, and overcomes, or
overaweth them most, so that they cannot resist it, though it thrust by duties
to God; and when they are ne*ver so taken up with Gods service, but it
indisposeth them when ever they come to immediate worship; it is an evident
token that such a thing is the man's ^dol.

These be the most ordinary ways how men fall in this sin of Idolatry: it were
hard to speak of all the several Idols which may be loved, feared, rested on
too much, and so put in Gods room: I shall instance in a few.

The first is the World; this is the great Clay-Idol that both covetous and
voluptuous men hunt after, crying, Who will show us any good? Psalm 4. 6. By
this thousands are kept in bondage, and turned head long: An excessive desire
to have the World's Goods, and to have by these a name in the Earth, is many a
man's Idol.

A second is the Belly, Philip. 3. 19. a shameful God, yet worshipped by the
most part of men, who travel for no more but for a portion in this life to fill
the Belly, Psalm 17. 14. to win their living, and provide for their Families.
To this sort also belongs Gluttons, Drunkards, Palate-pleasers, (who are
look^ upon as the dainty men in the World, abounding alace in our days) being
according to Satan's Maxim, ready to give skin for skin, and all they have for
their life; and aiming at no more, Job 2. 4. Thus Satan thought to have found
out Job when his riches were quite gone; thus he tempted the Lord Christ to
provide Bread in an anxious way; and thus fear of want captivateth many.

3. The third great Idol (which is comprehensive some way of all) is a man's
life, his Honor, Credit, Reputation, good Name, and Applause in the World; his
own Will, Opinion, Tenets, Judgments, whereof men are most tenacious, and will
not quite sometimes (as the Proverb is) an inch of their will for a span of
their thrift. Thus men are said to live to themselves, 2 Cor. 5. 15. in
opposition to living unto God, when self-respect swayeth them to be lovers of
themselves, ^ Tim. 3. verse. 2. 4. and lovers of their pleasures more then God,
and self-wi^^ed, Tit. 1. ^ ^ Pet. 2. 10. Ah, who are free of this!

The fourth is Men of Parts, etc. who have done or may do some considerable
good or evil to one, or have something in them eminent beyond others: These
oft-times, in regard of the fear, love, or trust, men place in them, are made
great Idols.

The fifth is Lawful Contentments, as Houses, Wives, Children, unto which men
are often too much addicted, and with which they are often too much taken up,
even sometimes with that which is in it self very little, and so they prove
their Idols.

A sixth is Self-righteousness, men's prayers, their repentance, blameless,
walking, etc. these may get, and often get more of their confidence, and weight
of their Eternal Peace, then they should: So the Jews laid the great stress and
weight of their Salvation upon this Idol, Romans 10. 3.

The seventh may be outward Ordinances in purity, external forms, and
profession of Religion, when men rest upon these, and press not after the
Power; as the Jews* who cried up the Temple of the Lord, the Covenant betwixt
him and them, and their external relation to him, Jer. 7. 4. etc.

The eighth is any gift of God which he has bestowed on men, such as Beauty,
Strength, Wit, Learning, when men who have them lay too much weight on them, or
think too much of them; yea, Grace it self, the sense of Gods love, and inward
peace, may be put in Christ's room, and more sought for sometimes then Christ
himself: Now when these are rested on, delighted in, and he slighted, or when
they are missed, and he not delighted in, then they are Idols.

Ninthly, Ease, quietness, and a man's own contentment, is oft-times a great
Idol; and it is so when a man is so addicted to his ease, as he cannot abide to
be troubled, Thus was it with that man, Luke 12. 19. Soul take thee rest: His
Ease was his Idol, and he rested on it, and made it the end of all his
buildings, and laying up of goods; but his riches were his Idol, as he grounded
his expectation of rest upon that which he possessed: So many idle men who
frame their life so as they may not be troubled, though they be no ways
profitable, but spend what they have, making this the drift of all they do,
that they may have an easy life, when this overswayeth them as their last end,
(though otherwise, if they were not wedded to their case, might be more
profitable) and often with abstaining from, and neglecting of many necessary
duties, that they may eschew trouble, it is a prevailing Idol.

A tenth is wandering fancies and Chimera's, the mind pleasing it self with
them, and delighting to entertain them, and pursuing them from a design to find
satisfaction in them, even in such things as never had, nor it may be, can have
a being, except in their own imagination and fancy; such are called by Solomon,
Eccles. 6. 9. The wanderings of the desire (opposed to the sight of the eyes,
which others delight in) as when men spend their wits and inventions on penning
Romances, Love-passions, Stage Plays, Comedies, Masks, Balls, etc. or which is
more subtle, yet much practiced, when the minds of men frame imaginary and
fictitious revenge, delight, eminency, etc. to themselves.

The means and second causes, Physicians, Armies, Ministers, Stars, and Natural
Causes, by which God uses to work (by some called Nature) are oft-times so
trusted and leaned to, as they are made men's Idols, nay by many in these days,
Judiciary Astrology, Palmestry, etc. are much studied and doted on, and the
Scriptures antiquated and laid aside in a great measure.

Next, if it be asked, what Idols are most subtle? Answ. 1. An Idol is then
most subtle, when it lurketh in the heart, and scateth it self principally in
men's mind, aim, and inward contentment, and they inwardly ascribe too much to
such a thing, and yet, it may be, in their external practice, there is not much
to discover this.

2. Then are Idols most subtle, when they lie in such things to which somewhat
of fear, love, delight, etc. is allowable, as in lawful things, which may in
some measure be lawfully loved, feared, and sought for.

3. When they are in negatives, as in Omissions, Ease, etc. then they are more
subtle then when they lie in something men positively seek after, or in the
Commission of something forbidden.

4. When they pass under a lawful name, as when Pride goes under the name of
Honesty, Anxiety under the name of Lawful Care, etc. then they are hardly
discovered.

5. When sticking to one Idol, the man rejects all others, (as he conceives)
out of respect to God, as may be instanced in the cases of a Monastic li^e,
regular obedience, some singular opinion so much stuck to, and laid weight on
by many.

6. When it is in means that have been used, or are allowed by God for
attaining such an end; as it is hard to keep bounds in this case, so it is hard
to discover the Idolatry of the heart in it.

In all which it is to be advertised, that Idolatry in these things consists
mostly in the inordinateness of the heart, and affections to them, and that it
lies not so much in our actions about them, as in the manner of our acting,
and the circumstances accompanying us and our actions, anxiety, estimation,
excessive care, love, etc.

For clearing the difference betwixt this idolatrous love, fear, service, and
true love, fear, etc. take these Rules.

1. When our love to Creatures drowneth our love to God, and makes us to cast
off duties we owe to him, as in Demas. 2. When in part it marreth us in the
performance of duties to God, as in Eli. 3. When it so takes us up in our
practice throughout the day, that we give not necessary time to the Worship of
God, in praying, reading, hearing, etc. 4. When it indisposeth for these; so
that when we are praying or hearing, the heart is carried away after Creatures,
and the mind is taken up with some other thing then God, as Ezekiel 33. 31. 5.
When they too much, and very unnecessarily haunt the heart in meditation, or
when we lie down or rise, and at such times when our thinking on such
employments contributeth not to the furtherance of them, it shows that they
have too much of the heart when they possess it always, and when it is seldom
taken up actually with better things, but these steal in easily and at all
times.

It may appear now 1. How common this sin of Idolatry is. 2. How great guilt
and hazard men are lying under thereby, because 1. Few are convinced of it. 2.
Many years Idolatry lies together upon the Consciences of many. 3. There is
little repentance for it, though many ways one may insensibly slide into it.

It is not so very useful or needful here particularly to enquire what Idol is
predominant, and has chief room, if these three things be granted. 1. That
there may be, and are many Idols often at once, as Legions distracting the man,
and swarming in his heart. 2. That successively they may be changed, according
to men's tentations and conditions. 3. That men should study the mortification
of all, and the giving God his due, so as none be spared; for if any one be
spared, none at all are mortified and slain.

It would become Believers, and it would be their advantage, to think much upon
such Scriptures as these, Isaiah 30. 22. And ye shall be my People, and I will
he your God. Luke 14. 8. When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not
down in the highest room; l st a more honorable man then thou be bidden of
him. 1 Corinthians. 10. from verse. 5. to verse. 15. And that they would study
conformity to them, and learn to abhor Idols; yea, all Creatures in so far as
they become Idols to them.

We are now further to prosecute the Branches of this Commandment, which is a
Key to all the rest; and because Gods Soveraignity is holden forth here, there
is no sin that may not be reduced to it, as being a disobedience to this
Sovereign God: We shall first permit some general ways whereby it is broken,
then insist in some particulars.

More generally it is broken three ways, as has been said already.

1. By derogating from God that which is his due; so all contempt of him,
disobedience to him, wronging his infinite Attributes, as if he were not
Omnipotent, Omniscient, Infinite, etc. denying of his Providence in less or
more, are breaches of this Commandment. Thus he is wronged, when he gets not
everyway that which is his due.

2. By attributing to God what is not consistent with his absolute Perfection,
Purity, and Holiness, as that he does or can do wrong, change, not keep his
Promises, or not guide the World wisely; that he has any bodily shape, or may
be comprehended.

3. When what is due to God, as Faith, Hope, Love, Fear, etc. is given to
Creatures, whether to Idols literally, or to Men, to Saints, Angels,
Ordinances, (as the Sacraments) Stars, Herbs, Gold, Physicians, etc. when too
much weight is laid on them, or any thing not agreeing to them is ascribed to
them, by which Witchcraft, Charming, Covetousness, Judicial Astrology, etc. are
reproved, as drawing the hearts of men away from the living God.

If it be asked, May not some things in the World be loved, and may not some
confidence be placed in men, means, etc. I answer, Love may be given to some
things, and naturally is called for to some things* but 1. Not simply, but with
subordination to God; not for themselves, but out of obedience to God; and as
they may be useful to us in helping us to honor him, and as they are his
gifts. 2. We are not excessively to love or rest on these, but so, as from love
to God, we be ready to quit, yea, to hate them, as Christ speaks of Father
and Mother, Luke 14. 26. Again, there may be some kind of confidence given to
some things, but 1. Not simply, nor 2. For themselves. 3. Nor always. 4. Nor
in all things; but 1. This confidence must be subordinate to Gods appointment.
2. It must be with dependence on his blessing for making means effectual, and
so may we expect health from Meat, Drink, Physic, etc. for they are looked on
as means conducing to such an end, and yet it is the Lord alone that must be
rested on. 3. There may be comparative confidence, whereby men lean more to one
mean then to another, as more to a skillful Physician then to an unskillfull,
and more to an Army, as to overcoming an Enemy, then when it is wanting,
because that confidence is in some external thing, and concerns not
Salvation, and but compares means amongst themselves, as they are ordinarily
made use of by God for attaining these ends; but in this case the means are not
simply confided in.

Next, we are to consider that this Command may be broken all these ways, in
four respects.

1. In Doctrine; as when men maintain such things as dishonor God, or give his
due to Creatures, and do teach them, Matthew. 5 33. to 38.

2. By Opinion or Judgment; as suppose men should not vent and publish such
things, yet if they in their heart think or believe so, Psalm. 14. v. 1.

3. Though it come not to a settled judgment, but only reaches the
imaginations; so that loose unbecoming thought of God, or misapprehensions
derogatory to him are entertained, as Psalm. 50. 21. Acts 17. 29.

4. In practice, when men live as if there were no God, Psalm. 36. v. 1. as if
he were not omniscient, just, etc. these do indeed deny him, whatever be their
profession to the contrary, Tit. 1. 16. Thus all propane men, who live loosly,
are guilty; as also formal Hypocrites who rest on the outside of duties.

Therefore, in the third place, we are to consider, that this Commandment, in
the extent thereof, does condemn 1. All gross Idolaters of any sort, who
usually are mentioned under the name of Heathens, 2. Jews, who worship not the
true God in his Son Jesus Christ. 3. All Heretics, that deny the Godhead of
any of the Persons; as Sabellians, who make but one Person; Arrians, who make
Christ a Made-God; Photinians, who make him a pure Man; and all that make a
plurality of Gods, or that lessen the Divine Attributes, and give to Saints
Gods due, in Adoration or Invocation; or, in a word, whoever contradict any
Truth, or maintain any Error; for thereby they fasten it upon God and his
Word, and wrong him who owneth no such thing: And to these may be added all
ignorant persons who know not God. 4. All profane men, whether Atheists in
heart or in practice, disobedient persons indeed denying God, and not giving
him his due, which is obedience, whatever in words they profess concerning him.
5. All Hypocrites, who give him but an an outside service, and so are not in
their obedience sinetcacute;ere and perfect as before him. 6. All Compacters
with the Devil, who consult him, or who leave Gods way, and seek to come to the
knowledge of any thing by an unlawful way; which is 1. To meddle with Gods
Secrets when he has not revealed them. 2. It is to be beholden to Gods Enemy,
the Devil, for revealing such things. 3. It is a making use of an unwarrantable
mean, which has no blessing Promised to it; therefore cannot be used as a mean
with subordination to God, even though the matter enquired after by such means,
or by the Devil, be such as he may know. 7. All charming by words, herbs, or
such means as God has not appointed for that end, or which have no Natural and
Physical Efficacy for bringing it forth; as in seeking health from Witches,
when there must be words so often repeated, or they must be said fasting, or
going backward, etc. all laying weight on these, or the like circumstances,
without any reason. 8. All Spells, fearing of events, and using superstitious
means to prevent these, as laying bits of Timber at doors, carrying a Bible
merely for a Charm, without using it, esteeming days and times unlucky and
unfortunate: these draw men off from God to some other thing: Of this sort is
all Divining by Lots, Stars, Rods, or any other way, not having a Warrant, to
find out some secret, or to know something that is to come; (it being Gods
Property and Prerogative to declare what is to come, Isai. 41.) for when there
is no Efficacy, no Reason in the mean used, the Effect must be looked for,
either from God, or from the Devil: Now when God has neither put it naturally
in the mean, nor by his revealed Will any way warranted it, as sometimes he
does, (as when he appointed Washing in Jordan for curing Naamans Leprosy, and
Anointing in the Primitive times for healing the Sick) it cannot be from him.
Hence sometimes one Charm or word to one at one time, will do what it never
does to another: These means have always some circumstance in word or action
immediately and explicitly, or implicitly flowing from the Devil, which may be
good in it self, yet has no force for the end, and so draws men to own the
Devils Institution, which is exceeding derogatory to the honor of God.

4. We gather the breaches of this Commandment from the duties that are
required in it, such as Faith, Love, Obedience, Hope, Fear, Knowledge, etc. in
which we may fail these ways in the general. 1. When we want these Graces, or
perform not these duties required. 2. When they are counterfeited, and not
real; as when our humility is not real, our prayers not sincere, but in show
only. 3. When they are defective, as to the measure of Knowledge, Faith, etc.
which we should be at. 4. When they degenarate, as when knowledge turns into
Curiosity, and Faith into Presumption, and Hope into vain Confidence, Fear into
Unbelief and Anxiety, by which we may see how often this Commandment is broken.

1. That we may the better understand the breaches of this Commandment, we
would first take a view of Gods Excellency and Attributes, and see how we sin
against all these, for we should walk worthy of God, Col. 1. 10, And here ye
may observe, that his infinite Wisdom is wronged by not submitting to him, or
not taking direction from him, his Power by not employing him, his Grace by not
trusting him, or abusing it to wantonness, his Omniscience by wishing he saw
not not some things, hiding them from men, and not fearing him, counterfeiting
in his service, etc. so is his Justice wronged by expecting mercy without
making use of a Sacrifice, not fearing his threatenings, not scaring at sin, but
hazarding on his wrath: and the like may be instanced in all the rest of his
Attributes, which are all sinned against, either by ignorance, or by omission
of something they call for, or by the Commission of something unbecoming them.

2. Consider God in his relations to us, how often is he sinned against as a
Father? how is his kindness abused, and he not reverenced as Creator of whom we
have our Being? yea, he is kicked against, and we live not to him from whom and
by whom we live; he is a Husband, and yet we go a whoring from him, and prove
unfaithful in all our ties to him; he is a Redeemer of his People, and a Master
and Lord of all, but what fear, love, subjection gets he from us,
notwithstanding of all these Relations?

3. Consider Gods works for us, about us, and to us, of Creation, Providence,
and Redemption* besides his particular Dispensations both of Mercies and
Judgments, all which call for something suitable from us; and yet every one of
them is more ways then one slighted, by attributing whether good or evil, to
Chance, Luck, or Fortune, by unthankfulness to him, and abuse of what he
gives; and by not studying these works, so as to admire and love him who is
the Worker.

4. Consider our obligation to God in all the parts of our Covenant with him,
sealed by Baptism, and the Lords Supper: Sure we should study to be like all
these Covenant-relations, and to answer these Obligations; but alace, how
shamefully unanswerable are we to them all?

5. Consider his Will revealed in his Word, and see how far short we are in
performing it.

Lastly, consider what care there is of using the means that may bring us near
to, and abstaining from those things that draw us away from God, such as sinful
Confederacies, evil Company, light and unsound Books, traveling needlessly to
strange places, etc. all which, and whatever else takes the heart off God, are
breaches of this Commandment.

Next, we shall insist more particularly upon some manifest breaches opposite
to the great and principal scope of this Commandment.

1. The first is Ignorance, which is a direct breach; for the Commandment
requires us to know him, 1 Cor. 2. 8, 9. and if he be not known, there is no
other duty can be rightly performed, the knowledge of God being the ground of
all duties.

For clearing of it, consider that some things concerning God are kept up from
us, other things are revealed to us; these things which are kept up from us we
cannot know: And 1. They are either such as we cannot see now, because they
are, incomprehensible in themselves, as Gods infinite Nature and Attributes,
which as they are in themselves, cannot be comprehensibly conceived, no not in
Heaven; but while we are upon earth, we see but darkly, as through a glass, and
our knowledge of him is rather Faith then sight; or they are such things which
are conceiveable, but God has not thought good to reveal them unto men; as when
he will end the World, when he will take every man from this life, who are
particularly Elected, etc. to be ignorant of these is no sin, it is a duty not
to seek to know them, yea curiosity in these is sinful; Ignorance here is
called rather a Nescience then Ignorance, which implies a privation of
knowledge which men ought to have; or 2. These things concerning God are such
as not only in themselves may be known, but such as we ought to know, because
they are revealed to us; ignorance of these is sinful: As 1. Being a
disconformity to that knowledge and holiness after which God created us. 2. A
fruit of original sin. 3. A cause of many sins. 4. A disconformity to the Law,
which requires us so to know and acknowledge God as he has revealed himself to
us; and that in his Essence, in the Trinity of Persons, in his Attributes,
Covenants, works of Creation and Redemption, and in his Relations to us; and
that we should so know him, that we may thereby know our selves also: And this
is that great duty called for in this Commandment, that we may know him, and
his will.

Again, this ignorance, as to these things, we ought to know, may be looked on
as threefold, according to the diversity of its causes.

1. There is a natural ignorance, that is the fruit of our natural corruption
and blindness, which has seized on men's memories and judgments, and, as they
think, incapacitateth them to learn, and indeed does so, as to the spiritual
and saving up-taking of the matters of God, till the eyes of the mind be opened
by the power of Grace.

2. There is a willful ignorance, when men have parts, means, and occasions,
whereby they may attain knowledge, and yet they will not know, but slight and
despise the means which draws often a judicial blindness along with it.

3. There is a lazy ignorance, whereby some do not wilfully reject the means of
knowledge, yet are so negligent, that they do not actually stir themselves for
attaining of knowledge: Now though there be a difference among these, yet the
least of them is sinful, and will not wholly excuse, it being a fruit of
original sin (at the best) entertained by our own neglect of such means as
might have more removed it: And thus a dull wit, or weak memory, can no more
simply excuse, then other gross discomformities to the Law in our natures
(appearing in some more then others) which follow upon original sin.

In sum, men may be three ways guilty of the breach of this Law, in respect of
ignorance.

1. As to the object matter whereof they are ignorant, which may be less or
more, according as less or more of that is known, which we should know
concerning God, and which he has revealed; and this is especially to be
understood of the substantial things more necessary to be known, there being a
great difference betwixt these, and other things, which do not so immediately
concern God; such as Chronologick Questions, some Prophecies, Cases, etc. which
yet are recorded in Scripture.

2. They may be guilty of less or more ignorance, in respect of the degree; so
some men are absolutely ignorant, others are doubtful only, and not confirmed
in the knowledge of the truths of God, who yet have not contrary impressions of
these things, as others have.

3. There are diverse kinds of ignorance in men, some are guilty of wilful
ignorance, some are negligent, and some (even the best) are laboring under the
remainder of natural blindness, who yet are not negligent.

If it be asked whether ignorance can excuse a man, and how far it excuses.
Ans. 1. There is no ignorance (properly so called) that excuses wholly, pro
toto, it being of it self sinful, and men being obliged to know what is sin,
and what not; neither can ever men do that out of Faith* which they do in
ignorance, and know not if it be in it self sinful or lawful: this is to be
understood in respect of ignorantia Juris, non facti, of the ignorance of the
Law, and not of the ignorance of the Fact, (as they call it;) for men may
sometimes be ignorant of this, and yet be Innocent; as when one is cutting with
an Axe, and it falls off the Helve, etc. but in respect of the Law, there is
no invinciable ignorance that can excuse any for their not knowing Gods mind,
because they are obliged to know it.

2. Ignorance that is wilfully entertained with neglect of means that might
help it, is so far from excusing, that it does aggravate the faults occasioned
thereby, because in that case there are two faults that concur. 1. Ignorance.
2. Another sin produced thereby.

3. Ignorance natural, or proceeding from paucity of means, or less occasion to
learn, though it does not fully, yet in part excuses: Hence it is said, they
that know not the Masters will, shall be beaten with few stripes; but Corazin,
and Bethsaida, and other places, having plenty of means, shall not in the least
be sheltered under that excuse, Matthew. 11. 22, 23, 24.

4. In some things we would distinguish betwixt sinning ex ignorantia out of
ignorance, and sinning ignoranter ignorantly; one may do a thing out of
ignorance (as Paul persecuted the Church) that would not have done it had he
known it; it was not malice but ignorance that led Paul to that sin of
persecuting, this excuses in part; but to do a thing ignorantly, is when a man
is more immediately the cause of his own ignorance, as when by drunkenness,
passion, hatred, malice, etc. a man is so blinded and prejudiced, that he
cannot discern what is duty, and what is sin: So some of the Pharisee were, who
might have seen that Christ was God, and to be acknowledged as such, but
prejudice marred it. Thus a sin considered in it self may be less, which being
considered more completely, will be found a far greater guilt; as suppose one
in drunkenness swear, commit Adultery, or in passion commit Murder, the Murder
or Adultery considered in themselves, as done in drunkenness, or passion, are
less, then when done in soberness; or deliberately; yet these sin^ being
completely considered, the person is more guilty, because he has Murder and
Drunkenness, or Murder and Passion, both to answer for, which Drunkenness or
Passion he caused to himself by his unwatchfulness, and all the effects that
follow upon these are to be imputed to him, both as the actor and procurer of
that which is the occasion, or rather the cause of them. Thus ye see how many
ways ignorance breaks this Commandment.

2. We shall instance the breach of it in what is opposite to Faith, or
Confidence which flows from Faith; to wit, unbelief, diffidence, temerity, or
tempting of God (which flows from unbelief, and is opposite to Faith) the
infidelity of Heathens and Jews, and the Atheism of such as believe not the
Word: Thus also Heretics who abuse it, and Apostates who fall from the truth
thereof, and are opposer^ of it, are guilty of this sin; as also those who
receive the Word in vain, and for all his invitations rest not on him; these
make God a Liar, and despise him and his offers, being unwilling that he should
reign over them: Here comes in also anxiety, in respect of his Providence, and
distrust or diffidence, in respect of his Promises, which is a sin questioning
the fulfilling of Promises from the apprehension of some weakness in the
Promiser, or in means used by him to bring about the accomplishment. Temerity,
or tempting of God, is against Confidence also; this is an essaying or
attempting somewhat without Gods Warrant, without which none can lawfully
undertake any thing; that of Diffidence wrongeth Gods Faithfulness, this of
Temerity wrongeth his Wisdom, in not making use of the means prescribed by him,
as if we would attain the end another way of our own; opposite to Faith also,
and the profession of it, are dissembling of the truth, fainting in the
profession thereof, especially in the case of Confession, by which we dishonor
God, and by our fearful, pusillanimous, and cowardly carriage, some way tempt
others to think that we do not indeed believe these things, on which we seem by
our faint deportment to lay little or no weight.

3. We may instance the breach of this Commandment in what is opposite to Hope;
namely, Desperation and Presumption, or vain Confidence; and because every
Grace has many opposite Vices, ye may see it is the easier to fail in obedience
to this Commandment: Desperation wrongeth many Graces; it is twofold, either
total from want of Faith, or partial from weakness of Faith: There is also a
Desperation and Diffidence that is good, Eccles. 2. 20. which is when we
despair in our selves, or from any thing in our selves or in the World to
attain happiness, or what is promised; that holy Self-despair is good, but that
is not it which is meaned here, for it is not absolute despairing, but such as
has still a reservation with it. If he help me not, which implies hope.
Presumption runs on the other extreme, looking for what is promised, without
taking Gods way to attain it, and it differs from native and true Confidence,
which with peace and boldness rests on his Word, and in his way expects the
thing promised; the fault of Presumption is not that it accounts Gods mercy
too great, or expects too much from him, but that it accounts him to have
no Justice, nor has it respect to his Holiness and Greatness; even as
Desperation fails not in attributing to him too much Justice, but in making
it inconsistent with his Mercy and Promises, and extending sin, wants, and
unworthiness beyond his mercy and help, as Judas and Cain did*

4. For finding out of the breaches of this Commandment, ye may consider the
opposites to love with the whole heart, such as luke-warmness, Revel. 3. 15.
coldness of love, Matthew. 24* 12. self-love, excessive love to Creatures, hatred
of God, not as he is good, but as he is averse from sinful men, prohibiting
what they love, and punishing them for committing sin; for it is impossible for
men to serve two Masters, as Sin and God, but the one must be loved, and the
other hated: And is there any thing more ordinary then love to sin which is
evil, and hatred of God which is the great Good? which appears in little zeal
for him, and little reverencing of him.

5. Consider what is opposite to Fear and Reverence, and there you will find
much carnal security and vain confidence in it, obstinacy, stout-heartedness,
little trembling at his Word, not being affected with his Judgments, rashness
and irreverence in his Service, whereas there is a general fear in all our walk
called for, Prove. 23. 17. We ought to be in the fear of the Lord all the day
long; and there is a peculiar fear called for in the Ordinances of his Worship,
Eccles. 12. 23. Mal. 1. 6. which was commended in Levi, Mal. 2. 5. On the other
hand, opposite to this, is that carnal fear and anxiety, which is commonly
called servile and slavish fear, and the fear of man which brings a snare,
Prove. 29. 25.

6. Look after the breaches of this Commandment, by considering what is
contrary to the obedience we owe to him as God, and our God: Now internal and
external obedience may both be comprehended in this, every man ought wholly to
give away himself, and the use of all his faculties and members, for the Glory
of God, and to him only, and to none other: And this requires a practice that
is complete, both as to the inward bent of the will and heart, and also as to
all the external parts thereof, which being seriously pondered, O! how often
will we find this Commandment broken? as the particular comparing of our life
with the Word, and the explication of the rest of the Commandments, may easily
clear and discover.

7. The sin of impatience, which is opposite to that patience and submission we
owe to God in his ways and Dispensations, is one of the special breaches of
this Commandment: it is very broad, and does many ways discover it self: As 1.
In fretting at Events which befall us. 2. In not submitting cheerfully to Gods
way with us but repining against it. 3. In wishing things had fallen out
otherwise then God has disposed. 4. In limiting God, and prescribing to him,
thinking that things might have been better otherwise. 5. In not behaving
himself thankfully for what he does, even when his Dispensations and cross and
afflicting.

8. This Commandment is broken by the many sins which are opposite to that
Adoration and high esteem, that we should have of God in our hearts; he ought
to have the Throne, and be set far up in our minds and affections; but oh! how
many are there that will not have one serious thought of him in many days, and
are far from being taken up with him, or wondering at him and his way with
sinners, etc.

Lastly, When Invocation and Prayer is slighted, this Commandment is broken,
when he is not by calling upon him acknowledging in every thing, and
particularly, when internal prayer in frequent ejaculations to God (as Nehemiah
2. 4.) is neglected.

Now if all these were extended to our selves, and these we have interest in,
and that in thoughts, words, and deeds, according to all the former general
rules, what guilt would be found to lie upon every one of us, in reference to
his Attributes, Relations to us, and Works for us? and as these hold him forth
to be worshipped as such, so when that is slighted or neglected, it cannot but
infer great guilt, especially when his due is not given by such as we are, to
such as he is, it makes us exceedingly guilty: and though the same thing be
often mentioned, yet it is under a diverse consideration; for as one thing may
break more Commandments then one, so may one thing, diverse ways, break one and
the same Commandment, as it opposes or marreth diverse Graces and Duties.

The second Commandment.
Exodus 20. 4, 5, 6. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any
likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in he Earth beneath,
or that is in the Waters under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down thy self to
them, nor serve them, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth Generation
of them that hate me; and ^he wing mercy unto thousands of them that love me,
and keep my Commandments.
THis Commandment is more largely set down then the former, partly to clear the
Mandatory part of it, and partly to press it; in which two it may be taken up.

The preceptive, or commanding part, is expressed in two things, v. 4. and v.
5. at the beginning. 1. That no Image be made: And 2. That it be not worshipped.

Next, it is pressed three ways: 1. From a reason. 2. By a threatening. 3. By a
Promise: The words are multiplied, that they may the more fully and clearly
express what is intended.

1. That this Commandment is against all making of Images for Religious
service, is clear from a threefold extent mentioned in the Prohibition. 1. The
Image of nothing in Heaven above, or the Earth beneath, or under the Earth;
that is, the similitude of no Creature is allowed for this end.

2. Men are forbidden to make either similitude or likeness, that is, no sort
of Image, whether that which is ingrave in, or hewn out of stone, wood, silver,
etc. or that which is made by painting, all kinds are discharged.

3. No sort of worship or service religious is to be given to them, whether
mediate or immediate, whether primarily as to themselves, or secondarily with
respect to that which they represent. This is understood under the second part
of the Commandment, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve or worship them:
under which two, all external reverence is discharged, which is clear from the
reason adjoined, because God is jealous, and he will not only not endure
Idolatry, but whatever may look like it; as a jealous Husband will not abide
any suspicious-like carriage in his Wife.

That we may have the clearer access to the meaning and use of this
Commandment: let us see 1. What is the scope of it. 2. Wherein it is different
from the former.

The scope of this Commandment, is not mee^ly and only to forbid making and
worshipping of Images, which is the most gross way of abusing the worship of
God; but under that to forbid all manner of grosness in the external worship of
God, and to command exactness and preciseness in it (as well as internal
worship) according to the Rule prescribed there anent by the Lord; and so this
Commandment includes all externals commanded in the Ceremonial Law, and does
forbid all will worship, and superstition in the worship of God, all honoring
him by precepts taught by men, and not by himself, Isai. 29. 13. and Matthew. 15.
9. So then in the first Commandment the worshipping of the only true God is
commanded, and the worshipping of any Idol is forbidden: here the true worship
of that God is prescribed, and the contrary forbidden; the first Commandment
shows who is to be worshipped, the second how he is to be worshipped, not in
the manner that Heathens worshipped their Idols, nor in any other manner that
men shall feign and devise to themselves, but in the manner he himself
prescribes.

In sum, this Commandment holds forth these three things. 1. That God will
not only be served inwardly in the heart, by good thoughts and intentions
(which is prescribed in the first Commandment) but also outwardly in the
confessing him before men, in external service and worship, in words and
gestures suitable; for the forbidding this sort of external gestures,
worshipping and bowing before Idols, does include the contrary affirmative in
all its kinds (according to the first Rule beforementioned for the right
understanding of all the Commandments.) Thus it takes in all Ordinances of
Word, Prayer, Sacraments, Ceremonies, etc. and failing in these, breaks this
Commandment, when even they are not rightly gone about.

2. It holds forth this, that in that external service and worship, God will
not have men following their own humor, but will have them to walk by the Rule
given, or to be given by him to them, and otherwise it is in vain whatever
worship men perform to him, Matthew. 15. 9. Hence it is said here, Thou shall not
make to thy self; that is, at thy own pleasure, without my Command, otherwise
what is by Gods Command is made to him; and this is to be extended to all
Ordinances, yea both to the worship it self, and also to the manner of that
worship, all is to be done according to Gods Command only.

3. It holds forth a spiritual service due to God, or that we should be
spiritual in all external service, there should not be in us any carnal
apprehensions of God, as if he were like any thing that we could imagine, Acts
17. 29. as is fully clear from Deuteronomy. 4. 15, etc. Also all rashness and
carnality in external performances is here discharged under be wing to Images.
etc.

So then, under these three, we take up the sum of this Commandment, whereby it
differs from the former, which may also be cleared from these reasons.

1. The first is, that this Commandment looks to external worship, and the
ordering of that; which is clear: 1. Because the things forbidden in it, as
making of Images, and bowing to them, are external acts. 2. These are mentioned
as relating ^o Gods Worship, for they are placed in the first Table of the Law,
and for this end Images are only mentioned, as made use of by Heathens in all
their worship, Lev. 26. 1. The Lord will not have his people doing so to him,
Deuteronomy. 12. 3, 4, 5, etc. 3. Add, that making and worshipping of Images are but
one part of men's abusing of the external worship of God, which is mentioned for
all of that kind (as Adultery is put for all uncleanness in the seventh
Commandment) and all kinds of false worship, or all the several ways of men's
abusing the external worship of God are condemned under it. 1. Because it is
most gross, and this being a most gross way of adding to his worship, ^t
serves to show, how God accounts every adding to his word, or altering of
it, to ^e a gross and heinous sin, Deuteronomy. 4. 23. 24, 25. 2. Because the Nations
about, espe^ially Egypt, served their Gods so, and men naturally are bent to
it, as appears almost ^y the practice of all Nations; and Romans 1. 25, etc.
and by the Israelites practice in ^he golden Calf, Exodus 32. from verse. 1. to
verse. 7. and by Jeroboams practice, 1 King. 12* 28. Now the Lord will not be
served so, but a^ he commands, De^^* 12. v. 4. Ye shall not do so to the
Lord* etc. but contr^^^ly, v. 5. as the Lord shall ^arve out unto you.

A second reason to clear this to be the meaning, may be taken from the
perfection of the Law, which lies in this, that it condemns all sin, and
commands all duties: now it is a sin not only to worship false gods, but to
worship the true God in a false way; and it is a duty also to worship him
rightly, according as he has appointed in his Word; now these sins must be
forbidden in this second Commandment, or they are forbidden in none at all; and
these duties must be commanded in this Commandment, or they are commanded in
none.

Next, that we may clear, that it is sinful to worship God otherwise then he
has commanded, it would be observed, there was a twofold Idolatry found in
Israel, and condemned in the Scripture: the first was, when Groves and Images
were planted, and made to Idols; and so the people of Israel did often to the
Heathen Gods: the second was, when they had Groves, and worshipped in high
places, but not to Idols, but to the Lord their God, as 2 Chronicles 33. 17. so in
that place before cited. Deuteronomy. 12. 2* 3 4. etc. you will find two things
forbidden. 1. Making of Image to the false Gods, which the Cana^nites
worshipped. 2, Making use of their manner of worship, and turning it unto the
true God, both are forbidden, the first by the first Commandment, the last by
the second; compare verse. 8. (which holds forth this scope.) Ye shall not do,
every man what seems right in his own eyes, with what follows, and with
verse. 30. and 31. See thou enquire not how these Nations worshipped their gods,
to wit, by Images. etc. as if ye would do so to the Lord, no, but verse. 32.
Whatsoever thing I command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto
nor diminish from it, which clears the scope of this Command, as being
purposely there opened up, Ye shall not do so to the Lord your God, wherein
more is comprehended then is expressed; namely, not only ye shall not serve
the Lord, as they do their gods, but also ye shall serve him, as he himself
prescribes.

Hence will it clearly appear, that this command is to be reckoned a distinct
command from the former, because 1. It contains distinct matter, forbids
sins of another kind, and commands duties of another kind. 2. Because they
are certainly ten in number, and there cannot be such a reckoning made up if
these first two be one, it being clear (as after will appear) that the last is
only one, and cannot be divided into two. 3. Beside, it is the common reckoning
of the ancient Jews, as may be seen from Josephus, lib. 3. 9. Ainsworth, and
others; This then being laid down as a truth; we shall 1. shortly put by some
Questions concerning Images for clearing the words. 2. Come particularly to
show, what is required and what is forbidden in this Commandment, and how we
break it in our ordinary practice, Then 3. Open the Reasons that are annexed,

Concerning Images, two things are to be enquired. 1* If no Image be lawful*
and if any be lawful, what these be? 2. If any use, especially religious, of
Images be lawful? and if adoration of any kind ^e to be given to them; We say
for Answer,

1. That making of Pictures of Creatures, which are visible, or may be
comprehended, or historical phansies (to speak so) such as the senses and
elements use to be holden forth by (which are rather Hieroglyphics then real
Pictures) these I say, are not simply unlawful, but are so, when they are
abused; (so Solomon made Images of Lions for his use, and thus the gift of
engraving and painting as well as others which God has given to men, may be
made use of, when (as has been said) it is not abused.) As* 1. When such
Pictures are obscene and filthy, and against Christian modesty to behold, such
break this Commandment, but more especially the seventh, because as filthy
communication does pollute the ears, so do they the eyes. 2. When men become
prodigal in their bestowing either too much time, or too much expense on them.
3. When they dote too much on them by curiosity, and many other ways they may
be abused: but especially in the fourth place, if they be abused to any
religious use, then they become unlawful, as afterward shall be cleared*

2. Though making of Images simply be not unlawful and discharged by this
Commandment, yet thereby every representation of God (who is the Object to be
worshipped) and every Image religiously made use of in worship is condemned
(though civil and political Images and Statues, which are used as ornaments, or
badges of honor* or remembrance^s of some fact, etc. be not condemned,) 1.
Because such Images cannot but beget carnal thoughts of God, (as Acts 6, 29.)
contrary to this Commandment. 2. Because God discovered himself, Deuteronomy. 4, 15,
16, etc. by no likeness, but only by his Word, that they might have no ground
of likening him to any thing. 3. Because it is impossible to get a bodily
likeness to set him out by, who is a Spirit and an infinite Spirit, so then
every such image must be derogatory to God, as turning the Glory of the
invisible God, to the Shape of some visible and corruptible Creature, which is
condemned, Romans 1. 22, 23. for every Image supposes some likeness; Now there
can be no conceivable or imaginable likeness betwixt God and any thing, that we
can invent, therefore it is said by the Lord, Isai. 40. 8. To whom will ye
liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him* where it seems it was
no Idol, but God they aimed to represent by their Images, which was the fault
condemned* verse. 25. As also when we cannot conceive of God, and of the
Mysteries of the Trinity, and Incarnation as we ought, what presumption must it
be to paint them*

Therefore upon these Grounds, 1. We simply condemn any delineating of God, or
the Godhead, or Trinity; such as some have upon their buildings, or books, like
^ Sun shining with beams, and the Lords Name, Jehova, in it, or any other way,
this is most abominable to see, and a heinous wronging of Gods Majesty.

2. All representing of the Persons as distinct* as to set out the Father
(personally considered) by the Image of an old man, as if he were a creature,
the Son under the Image of a Lamb or young man, the Holy Ghost under the Image
of a Dove, all which wrongeth the God head exceedingly* and although the Son
was and is Man, having taken on him that nature and united it to his God*head,
yet he is not a mere m^n; therefore that image, which only holds forth one
nature, and looks like any man in the World, cannot be the representation of
that Person, which i^ God and man.

And if it ^e said, m^ns soul cannot be painted, but his* body may, and yet
that picture represents a man: I answer, it does so, because he has but one
Nature, and what represents that, represents the person; but it is not so
with Christ, his Godhead is not a distinct part of the humane Nature, as the
soul of man is (which (...) necessarily supposed in every living man) but a
distinct nature, only united with the manhood in that one person Christ, who
has no fellow; therefore what representet^ him, must not represent a man only,
but must represent Christ, Immanuel, God man* otherwise it is not his Image;
beside, there is no warrant for representing him in hi^ Manhood, nor any
colorable possibility of it, but as men fancy; and shall that be called
Christ's portraiture? would that be called any other man's portraiture? which
were drawn at men's pleasure, without regard to the pa^ern; again, there is no
use o^ it, for either that Image behoved to have but common estimation with
other Images* and that would wrong Christ, or a peculiar respect and reverence,
and so it sins against this Commandment that forbids all religious
reverence to Images, but he being God, and so the object of Worship, we must
either divide his Natures, or say, that Image or picture represents not
Christ.

Again, as to what may be objected from the Lords appearing sometimes in the
likeness of a man, or the Spirits descending as a Dove, or as cloven tongues of
fire: It i^ answered,

1. There is a great difference betwixt a sign of the Spirits presence, and a
representation of the Spirit. 2. Betwixt what represents the Spirit, as he is
one of the Persons of the blessed Trinity, and what resembles some gift of
his: The similitude o^ a Dove descending upon Christ, was to show his taking up
his residence in him* an^ furnishing him with gifts and graces, and
particularly holy simplicity and meeknes^ without measure, and so his appearing
in cloven tongues was to show his communicating the gift of Tongues to the
Apostles. 3. Neither is there any warrant for drawing him in these shapes, more
then to look on every living Dove, as representing him: and the like may be
said of Gods appearing sometimes in humane likeness, it was but that men might
have some visible help to discern something of Gods presence, but not to give
any representation of him, and these bodies were but for a time assumed, as a
praeludie and fore-running evidence of the Sons being to become man.

From this ground also it would seem, that painting of Angels might be
condemned, as a thing impossible, they being Spirits, which no corporal thing
can represent* besid^ that the representing of them has some hazard with it,
and for those cherubims that were made by Gods direction under the Old
Testament, they were rather some Emblem of the nature and service of Angels,
as being full of zeal, and always (as it were) upon wing ready to obey Gods
will, then any likeness of themselves, and its hardly possible to fancy
representations of Spirits, good or evil, but thereby men will wrong themselves
in the right description of them: Though we grant, Angels being but finite
Spirits, there is another kind of danger and impossibility of representing God,
who is an infinite Spirit; also some say that these Cherubims mentioned did not
represent the nature of Angels, but Angels appearing under such a visible
shape, and we find Ezekiel. 1. There are diverse shapes by which they are pointed
out, but it is as to their fitness and readiness for service, and not as to
their nature.

3. We say that no Image whatsoever, made use of for religious ends, and
without the bounds of civil and politic uses is allowable, but is by this
commandment condemned, as unsuitable to the Lords nature and revealed will, so
by this, Images (otherwise lawful) when abused to Idolatry become unlawful,
and are not to be suffered but orderly to be removed, we call that more then a
civil or a common use, when religious worship or reverence is purposely
intended to them, or ^here is; by some one occasion or other, danger least they
may be so abused, and of this sort (viz. dangerous ones;) are, 1. Images in
places of Worship, but it is not Idolatry to have dead men's Images on their
Tombs or Monuments in Churches. 2. Images of such Angels, Saints, etc. which
has been abused to Idolatry by being worshipped, or most readily may be so
abused. 3. Images erected for h^lping our Prayers to be accepted, and which
have Altars, Lights, or Temples appointed for them, (which will be clearer,
when we come to speak of religious worship and Bowing,) thus peregrinations and
vows to Images, touching of them with some ap^rehension of fruit and advantage
thereby, especially when healing is expected from them; and so are they abused
also, though help be expected not from the Image, but from him whom it is said
to represent; and thus also when any Image once lawful comes to be abused, it
ought to be removed, as the brazen Serpent was by H^ze^iah, and under this
Prohibition come in the Images of false gods, as Cupid, Venus, Apollo, Jupiter,
etc. which were once abused; besides some of these Idols being nothing, the
pourtraying of them makes them appear something; and if it was the Lords way
to command the breaking and destroying of all Idols and Images of false gods,
can it be suitable to retain them in memory? that a generation following might
have that occasion and help to Idolatry, (viz. the Images of old Idols) from
Christians: and if it was David's and the Saints way, Psalm 16. 4. not so much
as to mention their names but with detestation, ought Gods people for sport or
delight to look on these Images? zeal for God would abhor these curiosities,
and what edification can be in them?

We are now to clear the second question, If any worship may be given, and what
worship is due to Images of any sort? and if it be not a breach of this command
to give any religious worship to any of them? that we may answer.

1. Consider there was a twofold worshipping of Images even amongst Heathens,
The first was more gross, when the worship was given to the Image, as being
some Godhead of it self, thus some think the images of Baal, Ash^eroth, etc.
and particular Images, that have special names, were worshipped, thus are men
said properly to worship the works of their hands, this is against the first
Commandment. 2. There was a worshipping of Images as representing God, and so
the worship was gone about as a part of service done to the true God, such was
(in conformity to the Hea^hens practice) the worship given to the Calf, Exodus
32. verse. 1. to 7. and such were the Groves and Sacrificings in the high
places, 2 Chronicles. 32. 17.

More particularly there is an immediate worshipping of Images as Idols, when
^hey in themselves, or for themselves are worshipped, and secondly there is a
mediate worshipping of images for that which they represent, when men worship
something in them, or signified by them.

This again may be distinguished with respect to the object, when the worship
is directed either first to a false god, or else secondly to the true God.

2. Consider, that there are diverse sorts of worship given to the images of the
true God, or of Saints. 1. Some religious worship which is more then civil, yet
not that which is due to God, such Bellarmine gives them for themselves
properly, and calls it (...) 2. A divine worship due to what is typified,
such many give to the images of God and Christ, this they call (...), this
Bellarmine gives them not properly, ^ut per accid^ns and propter aliud, though
the first he makes properly to terminate on ^he Image, yet Aquinas and his
followers, Part 3. q. 25. 3, 4. gives the images of Christ, of Mary, and of
the Cross (...) properly so called.

3. Consider what that is which is called religious worship, it differs from
civil and politic worship (such as is given to living men, yea from that civil
respect which one will give to the Image of a King, or of one they love, which
is not properly worship even civil) and consists in other circumstances of a
religious consideration* and it may be known to differ from what is Civil, by
these things. 1. By the thing to which the worship is given, that is, if it be
a thing, which passes not under a Civil, but under a religious account, as
bowing to a living man is one thing, to a Saints Image, a Sacrament, or such
like, which have nothing in them, calling for civil honor is another thing;
and therefore, if any honor be given them it must be on another account. 2. By
the actions, wherein we give such worship, as if it be in prayer or in
worshipping of God* or in sacrificing, it is one thing to bow then to or before
an Image or man, and another thing to do it when occasionally or historically
we are relating something, or doing some civil business, as tying the shoo or
such like. 3. By the sort of worship that has been given to Idols or used in
religious service to God, and not suitable for any civil respect to such an
object, as bowing the knee, uncovering the head, praying, building Temples,
Altars, making Vows unto them, or before them, swearing by them, or before
them, carrying them about with us because of some religious influence they are
supposed to have, setting them up for reverence to be given to them, setting up
lights about them, sacrificing, burning incense to them, etc. or something of
that kind used sometime in Gods service, or in the service of Idols.

4. Consider, that what is said of Images may be said of all creatures and
things to which divine honor, or religious worship in the service of God is
attributed, for if the one fall all will by this Commandment be overturned,
such as 1. Worshipping of Angels or Saints by (...), or the Virgin Mary by
(...), as Mediators and helps in our serving the true God. 2. All adoration of
the relics of Martyrs, such as their bones, dust, clothes, etc. Especially
the adoration of the very Cross (as they say) whereon Christ suffered, which
has by Papists a divine sacrifice offered to it, and a divine worship given in
the highest degree. 3. The adoration of such things as are used in worship, as
Temples, Altars* bread in the Sacraments Agnus Dei, Masses, etc. 4. The Images
of God, Christ, Saints, Angels, yea of the Cross* which are said to be
worshipped with respect to the true God, and not as derogatory to his service.

For further clearing of this purpose, we shall speak to a question which here
necessarily occurreth; namely, whether these things mentioned; being worshipped
by any sort of religious service, whether directly or indirectly for themselves
or for such things to which they relate, or which they signify, even when men
pretend the worship is not given to them, but ultimately referred to the honor
of the true God, whether I say worshipping them so, be not Idolatry and a
breach of this Commandment?

In answering this question. 1. We shall clear that there may be* and is
Idolatry committed with Images* and means of Gods service, even in such worship
wherein the Images which men worship are not accounted gods* but only
representations of God, and although these means of worship, which they worship
are made use of in serving the true God. 2. We shall clear, that all such
service* as being Idolatry is forbidden by this command, however it be
distinguished. If it be performed as religious service, though some such
service be more gross, and other some more subtle and refined.

First then, That there is such a kind of Idolatry in worshipping of Images,
when men rest not on the Images, but direct their worship to the God
represented by them, we may clear it diverse ways.

And 1. From the Heathens, who though some did, yet all of them did not account
their Images their Gods, but only some representation of them, and first we may
gather this from Romans 1. 22. 23. where it is said of them, 1. That they knew
God, and yet 2. That they turned the glory of that incorruptible God into the
similitude of Beasts and men, corruptible Creatures. Their fault is not that
they accounted these representations or Images, which they made gods, but that
they declined in their worship, in the worshipping of the true God by such
Images.

2. It may also appear by the frequent changes of their Images, while they
retained their former gods, and by their multiplying Images of one sort, and
diverse sorts to one and the same god, and by their giving all these Images one
name, and when it is said that Solomon and other Kings set up Images to
Ash^oroth, Baal* etc. It cannot be thought they supposed these Images to be the
very gods themselves which they worshipped, but that they were only set up for
their honor, 2 Kings 23. 13. And when Manasses made Chariots to the Sun, he
supposed them not to be to the Sun. 2 Kings 23. 11. Yea was not this commonly
acknowledged that Jupiter was in Heaven, as appears Acts 19 39. and that that
Image came down from him, but was not he, nor yet the feigned Goddess Diana.

3. It may appear by the Heathens own confession, and the shifts they used,
when they were charged with the worshipping the works of their hands, as 1.
They used to say they worshipped but the Numen or god which was in them, and
which invisibly after their dedication of them (and not before) dwelt in them;
yea, some of them would say, they neither worshipped that Image, or any Devil,
but by a bodily sign they beheld what they should worship. 3. When Christians
further urged them, that what was signified by their Images was not the true
God, but a creature, as by Neptune, the Sea* by Vulcan, the Fire, etc. They
replied it was not those bodies which they worshipped, but the gods which
governed them. So Augustine, Psalm 113. nobis 115. concerning the Idols of the
Gentiles, and Augustine de Civitat. Dei lib. 7. cap. 5. where he shows that
Varro gives that reason, why the gods where rather pourtrayed in man's picture
(though they were invisible) because, says he, man's Soul is a spirit and
comes nearest them, and the body is the vessel of the Soul, and therefore is
used to represent it. See Ch^ysost. 1. Ephesians. Hom. 18. Andrews on 2. Command.
August. in Psalm 96. (nobis) 97.

And it may also 4. appear from this, That the Heathen gods for the most part
(even those of them that were most commonly worshipped) were some famous men,
after death supposed to be Deified, to whom they made Statues and Images, and
yet still the honor was intended to those to whom they appointed the Images,
though they supposed that their gods in an especial manner dwelt in these
Images, and answered from them.

In the second place this may be made to appear from the Command, Deuteronomy. 12. 31,
where the Lord forbids not only the worshipping of Idols, but of himself by
Images, Thou shall not do so to the Lord thy God; that is, Thou shall not
worship me by Images as the Heathen do their gods; and therefore this is not
only possible, but is also, and that most certainly, a grievious guilt, even
though they pretended it was not idols but God they worshipped; yet it was not
so they worshipped not him but the idol.

3, We shall clear it yet further, That the true God may be worshipped (by
Idolaters) as they pretend, and yet in Gods account, their worship is nothing
but idolatry committed with their images.

We shall give four instances of this. The first is from Exodus 32. where it is
clear, 1. That the image they set up was not it self acknowledged to be God,
but as something to represent the true God, for 1. It cannot be thought their
minds were so soon darkened as altogether to forget what God had done, and to
imagine that the thing which was new made with hands was God, though they be
charged with forgetting God, because they were practical forgetters of him, and
their sin did speak it out indeed. 2. The image is called Jehovah, that brought
them out of Egypt, which was a mercy past before the Calf had a being, and
therefore the reason why they gave it this name, must certainly be, because
they aimed by it to represent Jehovah. 3. It is not likely that now they would
have worshipped the gods of Egypt, or that they would have attributed their
delivery from Egypt to them, seeing these gods were also plagued; also that
Aaron should do so, is incredible, who yet joined with them in this
transgression. 4. Beside can it be thought, that so soon they thought it to be
God, and yet so easily afterward passed from it? certainly the words, That it
may go before us, that is, not to Egypt, but Canaan, whether God called them,
do clearly imply, that they looked on it only as a representation of Jehovah.

2. It is clear, that they sacrificed burnt-offerings and peace offerings
before this image, and this was the same service which was due to the Lord, and
so it was proclaimed, Exodus 32. 5. and therefore it was to the Lord, and not to
the image (for it self) that they sacrificed.

3. It is clear, that they are charged for turning out of the way, and that
because of their making a molten image, which seems to infer, that their
guilt was rather in the manner of worship and making of that image for worship,
then in quitting God altogether; and thus they grossly failed in the manner of
worshipping him, by occasion of Moses his absence, for now they want that sign
of Gods presence, which formerly they had, and have not such a visible commerce
(as it were) with God, it is that they complain of, and this want of a visible
sign (and not of God simply) do they intend to make up by this image.

4. This may be further confirmed from Acts 7. 40. 41. 42. where it is said,
that because of this sin they were given up to gross idolatry which could not
be, had this been idolatry of the grosser sort.

The Second instance is from Judges 17. where you will find that that Idol,
which Micah made, is not by him or his Mother accounted God, but is made use of
by them, as they think, for furthering them in Gods service, as appears. 1.
From this, that it gets not the name of any strange god. 2. That he seeks
a Levite for a Priest to it, and promises to himself Gods blessing from that,
not that the idol would bless him, but Jehovah, verse, 13. 3. That it is said,
the Priest asked counsel of Jehovah for the Danites, Judges 18. 6.

The Third instance is that of Jeroboam, who did sin and made Israel to sin, by
the Calf he set up at Dan and Bethel, that they were not intended to be
worshipped as idols, for themselves, but as means* whereby they might be helped
to worship the true God, may appear, 1. From Ieroboams motive, which was not to
divert the people from the true God, atleast as he supposed, or to make them
alter their God, but to alter their manner of worship, and to divert them from
going up to Jerusalem to worship, from which his fear of their revolt to
Rehoboam arose; hence the Calves are not provided to prevent worshipping of
God, but are put in place of their going up to Jerusalem; as the color of
reason pretended by him for this alteration shows; and so one service is put
for another, without changing their God, and all the reproofs that his sins
meets with from the Prophets run at this, that he altered the manner of Gods
worship in putting up new signs in new places, and appointing new Sacrifices
and Priests. 2. It appears from this, that as it was distinct from that way
of serving God, which was in Judah, so was it from the way of the Heathens, yea
from the way used by such idolatrous Kings as Achab, who are said to do worse,
because they did set up strange Gods (which the Calves are not called) and
Baalim; and Jehu when he destroyed the false Gods, yet he retained this manner
of Worship; and there were no cause to discriminate Jeroboams sin from Achabs,
or to look upon it as any thing lesser, if all the difference had been only in
the change of worshipping the image of one Idol into the worshipping of the
image of another, but the difference was in this, that the one worshipped the
true God in these images* the other Idols indeed. 3. Hence there was still some
knowledge of God in that Land, and Prophets sometimes sent them by the Lord;
yea, when they were led captive, and others sent into their place, it is said 2
Kings 17. 26, etc. They learned the manner of the god of the Land, that is the
true God, though they corrupted themselves with serving their Idols also, and
thus the Samaritans continued worshipping they knew not what, though they
pretended to worship the true God, John 4. 22.

The Fourth instance is that corrupt practice, used sometimes in Judah of
setting up high places and groves, when yet they did not thereby intend to
serve Idols, but the true God, and yet they are reproved for this as a gross
Corrupting of the worship of God.

And it would seem clear sometimes in Judah, and often in Israel, even when
they are charged with Idolatry, that yet the knowledge of the true God, was not
obliterate among them, nor they so bru^tish in their worship as other Nations
about them; we take it then for a clear truth, that they often did worship the
true God, by Images, when they did not worship the images directly.

The Second thing may be easily cleared and made out, to wit, that all
worshipping of God by images though the worship be pretended to be given to the
true God, and not to the image, but to the thing signified or represented by
the image, is yet unlawful and Idolatry, forbidden by this commandment what
ever sort of worship it be, if it be religious, as has been said, and this we
shall make out by these Arguments.

The first is from the general scope of this Command, which is to forbid not
only the over-turning of Gods Service, but also all Will worship, though mixed
in with the Service (as it seems, that was which is mentioned, Col. 2. 8. of
worshipping Angels, which yet was so subtle that they pretended, they were far
from taking from God any thing that was his due*) that this is the scope of
this Command, is clear from Deuter. 12. 8. where the Lord forbids men in his
Worship, To do what seems good to every one in his own Eyes: But so it is,
that the worshipping of God before Images, etc, is Will Worship, etc. till it
be shown that it is prescribed by God.

Secondly: That way of Worshipping God is clearly condemned by them (...)
particular scope of this Command, which is first, to discharge all gross
thoughts o^ God or his Service; which scope, As it says, God cannot dwell in
Temples* So* neither can He be worshipped by men's hands* that is, by Images
made with me^ hands, as these in Athens did, Acts 17. 24. 25. For they
ignorantly worshipped the true God* 2. To show that he should not be served as
Idolaters served their Gods by Images* Deuteronomy. 4. and 22 30* 31, 32. This binds
us to the Word for all institute worship, but especially restrains us from
Idolaters, their way of worship as well as from their Idols, Thou shall not do
so to the Lord thy God: Note, that So set down, v. 4. relates to Groves,
Images, High places, etc. mentioned v. 3. which place does not only discharge
such Service to be given ^o Idols, but the giving of any such Service to God
himself, who will have no such Service: And if it be clea^ that worshipping him
by Groves and High places be condemned, why not worshipping him by Images also?
for the prohibition So, looks to all.

Thirdly: This Command has a general prohibition in it, that leaves no Image
out, whether of God, Saint, or any other thing for any Religious use under
whatever shape: For 1. It discharges the making of any Image of any thing, for
any Religious use. 2. It discharges all Worship to be given them, whether
outward by Bowing, or inward by Service, or whatsoever follows on these; and
therefore no distinction used by Idolaters can salve the matter, or avoid the
strength of this Command, especially considering that it directs men in the
manner how they should serve the true God, and does not simply prescribe who is
to be acknowledged as true God, which is done by the first Command.

Fourthly: If by this Command Heathenish Idolatry, or the Serving God by Images
be condemned? then the serving of God by Images also amongst Christians is here
condemned; But the Heathens serving God by Images, is here condemned, Ergo, etc.

If it be answered that Heathens did represent by their Images that which wa^
not God, and that this was their fault? I Answer. 1. It is not like that all
did so* nor that any at first did so; but some had a notion of the invisible
Godhead, (...) Romans 1* 28. though they changed it into an Image, like to a
corruptible Creature* 2. Yet here the Argument holds; If Heathens, who
worshipped, suppose, Jupiter, Vulcan, etc. and their Images of Gold, Silver,
etc. were holden for Idolaters, not only as worshipping Jupiter and Vulcan, and
these Idols which were so represented, but also as worshipping Gold and Silver,
and such Images and things as they made use of to represent them; then also
Christians must be said not only to worship what is represented, by those
Images, but the Images themselves, and so to be guilty of Idolatry on that
account: the Reason will hold alike in both* and if their Exception, that they
worshipped not the Images, but what they represented did not exempt them from
being found guilty of worshipping such Images in particular, neither will
Christians upon that Plea be found exeemed from th^^ guilt* for, ^ quatenus ad
omne valet consequentia.

Fifth Argument: If that Idolatry committed by the Israelites in the
Wilderness* Exodus 32* and that which was set up in Israel by Jeroboam, and that
of Manasses (...) 2 Chronicles 33. be to be condemned as Idolatry; then that which
is practiced among^ the Papists in worshipping of their Images, and God by
them, is to be condemned as Idolatry: But the former is condemned in Scripture
as gross Idolatry, because it falls off, and declineth from the way of
worship the Lord has prescribed, and turned Gods People like to Idolaters in
their way; therefore also the latter is to be condemned as idolatry*

There is no exception which the Papists give in here against this Argument,
but the like might have been given by the Israelites.

For 1. If they say, They worshipped not the true God before these Images, that
is answered already.

2. If they say, it was condemned because they represented him by such images,
that is not enough: For 1. The Command forbids all images of any thing: 2.
The opposition mentioned, Deuteronomy. 4. Thou saw no likeness, or Image, but
heardest a Voice, has no middle, but argues against all alike: Hence these
Images, Psalm 115. that had Noses and Mouths, but smelled not, and spoke not,
were condemned as well as those complained of, Romans 1.

3. If they say, It was not lawful then, but is lawful now; this were to say,
that the Gospel admits of more Carnal Ordinances then the Law, whereas its
Service is more spiritual without all doubt.

From all which we may clearly conclude, that in such Service there is a
twofold Idolatry committed: 1. In that, because of some holiness and
venerability, that is supposed to be in such Images, Relics, etc. Religious
worship (though inferior to what is attributed to God) is given to them for
themselves, according to the Decrees of that second Counsel of Nice: 2. In that
they pretend by such Service to worship the true God, though in an idolatrous
manner forbidden by him, besides what Aquinas and his followers maintain, who
give to the Images of God, Christ, Mary, and the Cross, (...) it self, part 13.
q. 25. ^ 1, 2, 3. And Reason says, it is a snare unto them that worship them,
and a scandal to others; for, as Augustine (speaking against the expressions
used by Heathens from Psalm. 113. and from that of the Apostle, Romans 1. (after
he has rejected their images, and their interpretation, and excuses also)
says, he who worshippeth and prays toward an Image is an Idolater; for,
who, says he, worshippeth and prays toward an Image, who is not affected
with it as if it heard him?

In short then, the Idolatry that strikes against this Command, may be summed
up in these particulars.

1. When by some visible sign, representation, or Image, the God head is
wronged as being thereby made like to it; this is against Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16, 17,
etc. where every Image made to represent the true God, is condemned as
unsuitable to Him.

2. When by our worship we tie the presence of the true God, to some Place,
Image, Statue, or Relic, as if they had something in them, or communicated to
them more divine then any other thing; or, as if God heard our Prayers better
at Images, and by them; or as if there were a more special presence of God
there, or a more special dispensation of grace granted by them; as Heathens
supposed their Gods dwelt invisibly in their Images, and did answer them there.
Now the supposing that there is in any thing something venerable and worthy of
such respect, is the ground of all idolatry; the inward leaning to it, and
trusting in it, is against the first Command; but the outward expressing of
this esteem and trust is against the second Command: Thus men sin in praying to
things that are (though rational Creatures) as Angels and Saints; or to things
that are not, as empty Images that have no Deity dwelling in them, or to
lifeless Creatures* as the Cross, Bread, etc.

3. It is Idolatry, when idolatrous worship, used in the Service of Idols, is
given to God contrary to his Command; so Deuteronomy. 12. 30. 31. Thou shall not do so
to the Lord thy God; and 2 Chronicles. 33. 17. Their keeping up of Groves for the
worship of God; and that invention of Jeroboams Calves, are condemned as
Idolatry.

Fourthly, When any thing of that External worship, which is due to the true
God, is given to any other, even though it be with a purpose not to shut him
out altogether from his due, yet when it is in part given to any other thing,
as to the Cross, Saints, Images, etc. it is called worshipping of them; see
Exodus 32. compared with Psalm 106. 19, 20. there they worshipped the Images of
gold and silver, etc. yea, verse. 37. Devils, though they intended to worship
God in these Images.

5. When any thing of this worship, due to God, is given to Servants or means,
as if something adorable, and to be worshipped, were in them, although they be
not accounted God himself: Thus Cornelius sinned in worshipping Peter, Acts 10.
25, 26. when he knew he was not God, and Peter rejects it on this ground,
that he was a Man and not God; and that therefore it was due to none but God:
which Reason, takes off all that can be said by men for palliating this kind
of idolatry: Thus the scope of the Command, and the reason and ground of
worship being considered, it is evident that all these are idolatry.

We would now further consider, first, the positive part of this Command, and
next what is forbidden in it.

And 1. For the positive part of this Command, we conceive it does reach, 1. To
all external Ordinances, such as Doctrine, Worship, government, and Discipline:
We are here enjoined to keep all these pure, according to his word: Thus any
error breaks this Command, when it is vented and made public, as secret
errors break the first.

Secondly, It reaches to all external Obedience, such as receiving the truths
of God, submitting to the government and discipline of his House, entering
therein as Church Members, often hearing the Word, not only on the Sabbath,
which is required in the fourth Command, but at all occasions, when God shall
give the opportunity, it being a special part of his worship; right using of
the Sacraments, and worthy receiving of them* praying externally, internal
prayer being required in the first Command; outward confession of sin, when
called for; confession of the truth in times of trial, etc. and this obedience
is to be extended to extraordinary duties as well as ordinary; as Vowing,
Swearing* Fasting, etc. when they shall be required in providence; external
Covenanting with God, an Ordinance necessary for keeping pure public Service,
etc. Also it is to be extended to secret duties, and to private duties in
Families, and Christian fellowship, as well as to public, and to diligence in
them all.

Thirdly, It reaches to the right manner of doing duties; especially, it
requires 1. That they be not done in Hypocrisy, for God will not be so
worshipped in any duty. 2. That all our worship and duties be directed to God,
in, and through the Mediator, and that none come to God but by him, who is the
appointed High Priest. 3. That all our Obedience and Service be Spiritual.

Fourthly, It takes in all external gestures, and outward reverence in praying
and hearing, etc. as, that the eye be fixed, and the carriage not light, but
decent; that there be no laughing, that the look^ be stayed and grave; these in
a special manner, in worship, are to be looked unto.

Fifthly, It requires every Mean that may further Gods public Service, as
educating and training up men for the Ministry, entertaining them, providing
places and accommodations for public worship, and every thing of that kind,
without which the external worship of God cannot be performed.

Sixthly, It requires the removing of all letts and impediments of Gods
worship, or whatever is contrary thereto, according to our places and stations;
such as Heresies and Heretics by condign censuring of them, removing all
idolatrous worship, and whatever may be occasions of it, or whatever has been,
or may be abused to it, purging the House of God from corrupt and insufficient
Ministers and corrupt Members.

But let us see in the next place what is forbidden in this Command, and how it
is broken.

In the first Command, what immediately reflecteth upon God himself, is
forbidden; here, what immediately reflecteth on his Ordinances and
appointments, contradicting them and Him in them, is discharged; there is none
of the Commands more frequently broken, and yet men most readily think
themselves free of the breach thereof, and therefore ye should consider, that
it is broken*

1. In Doctrine, or doctrinally. 2. In practice. 3. In both, when the Doctrines
vented and published against truth, have external practices following on them,
as that doctrine of Image Worship has, which we have spoken to already, and is
the gross breach of this Command; and the Lord instanceth it as being the
greatest, because where this is, all sorts of idolatry are: for it supposes
idolatry against the first Command, and that some esteem and weight is laid
upon that Creature we worship, beyond what is its due; as if there were in it
some divinity or ability to help, whereby it is thought worthy of such honor,
whereupon follows that external worship which is given to it upon that
account; and so because Saints are thought able to hear and help, men pray to
them; and because the Cross is thought holy, men worship it, etc. and as this
idolatry is manifold among the Papists, so it is palpable when Prayer is made
to Saints, Relics, Bread, the Cross, images, etc.

Now that we may further explain this; consider, that this Command is three
ways broken doctrinally. (all which have a great influence upon men's breaking
of it in their practice;) or, the Service and Worship of God, is three ways
wronged by the Doctrines of men. 1. When some thing is added to his Service
which he has not commanded, and this is superstition and will worship largely
so taken: Of this kind are 1. The 5* Popish Sacraments added to those two the
Lord apppointed. 2. Other and more Mediators then the One Mediator Christ. 3.
More meritorious causes of Pardon and Justification, then the blood and merits
of Christ* 4. More Officers in his House then he has appointed, such as
Bishops, Cardinals, etc* 5. More Ceremonies in worship, as Salt, Spittle and
Cream, added in Baptism to Water, and Kneeling, etc. to the Lords Supper. 6.
More Holy days then God has instituted. 7. Other things to be acknowledged
for the Word of God then the Scripture, as Traditions, Apocrypha, etc. and many
such things, whereof (for the most part) Popery is made up.

Secondly, It is broken when his Ordinances are diminished, and any thing which
he has commanded, is taken away from them, as is clear from Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye
shall not add unto the Word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish
ought there from: and thus they break this Command, by taking away the Cup from
L^icks (as they call them) in the Lords Supper, and the use of the Bible from
the People in their own Language; also it is broken by taking away Baptism from
Infants, and Discipline or Excommunication from the Church, and by taking away
the Sabbath Day, and public singing of Psalms, or such like; not to speak of
that Blasphemous, and some-way Pagan-Heresie of Quaquerisine, over-turning
most, if not all the Ordinances of God, destructive to all true Religion and
Christianity, and introducing, at least having a native tendency to introduce,
old Paganism and Barbarity.

Thirdly, This Command is broken by corrupting of Gods worship, as when the
Word is mis-interpreted and mis-applyed, Prayers are used in a strange Tongue,
the Word is mixed with Errors, and the Church, both left without Discipline
and abused in civil things, which tends to the corrupting of Gods Service;
unqualified-men put into the Ministry and kept in it, when Sacraments are
rested on and worshipped, even as the Brazen Serpent was abused, and the Temple
though appointed by God at first for good ends, was afterward rested on and
Idolized.

Again, this Command is practically broken four ways: First, by gross
prophanity and neglect of the practice of known duties of worship; this way,
are guilty all profane Contemners of Sacraments, Word, Discipline, etc. All
Neglecters of them when they may have them: and all these that set not
themselves to go rightly about them, in secret, in Families or in Public; and
where many opportunities of Gospel Ordinances are, this sin is the more
frequent; and so all Atheists that contemn Religion, and these that would only
serve God with a good heart and intention, as they pretend, without any outward
worship, are condemned here; and also those, who for fear or advantage give not
testimony to the Truth and Ordinances of Christ, when such a testimony is
called for.

2. Men sin against this Command, when they practice will worship and
superstition in serving God by duties he never required, whether 1. It be
Will Worship in respect of the Service it self, as when that is gone about as
duty, which is not in it self lawful, as when such and such Pilgrimages and
Penances are appointed by men to be done as Service to God: Or 2. When worship,
or Service under the Gospel is astricted to such a place, as if it were Holier
to pray in one place then in another, and that therefore God did hear Prayer
there more willingly and easily then in another place* Or 3. In respect of
bodily posture, as if there were more Religion in one posture then in another;
as in receiving the Lord's Supper kneeling, or Praying in such and such a
posture, except in so far as it is decent, and otherwise rightly regulate by
rules of Prudence and Natures light. 4. When it is without a Divine Warrant
tied to such a time only, as Christmas, (commonly caled Yool) Easter, Pasc^e,
etc. which is an Observing of times that God has not appointed. 5. When it is
tied to such an occasion or accident, as, to Pray when the Clock strikes, or
when one Neeseth, which Plinius marked of Ti^erius, who was no Religious man,
yet could not abide one who lifted not his Hat when he Neesed, and said not,
God bless; and he observes it among these things he can give no reason for;
the Prayer is good, but the timing of it so, and astricting it to that thing,
is superstitious; so your Lightwakes and Di^iges (as ye call them) are upon
this account to be condemned, either as superstitious, or as profane, or at
the best, as the relics and causes or occasions of both: For 1. Once in times
of Popish darkness they were so used, or rather abused. 2. Why are your Visits
stinted to such a time more then another? It profits not the defunct, and it
hurts the person you come unto; a multitude not being sit for comforting or
instructing; and yet it cannot be called a mere civil visit, being trysted with
such an occasion; but certainly it suiteth not, nor is it a Christian carriage
toward the Dead, and after the Burial of the Dead, to spend time together in
such a way as is commonly used: Beside, it is superstitious, when a thing
without reason is astricted to such a time or occasion, as giving and receiving
of gifts on New-years-day, too too common amongst Christians, though a
Heathenish custom; which day, as Gratian observes, was dedicated to their
Devil-god Janus: He asserts like wise, that such Christians, as in his time did
observe it, were Excommunicated; and Alchuinus, with others, write that the
whole Catholic Church appointed once a solemn public Fast to be kept on a
New-years-Day, to bewail those Heathenish Interludes, Sports, and lewd
Idolatrous practices that had been used on it. 6. When some weight is laid on
the number of words, or set repetitions of Prayers, Ave Maria's, or Pater
Nosters, or on the reading so many Chapters, or saying so many Prayers. 7. When
any take a word of Scripture at the opening of the Bible, or by a thought
suggested, as more befitting their condition because of that, without weighing
the Word it self; and lay more weight upon that word then upon another that
has the same authority and suitableness to their case, which is to make a
Weerd, or Fortune-book of the Book of God, for which end he never appointed it.
Thus also men are guilty, when they account Sacraments more valid, or lay more
weight on them, because dispensed by some Ministers, then when dispensed by
others, though having the same warrant, or because of the difference of persons
that partake therein with them;

However some of these things may be in themselves good, yet they are abused by
some one circumstance, as in unwarrantable timing them, or in laying that weigh
on them which is not warranted in the Word, which 1. Alters the way that God
has laid down. 2. Brings us to prefer one circumstance to another, without
any warrant. 3* Makes a necessity where God has left us free, and so brings
us into Bondage.

3. We may go wrong in practicing lawful duties many ways, as to the manner of
performing them, when they are not so done as is required: As 1. When we do not
propose to our selves the right end we should have before us. 2. When they are
not done from a right inward Principle. 3. When they are done in Hypocrisy and
Formality, and rested on; all which may go along with men in all Duties and
Ordinances; and generally all our shert-comings in the right manner of
commanded duties, strikes against this Command.

Fourthly, We may also consider the breach of this Command, by taking a view of
what is opposite to every thing required; and so want of Reverence in Worship*
want of Zeal against error of false worship, not streatching our selves in all
lawful endeavors to entertain and maintain the true worship of God, are here
forbidden; so likewise the putting in, and keeping in unworthy Ministers; the
traducing* holding out, and putting out of Faithful Men; the withdrawing and
Sequestring their maintenance from them; the diminishing of it, or straitning
them in it. Horrid sins, though little thought of, and lightly looked on by
Men, drawing no less deep before God then obstructing the free course of the
Gospel, breaking up the treaty of peace betwixt God and Sinners, carried on by
Faithful Ministers, as the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ; and saying on the
matter that he shall not see of the fruit of the travel of his soul in the
salvation of the souls of men to his satisfaction, so far as they can impede it
by outing and discountenancing his Ministers, the instruments made use of by
him for bringing about that last warrantably; and thus also, all Sacrilege,
Simony, and the like, comes in as breaches of this Command; and all Partiality
in Church proceedings, Tolleration of Errors, countenancing the speaders of
them, slighting of discipline, conversing unnecessarily and unwarrantable with
such as are Excommunicate, and all unwarrantable innovating in the external
worship of God; and when we are not aiming and endeavoring to have our
Children and Servants, and all under our charge, brought under subjection and
conformity to the Ordinances and Service of God as well as our selves.

But because this Command in an especial manner looks to public Ordinances,
let us see a little more particularly how it is broken in these: 1. In respect
of Preaching and Hearing. 2. Public Prayer. 3. Praising. 4. Sacraments. 5.
Fasts* and in all these, there are faults of three sorts. 1. Some going before
the performance of these duties. 2. Some following after. 3. Some going along
in the performance of them.

And again, 1. Some are guilty of the breach of this Command by neglecting
these duties. 2. Some are guilty in the wrong manner, of going about them.

And 1. Before hearing the Word men break this Command. 1. In not Praying for
the speaker. 2. In not Praying for themselves, in reference to this end, that
they may profit by the Word* 3. In not setting themselves to be in a spiritual
composed frame for such a work. 4. In not watchfully preventing what may divert
them or distract them, or straiten their minds when they come to hear, not
ordering their other affairs, so as they may not be a hinderance to them in
meeting with the blessing of the Gospel. 5. In not aiming to have the right
esteem of the Word. 6. In not blessing God for it, or for any good received
before by it. 7. In not coming with hunger and thirst, as new born Babes,
having laid aside what may hinder its, being received with desire, 2 Pet. 2. 1,
2, 8. In not denying our own strength, as to the right discharge of that duty,
that so we may make use of Christ. 9. In not minding that when we are called to
hear, it is to tryst with God in his Ordinances* 10. In going to hear with
prejudice. 11. In coming without expectation of, and longing for the presence
of God, or of meeting with him. 12. In not coming from respect to the honor of
God; nor out of Conscience, but from custom, and for the fashion.

Secondly, Men sin against this Command, when they are come to hear, and while
they are about this duty of hearing: 1. In not looking to God, or not receiving
the Word as Gods Word, but as Man's. 2. In extravaging and wandering in their
minds and thoughts. Ezekiel. 33. 31. 3. In sleeping when they should hear. 4. In
letting the Word slip out of their mind, and not retaining and laying up what
they hea^. 5. In not yielding their ears and memories, or yielding only their
ears and memories, but not casting open their hearts to the Word, to let it
sink down in them. 6. When though it be heard, yet it is not understood, Matthew.
13. 13. 7. When though understood, it is soon forgotten. 8. When there is not a
peculiar trembling and fear in our waiting upon the Ordinances, Isai. 66. 2.
Eccles. 5. 1, 2. and Malach. 2. 5. There is a special fear which we ought to
have before his Name. 9. When there is not Faith mixed with hearing, giving
credit to the Word, it must be a great fault not to believe Gods Word when we
hear it, Hebr. 4. 1, 2. 10. When we fret and canker at the reproofs of the
Word. 11. When we needlessly stumble at any expression, especially when we
carry so lightly as to laugh at what is spoken, to the prejudice of the
Ordinances. 12. When we are more for knowing then for doing, more for
informing the mind, then for reforming the heart and life. 13. When there is
carping at the Word, or censuring of it rather then our selves. 14. When we
make no application of it to our selves, and try not whether we have such a
fault, or if we perform such a duty, etc. 15. When we are not present, as
before God, to hear, as Cornelius was, Acts 10. 33. 16. When we itch after
novelty of expressions, or words, or things, rather then thirst after the
sincere Milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby. 17. When these novelties
are more entertained and laid weight on then known duties or truths. 18. When
the Word is heard with respect of persons, and the same truth, or expression,
or Scripture cited by one, is not so respected and received, as when spoken by
another, contrary to James 2. verse. 9. 19. When there are vain looks as well as
idle thoughts. 20. When there is a wanton, light, unreverent carriage. 21. When
there is immodest and strange Apparel unbecoming that Ordinance. 22. When there
is speaking or talking, out of the case of necessity, in time of Sermon, though
it were by way of Prayer, it is sinful, except it were Ejaculatory in reference
to what is at present spoken. 23. When there is reading of something, (even
though Scripture) unseasonably. 24. When there is insisting on good thoughts,
that tend to divert from hearing. 25. When men are observing Vanities in time
of hearing, such as the Apparel that others have on, or the painting that is on
the House, or the cuplings of the roof, or such like. 26. When there is not an
intermixing of Ejaculatory Prayer for our selves and others, and the Speaker,
that God would help him, and them, and us, to keep such a Word to the time when
we may have need of it; and when God is not blessed when a word is rightly
spoken. 27. When there is any quenching of convictions, or the motions, or
stirrings of affection wakened up by the Word. ^8. When thero is diverting to
a doting love of the Speaker, or the thing as spoken by such a Speaker; or the
manner of expression, and a delighting in these, more then in God, or a
respecting of Him or our own profiting. 29. When we do not look upon, and make
use of the Preached Word as a means to con ert, but only as a mean to
confirm. 30. When we do not make use of Promises offe^ed in Preaching, and
directed by God to us by an Authorized Ambassador, and do not so lay weight on
them as from him. 31. When we reject the many sweet offers of the Gospel, and
come not to the Marriage of the Kings Son. 32. When we do grieve Gods Spirit
who presses it upon us. 33. When we tread under-foot Christ's Blood by our
little esteem of it. 34. When we give no credit to, nor lay do weight upon
threatenings. 35. When we have not the Faith of Gods Providence, or of the
Judgment to come, 36. When there is not an accepting of Christ. 37. When there
is not employing of him. 38. When there is not reverence in removing from our
hearing of the word.

After hearing also, there are many ways whereby we are guilty of the breach
of this Command. 1. Forgetting what we have heard. 2. Letting the heart
unnecessarily look back again to other objects, and follow other thoughts, and
not meditating on what has been heard. 3. Not comparing what we have heard
with the Scriptures. 4. Not following the Word with prayer for the watering of
it* 5. Needless falling to other discourses, immediately after the hearing af
the Word. 6. Casting it all aside as to practice* Ps. 50. verse 6. to 23. 7
Fretting at some things that have been spoken. 8. Spreading Censures: Or 9.
Commendations of the thing Preached, or of the instruments that Preached, as if
that were all. 10. No^ following the Word with self-searching Prayer, and
fruits suitable, endeavoring to practice what is required. 11. Not trembling
at its threatenings, nor forbearing what was thereby discharged. 12. Not helping
others to make use of it, 13. No^ repenting of faults committed in the time of
hearing. 14. Little delight in remembering of it. 15. Finding out shifts to put
by its directions or challenges. 16. Applying them to others rather then to our
selves. 17. Mis construing the Ministers end in pressing of them. 18.
Mis-interpreting his words. 19. Mis-reporting or mis-representing them. 20. Not
being troubled for fruitlesness in hearing* without any use, but being as a
stone without sense or feeling. 21. Leaning o^ hearing, as if having been in
the Church were a piece of holiness, though no fruit follow on it. 22. Profane
abusing words of Scripture, or phrases used in preaching* in men's common
discourse; much more when they are mixed in wanton and profane sports* or jests
and gybes.

All these ways men may sin, when they come to hear the Word; they sin also by
absence when they come not, neglecting the opportunities of the Gospel; there
are also diverse sins which men are often guilty of in reference to hearing,
even on week days: As 1. Little love to the Word, or delight in the
opportunities of it on such days. 2. Too much love to some other things that
procures luke-warmness in hearing. 3. Contemning occasions of hearing the Word
on such days. 4. Improvidently bringing on a necessity on our selves that we
cannot hear. 5. Caring little to have a Ministry, whereby we may be instructed
at all times, and therefore we want such occasions. 6. Setting our selves, and
using our wits to discourage the Ministers we have* 7. Not being weighted on,
with our absence from weekdayes Sermons. 8. Mocking at them who are present. 9.
Dis-respecting the Ordinance for some worldly or personal respects, preferring
any small trifle thereto, etc.

2. Let us instance the breach of this Command in public prayer, which is a
part of worship, which very nearly concerns the glory of God; and certainly
when it is wronged through the unsuitable, and nor right discharging of this
duty, this Command is in a special way broken.

We shall not here look to every thing, but especially to what concerns
public Prayer, indeed we fail also in secret Prayer, and in giving Thanks both
alone and in our Families. 1. By contempt of this excellent Ordinance, many
slight Prayer in secret and in their Families, Jer. 10. ult. which is a clear
breach of this Command as well as neglecting it in public, when men do not
countenance Sermon or Prayer, though at the same time walking Idly in the
Street or in the Fields. 2. By casting up of Prayer to others, reproaching it,
calling it Hypocrisy, and those who use it Hypocrites. 3. By mocking the
Spirits work in Prayer.

1. Before we come to Prayer, we sin. 1, By not watching to keep the heart in a
frame for Praying always. 2. By not watching over every opportunity that we may
have for Prayer, whereby many occasions are lost. 3. In not longing for
opportunities of Prayer. 4. In not stirring up our selves to seriousness when
we are about to Pray. 5. In letting the heart run loose when we are about other
things, which indisposeth for Prayer. 6. In having a selfy particular end
before us in our Prayers. 7. In our little respecting God for strength and
fitness, and little looking to him for his Spirit to our selves, or these who
are to go before us in this duty of Prayer. 8. In our little examining our
selves that we may know what to Pray for, and what distinctly to confess. 9. In
our not meditating on what we are to say, that we may as to the matter of our
Prayers speak in Faith. 10. In aiming more to find and exercise gifts, then to
have grace acting in us. 11, In our rushing rashly on such a weighty and
spiritual duty.

Secondly, In Prayer; and 1. On the Speakers part there are diverse ways whereby
this Command is broken: As 1. By rashness and sencelesness, not exercising the
spirit, but the mouth, telling over our Prayers as a Tale without life. 2.
Praying in our own strength, without looking after the influence of the Spirit.
3. Not drawing near to God by Faith in Christ, but leaning too much on our
Prayers, from a secret false opinion of prevailing more with many words well
put together, then by exercising Faith on Christ, and resting on Him, as if God
were persuaded with words. 4. Inadvertant Praying, uttering unadvised Petitions
and expressions without understanding. 5. Not praying humbly and with soul
abasement: Nor 6. Singly to please God, but men, seeking expressions that are
pleasant rather then sensible. 7. Saying many things we think not, not being
touched with the weight of sin when we confess it, nor with the desire of
holiness when we mention it: counterfeiting sometimes liberty and boldness,
sometimes restraints and complaints more then is real. 8. Limiting God in
particular suits. 9. Cold in what is of greatest concernment. 10. Want of
reverence and holy fear. 11. Want of a right impression of a present God. 12.
Not praying for others, and little respecting the condition of those we pray
with; or what we do of this kind, is either but cold, and for the fashion; or
if there be more apparent zeal and seriousness for others, it would be adverted
that it be not upon design to flatter and please them rather then to obtain
spiritual blessings to them. 13. Desiring things for satisfying our selves more
then for Gods honor. 14 Breaking off before we come to liveliness and liberty,
having begun lazily and without life. 15. Not insisting to wrestle with God
when under Bands. 16 Precipitating with the words before the heart ponder them,
or the affection be warmed. 17. Posting through it, as duty, only for the
fashion, without respect to God, or love to the exercise, or driving at any
profit by it. 18. Wearying and not delighting in it. 19. Not aiming at Gods
presence or sensible manifestations in it, or at a Hearing in that which we
pray for. 20. Being more desirous of Liberty in public then in private. 21.
Fretting when we are put or kept under Bonds. 22. Growing vain and light when
it goes well with us, and turning carnal and unwatchful when we get liberty.
23. Impertinent use-making of Scripture-words, either ignorantly or vainly. 24.
A secret expectation of something for our Prayer, and so resting upon the work
done, as if there were merit in it. 25. Using expressions not easily
understood. 26. Using undecent gestures, and scurrile expressions. 27. Not
observing Gods dispensation to us, nor his dealing with our souls in the time
of Prayer, that we may conform our suits accordingly, as we find many of the
Saints have done, who end in Songs after they had begun sadly. 28. Not praying
with fervency for Christ's Kingdom, and for Jews and Gentiles. 29. Exercising
gifts rather then grace, when we pray. These are Sins upon the Speakers part.

Next, ye should consider the sins of them that join: And beside, what is
general and common in the duty of praying, we fail often in joining. And 1. In
this, that many think, When another prays they need not pray, but let the
Speaker be doing alone. 2. When we observe not what is spoken, that we may go
along in what he prays for, and be upon our watch that we may join, and
that we may do it in judgment. 3. The mind waving or wavering, and we hearing,
but not praying. 4. Censuring the words or gestures of the Speaker. 5. Fixing
our eyes or minds on some other things, and giving way to other thoughts that
may divert from joining. 6. Sleeping in time of Prayer. 7. Confusedness in that
exercise, and not distinctly joining with what agrees to our selves and our
own case, nor with what agrees to others joining with it for them. 8. More
cold and indifferent in what concerns others, then in what concerns our
selves. 9. More careless of being heard and answered when we speak not, as if
we were less concerned, thinking it enough to be present, although in our heart
we join not; and not being affected with the prayer of another, nor acting
Faith in it, we soon weary when others pray. 10. Not being edified by the
praying of another, nor taking up our sins in his Confessions, nor our duty in
his Petitions. 11. Much Hypocrisy in such duties, while we seem to be joining,
but are doing nothing. 12. Not endeavoring to have affections, suitable to
what is spoken, stirred up in us. 13. Not praying that the Speaker may be
suitably guided and helped in bringing forth Petitions that may answer our
wants. 14. More indifferent that another who speaks as mouth for the rest,
want liberty, then when we are put to speak our selves, although it be Gods
Ordinance. 15. Not rightly touched with any expression we cannot join with, but
rather stumbling at it. 16. Our being ignorant of the meaning of many
expressions through our own fault, so that we cannot join in them. 17.
Muttering words of our own, and not joining with what is said. 18.
Indistinctness in consenting or saying Amen at the close.

Thirdly. After Prayer both Speaker and Joyners fail. 1. That they watch not
over their hearts, but soon return to other things, as if then they might take
liberty. 2. Not waiting for an answer, nor observing whether Prayers be
answered or not. 3. Not being thankful for Answers when they come: Nor 4.
Entreating and pressing for an answer if it be delayed. 5. Not reflecting on
our failings, whether in speaking or joining. 6. Not remembering what we have
uttered in Prayer, but presently returning to a carriage that is very unlike
those things we have been speaking before Him. 7. Not keeping up a frame for
new opportunities of Prayer. 8. Not pressing after a constant walk with God
betwixt occasions of Prayer. 9. Resting on Prayer after we have done, and
thinking something of it if we seem to have been helped to Pray 10. Carnally
heartless and displeased, if it has been otherwise. 11. Not being humbled for
the sinfulness and defects of our Prayers. 12. Not having recourse by Faith to
the Blood of sprinkling for pardon of these sinful defects.

We are to consider how men break this Command in Praise and Thanksgiving: And
here there is failing, in general. 1. In the utter neglect of this necessary
duty; alace, what of that duty do we in secret, and yet it is singularly for
Gods honor, and as clear a duty as Prayer. 2. In mocking praise often, by
profaning Psalms for our carnal mirth. 3. In neglecting and slighting of it,
though not altogether, yet by unfrequent going about it. 4. In accounting it to
be almost no duty at all, and in being but little challenged for slighting of
it, or for irreverent using of it.

Secondly. We sin before we go about this duty: 1. In not preparing for it. 2.
In not praying for the Spirit, to fit and enable us to Praise, 1 Cor. 14. 15.
and for a fixed heart for that work, Psalm 108. 1. 3. In our not aiming at a
spiritual disposition for such a spiritual duty. 4. In our not endeavoring for
a right impression of the Majesty of God. And 5. For clearness of our interest
in him: And 6, For an impression of the excellency of his way, and meaning of
his Word; all which are exceeding necessary unto the right performance of this
duty, and without them we cannot Praise suitably.

Thirdly. We are guilty of many faults in the time of praising. 1. Doing it
without respect to Gods glory, and for the fashion only. 2. Hypocrisy, not
praising him with the whole heart, performing it only with the lips, when the
heart is away. 3. Ignorance, when we want understanding of the words we
express. 4. No suitable impression of Gods greatness and goodness upon our
hearts when we praise. 5. Not aiming at Communion with God in this duty, as
desiring, minding, and hoping to praise him for ever. 6. Not being taken up
with Spiritual and Heavenly delight in him, and in the work of his praise, 7.
Lightness, laughing, or mainly affecting of, and carnally doting upon, some
tone or voice more then being suitably affected with the matter, and making
melody in the heart to the Lord. 8. Forgetting what we do sing, and not knowing
or considering what it is we sing, the heart not being present nor fixed. 9.
Not being constrained by love to praise, but some custom or natural Conscience
constraining us to it. 10. Not offering up our praises in and through Christ
Jesus, Heb. 13. v. 15. 11. Soon satisfied in our praising, as if we were little
troubled to be fitted for it, and because little of our selves lies in it, we
are the less careful how we discharge it, but stint and limit our selves to
some certain customary matter which puts us to few prayers before, and makes
but few challenges after. 12. Not intermixing ejaculatory prayers in our
praisings. 13. Much Hypocrisy when we sing the cases of others, or their
thoughts and estimation of God, and study not to be something-like their frame
and exercise. 14. Not framing our affections in praising to the subject of our
praise; whether it be some sad case or some cheerful condition, or some
Historical or Prophetical subject; and when imprecations are a part of the
Song, we soon fall off, or praise one and the same way in all. 15. Not serious
in blessing God for former mercies to his Servants, if it be not so well with
us in the mean time, nor cheerfully acknowledging his former deliverances of
his Church and people in which we have not personally shared. 16. Not being
affected with his keeping of us free of many sad cases we sing, and others have
been in, nor blessing him for delivering them. 17. Not letting the Word of the
Lord which we sing, sink down in us for engaging our hearts to, and chearing
our spirits in good. 18. Not assenting to, and giving him glory in the
acknowledgement of the justness of his severest threatenings, and the most
fearful Scripture-Imprecations. 19. Not rightly observing those things that are
the subject matter of Scripture Songs, so as to put a difference between some
things we are to tremble and scare at, such as the falls of the Saints; and
other things which we are to imitate and follow for our edification. 20.
Gadding in idle looks, so that some scarce look on their books (although they
can read) that they may the better have the sense of what they sing. 21. Not
putting a difference betwixt praying a Petition that is in a Psalm, and singing
of it, which should have a sweetness with it that may encourage us to pray for,
and expect what others before us have obtained* 22. Wanting such considerations
about the matter sung, when it suits not our present case, as may suitably
affect us, and fit us to glorify God in that duty: as when we sing of the
eminent holiness of some of the Saints, we are to bless him that ever any was
so holy, whatever be our sinfulness; and that we have hope of pardon, though
under many failings, and much unlikeliness to that case we sing. 23. Not
singing with the voice at all, although the tongue be given us as our Glory,
that we may therewith thus glorify God.

Fourthly. After we have been about this duty of praise, we sin. 1. By falling
immediately into a carnal frame. 2. Not looking back or examining when we have
done, how we carried it in praising God. 3. Few challenges for our many
failings in praise. 4. Little Repentance for those failings. 5. Not keeping the
heart right for a new opportunity of praise. 6. Not keeping a record of his
mercies in our memories, and upon our hearts to engage us to praise him. 7. Not
walking in the exercise of love, which would sweetly constrain us to this duty,
and make us delight in it.

These are but a few of the many Iniquities that are to be found in our holy
things, Exodus* 28. 38. Its good we have a High Priest to bear them: O, what if
all our sins were reckoned, how heinous would they be? and what a sum will they
come to, if our performances of holy duties have so many sins in them? and when
the sins of a Sabbath are counted, how many will they be? hundreds of diverse
sorts, in praying, hearing, and praising; and multiply these to every loose
thought, and every declining or wavering of the heart, now many times may they
be multiplied? Ah! how many unholy words do we let slip, and then consider all
the Sabbaths and Sermons, Prayers and Praises we have had, how many hundred
thousands will they amount to* It is sad that men should lie under all these
with few or no challenges, or without minding repentance, or thinking of the
necessity of employing the High Priest for doing them away; therefore we should
accept these challenges, and give Him employment who only can bear the Iniquity
of our holy things. If this bring not down self-Righteousness, and convince you
of the necessity of a Mediator, what will do it?

We shall proceed in the next place, to consider the sins that wait on
receiving the Sacraments, which as they were a special part of the Worship of
God under the Old Testament, so they are yet under the New; and our sins in
reference to them strike against this Command, as it prescribes and carveth
out our external Worship, and so much the rather should we consider this,
because there cannot be a more express Covenanting with God in giving and
receiving, proposing terms and accepting of them for closing the Covenant, then
is in the Sacraments.

Before we enter to speak of the faults we are here guilty of, we may in
general propose some things concerning the Sacraments: As 1. For what ends God
has appointed them, that so we may know what is to be expected in them. 2. How
they effectuate the ends, that we may know how we should go about them; and we
shall speak to these two jointly, because we cannot speak to the one, but we
must speak to the other.

But before we speak to these, some things are to be premitted: As 1. That God
has thought good always to add Sacraments to his Covenants; thus the Covenant
of Works had its Sacraments: Adam had the Tree of Life for a Sacrament to
confirm him in the Faith of that Covenant; so the Covenant of Grace in all its
administrations had its Sacraments also for confirmation thereof, as before
Christ's incarnation it had, Circumcision, the Passover, and diverse Sacrifices
effectual for that end; and the Fathers before Abraham had their Sacrifices for
Sacraments: and since his Incarnation, it has Baptism and the Lords Supper;
for as the Lord has for man's sake condescended to deal with him after the
manner of men, by Covenants and mutual Engagements, so he keeps the manner of
men in Swearing, Sealing, and confirming these Covenants for their
greater*consolation, who are within the same, Hebr* 6. 18.

Secondly. Although the nature of the Covenant alter the Sacrament, in respect
of our use making of it; yet, as all Covenants have some essentials in which
they agree, to wit, a Promise and a Restipulation; so all Sacraments have
something common, to wit, that they Signify, Seal, and Strengthen the
Covenanters in assurance of enjoying what is promised according to the terms of
the Covenant to which they are as Seals appended, the Tree of Life confirmed
the promise of Life to Adam upon condition of perfect Obedience; Circumcision
confirmed it to Abraham upon condition of Faith, Romans 4. 11.

Thirdly. The Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace before and after Christ,
differ in circumstantials, as the Covenant it self under the Old and New
Testament does; but in essentials they agree, for they seal one and the same
thing, and after one and the same manner.

Fourthly. There are some chief things common to all Sacraments of the Covenant
under one administration; As for example, Baptism and the Lords Supper, they
agree both in this that they seal the Covenant, and represent Christ and his
benefits, etc. yet in either of them there are some peculiar promises and
benefits especially looked unto: and also they have their peculiar manner of
sealing these things which are common to both; Believers are also confirmed in
the same things by the Word, but the Sacraments confirm them in another way,
more clearly, and sensibly, and proportionally to our weakness and necessity.

Fifthly. No Sacrament is of, and from it self valid, but its validity and
efficacy is from the Covenant and Promise, whereof it is a Sacrament; and so it
is a seal to none but to such as are in the Covenant, and keep the condition of
it, to them it seals the benefits promised, though absolutely and simply it
seal the truth of the conditional promises: and so it may be said conditionally
to Seal, to all the Members of the Church, the Truth of what is promised upon
such a condition; as for example, The Tree of Life sealed this Truth, that who
stood in perfect Obedience should have Life, but it did not seal to Adam, that
he should have Life* except upon condition of his perfect Obedience; the like
may be said of Circumcision, Baptism, etc.

Sixthly. Hence every Sacrament does suppose a Covenant, and the Receivers
entry into the Covenant, to which the Sacrament that he receives relates: so
that we come not to the Sacrament properly to enter into Covenant with God, but
first the Covenant is entered, and then the Seal is added, as Genes. 17. First,
God entered into Covenant with Abraham, and then the Seal of Circumcision is
added as a confirmation thereof.

Seventhly. No Sacrament gives any new right which the Receiver had not
before; only it confirms the right he had before; he has access to the
Sacraments upon the account of his external right.

Eighthly. Sacraments confirm still something that is future, and to come, they
being instituted for the confirmation of our Faith and Hope in those things, of
which we are most apt to doubt; as the Passover strengthened the Israelites
against the fear of being destroyed; the Tree of Life confirmed what was
promised to Adam and not performed; and so all Sacraments help us to believe
the making good of some promise not performed, for they serve as the Oath and
Seal; and indeed, when we Preach the Gospel, we offer a sealed Covenant, and a
sworn Covenant.

These things being promised, we come to speak to the things proposed; and we
say, The Sacraments of the New Testament (of which only we speak purposely)
have in Gods appointment and our use, these three ends especially;

The 1. is, to represent clearly the nature of the Covenant, and the things
promised therein, as, the washing away of sin, Christ himself* his death and
benefits, and the way how we come to the application of all these, to wit, by
Faith freely, putting on Jesus Christ for taking away guilt, and strengthening
us to an holy walk; in all these the Sacraments (that is, the signs and word of
institution added) do fully and clearly, 1. To the Ears: 2. To the Eyes: 3. To
our other senses of feeling, etc. not only hold forth what is offered, but our
way of closing with and accepting of that Offer; as if God, who by Preaching
lets us hear him speak (inviting us to be reconciled to him) were in the
Sacraments, letting us see him tryst and close that bargain with us by his
Ambassadors; in which respect, the Sacrament may be called the Symbol and Token
of the Covenant, as it is, Genesis 17. and this way the Sacraments have a teaching
use to bring to our remembrance Christ, his sufferings and benefits, as well as
our estate, what it was without him, and before our closing with him; all this
by the word and elements with the actions concurring, is represented to us, as
if it were acted before our eyes, for making the way of the Gospel the more
clear to our judgments and memories, who either senselesly take it up, or
sluggishly forget these spiritual things; the Lord, who sometimes makes use of
Parables and figurative expressions or similitudes, to set forth spiritual
things to make them take with us the more, has chosen this way to make use of
external signs, and actions for the same ends also.

2. The second end of Sacraments is to seal and confirm Gods mind and revealed
will to man, and to put him out of question of the truth of his promises, that
so he may have a further prop to his Faith, and may draw more strong
consolation from the promises of the Covenant upon this ground. In this respect
they are called Seals (Romans 4. 11.) of the Righteousness by Faith; that is, not
the Righteousness of Abraham's Faith, but of his obtaining Righteousness by it,
and not by works; that is, They are seals of that Covenant which offers and
promises Righteousness to such as believe: ^o was the Tree of Life a
confirmation to Adam of the promise of Life; so was Circumcision to Abraham a
Seal and Confirmation of the promises of the Gospel, as Gods Oath was, Hebr. 6.
18. And so are the Sacraments to us,

This Confirmation may be three ways looked on: 1. As that which confirms
the Proposition, 2. The Assumption, 3. The Conclusion of a practical Syllogism,
whereby the Believer concludes from the Gospel that he shall be saved.

The Proposition is this, He that believes shall be saved; this by the
Sacrament is simply confirmed as a truth, that one may lean unto: Then the
Believers Conscience in the Faith of that subsumeth, I will then take me by
Faith to Christ: seeing that is a sure truth, I will rest on him and hold me
there; or more clearly, I do believe in him.

Now 2. This assumption that I, or such a man has Faith, is not confirmed
simply by the Seal, for the Sacrament is to be externally applied by men, who
can say no more, but, They charitably judge such a one to have Faith; yet it
may be said to be so far confirmed as one whose Faith doubts may by this be
encouraged to rest on Christ, and quiet himself on him; Thus Faith is confirmed
while it is helped to Assume, though the man be not clear that he has assumed;
as also one having according to Gods command, cast himself on Christ, and
according to his institution, taken the Seal, I say such a man may conclude
from the Seal, as well as from the Promise that he is accepted, even as one
having prayed may conclude he has been heard, having done it according to Gods
will in the name of Christ.

Thirdly, When the Conclusion is drawn, Therefore I shall be saved, the
Sacrament does not confirm that simply to us, more then it did to Adam (who
afterward brake the Covenant of Works* and so attained not the thing Promised)
but it seals it conditionally. If thou Believe, thou shall be saved, and so
the Assumption must be made out by the search of the conscience before the
conclusion receive any confirmation by the Sacrament; yet by strengthening the
major proposition* Such as Believe shall be saved; it strengthens the
Conclusion also: for if that were not true, my having Faith, or flying to
Christ were no great comfort; and so consequently it has influence on the
Believers comfort in the Conclusion, as Gods Oath and Seal did confirm the
Promise made to Abraham, and also strengthened his Faith in believing it should
be made out to him, Rom 4. 11.

Again, it is to be considered that the Sacrament seals particularly, not
only as it says* All that Believe shall be saved, but also as it says, Thou*
if thou will Believe, shall be saved; and the seal is so appended to that
conditional Offer, that the Covenant stands not only sure in general to all
Believers, but to Me particularly upon my closing with it, as if God were
particularly singling me out to make the offer unto me, and to take my
engagement, and to put the seal in my hand, by which Faith is more particularly
helped and strengthened then by the Word alone; there is great use therefore of
the Sacraments* in that thereby we get Faith quieted in the believing of this,
that God will lay-by his Controversy, and keep his Covenant, and make
forthcoming his Promises to those who fly for refuge to Jesus Christ,
according to his Oath and Seal: Thus he seals the Major Simply, the Minor
Conditionally, but Particularly; Or we may suppose God speaking to us from the
Covenant thus, He to whom I offer Christ, he may receive Him; and all that
believe, and receive the Offer, shall obtain the Blessing offered: But I offer
Christ to thee: therefore thou may and should receive him; and if thou
accept the Offer, hou shall obtain the Blessing offered, and shall ^e saved:
Thus the Major and Minor are simply sealed, but the Conclusion conditionally:
Or the Sacrament seals the Offer simply; but the Promise as it is applied to
such a particular Person Conditionally, if he receive the Offer* so that none
needs to question Gods Offer, nor Christ's Performance on our Acceptance. And
thus the Sacraments may be called Testimonies, of Gods Grace to us, because
particularly they seal that Offer of his Grace unto us, namely Christ, and
Salvation by him, and his being content to give Him upon condition of our
believing.

The Third end and use of the Sacraments; is, to exhibit and apply Christ or
his Benefits to Believers; hence in the Sacraments we put on Christ, and ea^
him: which is not done, by any Physical Union of Christ, or his Benefits with
the Signs; but as in the Word, Christ communicates himself when the Spirit
goes along with the Promises, and Hearers bring not only their Ears, but their
Hearts and Faith to that Ordinance: So here by the Sacraments Christ is
Communicated to us, when we come not only with Ears, Eyes, T^st, etc. but with
Faith exercised on Christ in the Sacrament with respect to his Institution* and
he comes by his Spirit with the Elements, and Word, whereby the Union with
Christ is so much the more near and sensible, as it has upon the one side so
many and great External helps in the means appointed by God; and on the other
side a proportional Blessing promised to go along with his Ordinance by the
Operation of his Spirit. Hence it is that all this Communion is spiritual,
conferred by the Spirit, and received by Faith; yet it is most real, and having
a real Ground and Cause, and real Effects following, not by virtue of the
Sacraments in themselves, more then by the Word or Prayer considered in
themselves* but by the virtue of the promises being laid hold on by Faith. And
now Word and Sacraments being joined together, they concur the more effectually
for bringing forth those ends intended in the Covenant.

Fourthly. There is a fourth End which resulteth from these, and that is a
Believers Consolation, Hebr. 1. 6, 8. which by the strengthening of Faith, and
beholding of Christ in that Ordinance, and being confirmed in the hope of his
Coming again, etc. proves very sweet, and corroborateth the Soul so much the
more, (...) that therein he trysteth often with the Believer, and by it
Communicates himself to his Sense and Spiritual feeling.

Fifthly. The Sacraments hold forth a Mutual Engaging betwixt God and his
People; God holds out the Contract, the Covenant and Offer* We by our
partaking do declare our acceptance of that Offer on those Terms, and engage
accordingly, that we shall make use of that righteousness therein held forth
for our Justification, and of that Wisdom and strength therein offered for our
direction and Sanctification: In this respect our taking of the Seal, is called
our Covenanting* And Genes. 17. he was to be punished that wanted the Seal of
Gods Covenant* Thus our accepting and receiving, looks to the Word, holding
forth the Terms, and God seals and confirms on these Terms the particular
Promises of righteousness and strength to the ends beforementioned, that our
Faith may be strengthened in making use of them.

These are the main and principal ends of the Sacraments, though they serve
also for outward distinguishing of Gods People from all other societies and
persons.

In sum, the Word offers Christ and his benefits, the Hearer accepts him,
on the Terms on which he is offered, and consents; both these are supposed to
precede the Sacraments, though (as we may see in the Jailer, Acts 16. and
others) it may be but for a very short time; yet in the order of Nature at
least, they are Prior, and then come the Sacraments, which have in them, 1. a
clear view of the bargain, that we may close distinctly, and know what we
attain, 2. A solemn Confirmation on Gods side of the Covenant, and the
particular offer he therein makes. 3. A furthering of us in part, and helping
us to believe, and a conferring of something offered. 4. A comforting of those
upon whom the Blessings are conferred. 5. The Receivers solemn and public
engaging to God, that he shall observe and make use of all these; the Fifth may
be looked upon, as the Second in Order.

We may come now to consider the Faults we are guilty of in reference to the
Sacraments. And first in general, then more particularly in reference to
Baptism and the Lords Supper: We shall not speak to those faults common to
Popists and others, which are more Doctrinal, such as Errors about the persons
who may Administer them, as that Women may Administer Baptism, etc. But we
shall speak to those that are incident to us in our practice.

And first in general we fail, either when too much weight is laid on them, or
when too little; First, when too much, as 1. When there is an absolute
necessity supposed to be of them, in order to salvation. 2. When they are
thought to confer Grace of themselves, by the very partaking of the outward
Elements, although without Faith. 3. When they are rested on in the outward
Receiving; as if that made us some way acceptable to God. 4. When there is a
superstitious blind preferring of them to, and with, the prejudice of all other
Ordinances, so that one will neglect Preaching and Prayer long, but must have
Baptism and the Communion. 5. When there is a preferring of the outward
Ordinance to Christ and the thing signified; that is, when men seek more to
have the Baptism of Water then the Baptism of the Spirit, and the External
Communion more, then the inward; in which any Heaven that is to be found in the
Ordinances, lies; and when men are more commoved for wanting the Sacrament
once, then for wanting Christ often and long. 6. Coming unto, and going from,
the External Ordinances neglecting him and without dependence upon him who
gives the blessing, and thinking that then all is well enough, seeing they
were present at the Ordinance. 7. Going far off for the partaking of a
Sacrament to the prejudice of necessary Moral Duties called for at that time.
8. Placeing more in them then in works of Mercy and Charity, or doting on
them, to the neglect of those. 9. When they are accounted so holy as if they
might not be given, where Christ allows them to be given; or as if that
wronged them, when they are not Administrated in some consecrate place, as if
one place were now under the Gospel more holy then another. 10. Adding to
Christ's Institution, in the way of Administration, as if what he has
appointed, because it is common and ordinary, were base, and too low for them.

Again, they get too little esteem* 1, When people use them as bare and empty
signs, without respect to their due ends. 2. When there is not that Reverence
given to God in them as ought to be according to his command, when we are about
so holy and so solemn pieces of Worship. 3. When men carnally and without
preparation, and observation, can hazard on them as common things. 4. When Gods
Grace and Goodness in condescending in them to us, is not admired and blessed.
5. When they are not pondered and studied, that we may know them. 6* Want of
delight in them. 7. Carelessness of them whether we have them or want them. 8.
Corrupting the Lords Institution in our manner of going about them, either
adding to it, or diminishing from it or changing it, as if men might do so. 9.
Little zeal to keep them pure. 10. Neglecting the occasions of them when we may
have them with some little pains. 11. Accounting them better when Administrated
by one Minister, then when by another; or esteeming little of them, because
dispensed by some men, (though lawful Ministers) as if men added any worth to
the Ordinance of God. 12. Never actually laying weight on any of them, or
drawing comfort from them, or less then should have been done. 13. Not wishing
and praying that others may have good of them. 14. Not fearing the wronging of
them by multitudes who partake of them, and not endeavoring to have abuses of
that kind helped, but making them common to all indifferently and
promiscuously. 15. When Folk fear not the breaking of their engagements in
them. 16. When men hang the Fruit of them on the Administerers intention, or on
the grace of them that are Joynt-partakers with them. 17. When there is little
Zeal against the Errors that wrong them, as when they are denied by
Anabaptists, and when they are corrupted, as in the Mass.

To come particularly to Baptism; we may consider, 1. The sins of those who
seek it for their Children. 2. The sins of these who Administer it. 3. The sins
of on-lookers, especially those who are called to be Witnesses. 4. The sins of
those who are baptized.

The Parents or Presenters of Children to Baptism fail before, in the time, and
after the Administration of this Ordinance; First, before, 1. By not serious
minding that which is to be done. 2. Not considering the Child's condition as
needing Christ in that Ordinance. Nor 3. The end of that Ordinance. 4.
Miskenning Christ, and not going first to him, for conferring the things and
blessings signified. 5. Not praying for the Child, for the Minister, and for a
Blessing on the Ordinance. 6. Not blessing God, that there is a Covenant of
Grace that takes in our Children; not offering them to be engaged and received
in it. 7. Not minding the most simple and edifying way of going about it, but
walking by other Rules. 8. Needless delaying of it for carnal ends. 9. Being
more desirous of the Sign, then of the Thing signified.

Secondly. When we come to it, we sin. First, Not seeking to have our own
Covenant with God (by which we have this privilege of bringing our Children to
Baptism.) renewed and made sure. 2. Not considering by what right we claim it
to our Children. 3. Not repenting of our own Breaches of Covenant, no^
wondering that God keeps with us, who have often broken to him. 4. Not coming
with the exercise of fear and reverence. 5. Waiting on it oft-times without
attention or minding our Duty in what is spoken* 6. Promising for the fashion
when we engage for the Childrens Education, and wthout either Judgment or
Resolute purpose to perform. 7. Being ignorant of what is said or done. 8. Not
concurring in Prayer for the blessing. 9. Not undertaking in Christ's strength
to perform the Duties called for.

Thirdly. After the Administration of Baptism, we fail. First, In forgetting
all our engagements* 2. In growing careless to maintain any suitable frame, and
falling carnally in our Mirth on such occasions. 3. Not being much in Prayer
for the Children, nor insisting or continuing in Prayer for the blessing. 4.
Not being Faithful according to our engagements, in Educating them. 1. In
knowledge, that they may be so trained up as to know what God is. 2. In the
fear of God, pressing it upon them by frequent Exhortations. 3. In giving them
good Example. 4. In giving them seasonable Correction (but rather sparing them
though to their hurt) when there is cause of Correction. 5. Being also
unfaithful in not seriously minding them of their engagements by Baptism. And
6. Much more by giving them evil Example. 7. Conniving at their faults. 8.
Advising them to what is sinful, or sending them where they may meet with
snares, or suffering them to go there. 9. Providing for them the things of this
Life, without respect to that Life which is to come. 10. Not enabling our
selves that we may discharge our Duty to them. 11. Not insisting to press those
things upon them, that concern their Souls always; thinking it is enough that
sometimes they be spoken to. 12. Never purposely stirred up and driven by that
Tie to see for their good. Nor 13. Repenting our many short comings. Nor 14.
Lamenting for what we see sinful in them, when they follow not faithful
advice. These are things that would carefully be looked unto, both by Fathers
and Mothers, and all such as engage for the Christian Education of the
Children, whom they present to that Ordinance.

Next in him that Administreth Baptism, there are oft-times diverse failings.
As 1. When it is customarily dispensed without respect to its end. 2. When in
Prayer the Child's salvation is not really and seriously aimed at, but for the
fashion. 3. When it becomes a burden to dispense it. 4. When it is not thought
much of, that Christ admits such into his House, or himself to be a partaker
of such mercies, but be a Dispenser of them to others. 5. When he follows it
not privately with his Prayers for a Blessing; besides what failings may be in
unsuitable words, and humane Ceremonies, etc. And seeking himself in the words
that are spoken, rather then the Edification of the Hearers.

When we are Witnesses and On-lookers, we fail. 1. In wearying and fretting,
because we are detained a while. 2. Not setting our selves to be edified by
that we see done and hear spoken. 3. Not sympathising with the Child or its
Parents in Prayer. 4. Not being thankful to God for such a benefit and
Ordinance to such a Child's behoove. 5. Lightness of carriage, and in looking,
speaking, or thinking in the time, as if we were not present at such an
Ordinance of Christ's. 6. Not so seriously taken up in sympathising with other
Folks Children, because they are not our own. 7. Removing and withdrawing and
not staying to countenance it. 8. Not minding the Child when we are gone. 9.
Not helping them as we may to be answerable to that tie they come under in
Baptism. 10. Not admonishing them when we see Parents and Children walk
unanswerable, nor testifying against them, nor mourning for the dishonor God
gets by baptized Persons unsuitable carriage.

Fourthly. All of us that are baptized, fail wonderfully, less or more, First,
That we never (as we ought) reckon our selves obliged by that tie we come under
in Baptism. 2. That we neither are, nor seriously study to be, as we ought,
answerable to it. 3. That we are not thankful for it to God, who admitted us to
that Ordinance. 4. That we do not esteem it above all bare carnal Birthrights
how great soever 5. That we do not seek to have it cleared, in the extent of
it, as to the Privileges and Benefits thereby conferred on us and our
Children. 6. That we do not pursue after the Blessing therein covenanted to us.
7. That we do not endeavor the performance of the condition of believing and
trusting in Christ which is the condition of the Covenant of which Baptism is
the Seal. 8. That we do not lay weight on our Baptism for strengthening our
Faith both in spiritual and temporal Difficulties, as if it were no Seal of the
Covenant. 9. That we are often ignorant how to make use of it. 10 That we do
not account our selves wholly Gods, as being given away to Him in Baptism, but
live to our selves. 11. That we do not fight against our Lusts, Satan, and the
World, according to our baptism^^ Vow. 12. That we do not adorn our Christian
Profession with an Holy Life, 13. That we walk and war against Christ, instead
of fighting under his Banner. 14* That we do not aggravate our sins, as being
committed against this T^^. 15 That we are not patient under Sufferings, nor
penitent and humble under all sad Dispensations; notwithstanding that we are by
our Baptism bound to take up the Cross. 16. That we do not meditate on our
engagements nor repent for our Neglects. 17. That we do not aim and endeavor
to come up to the main ends of this Ordinance. Which are, 1. The evidencing out
Regeneration and i^grafting into Christ. 2. The giving up our selves to the
Father, Son, and Spirit. 3. S^icking by Christ on the most costly and dearest
terms. 4. Taking directions from him and walking in him. 5. Seeking the things
above, and not the things that are on Earth. 6. Mortification to Creatures, and
to be crucified with Christ, 7 The improving of this Tie, not only for
obliging us to these, but for strengthening us in Him to attain them, and to
comfort our selves in all Difficulties from this ground. These things are much
a missing: Alace, they are much a-missing: For we lamentably neglect to draw
all our Strength and Furniture under all tent^tions, and for all Duties from
Christ by virtue of this baptismal Obligation and Tie: We resort but seldom to
this Magazine and Store House; this precious Privilege is (Alace!) but very
little manured and improved by us.

We come next to speak of the sins we are usually guilty of in reference to the
Lords Supper, and they be of several sorts. 1. Some are Doctrinal when the
Institution is corrupted, as in Popery: These we will not now meddle with. 2.
Others are practical, and they are either in Ministers and Elders, who admit
and deba^, or in such as are admitted or debarred.

And First, we are to consider, that men may sin against this Ordinance, by not
Communicating. As 1. When they contemn and wilfully neglect it. 2. When they
are not frequent in it, but carelessly slight it, when conveniently it may be
had, 3. By not foreseeing and ordering our Affairs, so as we may not be
hindered, when an occasion of that Ordinance offers it self near to us. 4. By
incapacitating our selves to be admitted through ignorance or scandal, and by
negligence to remove these. 5. By fretting at our being debarred, or at these
who has a hand in it. 6. Not repenting of the causes which procures our being
debarred. 7. Not seeking to be humbled under such a weighty censure, and to get
the right use of it for the time to come. 8. Suspecting that it proceeds from
carnal ends. 9. Reporting amiss of those who do it. 10. Not praying for them
that partake in this Ordinance, wherever we hear of it in any place. 11.
Looking rather to the unfitness of some that are admitted, and the neglect of
duty in Office-bearers in debarring, then our own. 12. Not sympathizing with
them, and yet on that ground absenting our selves, to wit, for the faults of
others.

And here, by the way, we beseech you take these few words of Exhortation. 1.
Look on debarring of ignorant and scandalous persons from the Lords Table as
Christ's Ordinance. 2. Consider wherefore your selves are debarred, and as you
may be assured it is from no particular prejudice or dis-respect, so ye would
repent and be humbled for that which procures it. 3. Be making up what is
wanting for the time to come: your failing in any of these is a fault, and let
none think themselves the less bound to the study of holiness, because they are
kept from partaking of it: But the sin of some is; they shift it, because they
will not stir themselves up to a suitable frame for it, and yet they are not
suitably affected with the want of it.

Next, there are faults in them that are admitted to Communicate, and these
both in Hypocrites and true Believers respectively; and that 1. Before. 2* In
the time, and 3. After receiving the Lords Supper.

And first: Before receiving there are many failings: As 1. Ignorance of the
end and nature of this Ordinance. 2. Not studying to know it: Nor 3* To have
the heart rightly affected with it. 4. Not endeavoring to keep up a high
esteem, and holy reverence of the wonderful Love of God in giving of his Son,
and the Sons condescending Love in coming to dye for Sinners. 5. Not seeking to
have the Covenant clearly closed with by Faith, before it be sealed by the
Sacrament. 6. Not endeavoring to have all bygone quarrels removed, and our
Peace established. 7. Not searching our way, that we may be well acquainted
with our condition, so as we may have the distinct knowledge of it, when we
come. 8. Not carefully endeavoring a suitable frame of heart by Prayer,
Meditation and Reading. 9. Not praying for a blessing, either for him that
administreth, or for those who are to join with us, to prevent their sin. 10.
Not minding their instruction who are under our charge. 11. Not presently
renewing (if before closed with and consented to) our Covenant before our
partaking. 12. Not sequestring our hearts from other things for that end. 13.
Not fearing to miss the thing offered, and to contract guilt instead of getting
any good, 14. Not searching after the sins of former Communions and other sins,
and repenting of them. 15* What we aim at in these, not aiming at them in
Christ's strength. 16. Not aiming and endeavoring constantly to walk with God,
and keep commuuion with him in all duties, that we may have the more access to
communion with him in this Ordinance. 17. Not laying aside of rooted prejudices
and secret malice. Nor 18. Admonishing such whom we know to lie under any
offense of that kind, that they may repent and reform. 19. Unstayedness in our
aiming at communion with God in it, or coming to it more sel^ily then out of
due regard to the glory of God.

Secondly. In our going about this Ordinance, there are many faults that
usually concur: As 1, Our giving too little respect, or too much to it, as is
said before of the Sacraments in general. 2. Our not exercising Faith in the
present time, according to the Covenant and Christ's Institution. 3. Want of
Love to constrain us, and want of that Hunger and Thirst that should be after
Christ. 4. Want of that discerning of the Lords Body, which should be, so as,
1. To put a difference betwixt Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, and common
Bread and Wine in respect of the end. 2. To put a difference betwixt this
Ordinance, and Christ himself who is signified and exhibited by it. 3. To lay
in some respect a further weight on this then on the Word only, though it be
some way of that same nature. 4. To put a difference betwixt this Sacrament and
other Sacraments; and so discerning it, it is to conceive of it rightly. 1* In
respect of its use and end according to its Institutiou. 2. In respect of our
manner of use-making of it, not only by our senses or bodly Organs, but by
Faith and the faculties of the Soul, looking upon, and receiving Christ's Body
in that Ordinance, and feeding on it there as in the Word, and more clearly and
sensibly: for the Sacraments do not give us any new thing which the Word did
not offer and give before, but they give the same thing more clearly and
sensibly. 3. In respect of the blessing* not only waiting for a common blessing
for sustaining the Body by that Bread and Wine, but for a spiritual blessing to
be conferred by the spirit to the behoof of the soul. 4. Its so to discern it
as to improve it for obtaining real communion betwixt Christ and us, by a
spiritual feeding, as it were upon his own Body; so that when there is any
shortcoming in these, in so far the Lords Body is not discerned. 5. We sin in
going about this Ordinance, by want of Reverence, when we come without Holy
thoughts, and a Divine frame, and without Love ravishing the heart, which (...)
most suitable at such a time* much more do we sin when we come with carnal,
loose, or idle thoughts, or any unreverent gesture, or with light-like apparel,
or carriage in coming or sitting. 6. By want of Love to others, and sympathy
with such as are Strangers to Communion with Christ. 7. By not distinct closing
with Christ, or renewing our Covenant with him, or engaging of our selves to
him. 8. By stupidly, or senselesly taking the Elements without any affection,
and by being heartless in the work, and comfortless because we want sense. 9.
By not che^ring our selves by Faith, that we may obtain and win to sense, and
by pressing too little at sense or comfort. 10. By not improving this Ordinance
in reference to the general ends of a Sacrament, or the particular ends we
should aim at in this Sacrament: As 1. Fellowship with Christ himself. 2.
Communion in his Death and Sufferings. 3. The sense of these, and the comfort
of them. 4. The lively commemoration of Christ's Death and Sufferings, and of
the Love he had to us i^ all these; for the stirring up of our Love again to
him. 5. The strengthening of our selves in the way of Holiness, by strength
drawn from him by Faith. 6. Minding his glory, and the setting forth thereof,
with respect unto, and hope of his coming again. 7. Particular engaging of our
affections one to another. 8. Engaging our hearts by serious resolutions to
make for Suffering: Lastly, We ^i^ here, by not reflecting on our hearts in the
mean time, that we may know wh^^ they are doing* no^ putting*up Ejaculatory
Prayers to God in the time; receiving the S^cr^^ent with our hand, and yet not
receiving him in that mean by Faith (...) the heart, nor feeding on him, and
satisfying our selves with him really present in that mean: for he is to our
Faith really present there as well as in his Word.

3. After Communicating, there is a readiness to slip and fall into these
faults: 1. Irreverent and Carnal removing from the Table. 2. Forgetting what we
were doing, and falling immediately to loose words or thoughts. 3. Not
reflecting on our by past carriage, to see what we were doing, and what frame
we were in, and what we obtained. 4. Not repenting for what was wrong in every
piece of our way and carriage. 5. Not following on to obtain what we yet miss,
and not still waiting for the blessing, even after we are come away. 6. Not
being thankful if we have obtained any thing. 7. Fretting and fainting if we
have not gotten what we would have. 8. Or being indifferent and careless
whether we get or want. 9. Carnallyloose after Communions, ^s if we had no more
to do, 10. Vain, or puffed up, if we think we have attained any thing. 11.
Little or no keeping of Promise made to God, but continuing as before. 12.
Digressing on the commendation or censure of what was heard, or seen, rather
then making use of it for our profit. 13. Making that Ordinance an occasion of
contention, for some faults we conceive to have been about it, whereas it
should be ground of Union and Love. 14. Not entertaining tenderness, and a
frame that may keep us ready to communicate again. 15. Not meditating on what
we have been doing. 16. Nor longing again for the like occasion. 17. Not
helping others that did not come, or had not the occasion of coming to it. 18.
Conceitedness because we were admitted. 19. Despising others who might not be
admitted. 20. Mocking, or secretly snuffing at any who goes, or has gone about
it with more tenderness then we, or who endeavors to keep their Promises
better then we: This sin of Emulation and spiritual envy, at any who outruns us
in tenderness and proficiency (touched in these two last) is, as very natural
to us, so, most dangerous; it participates of cursed Cain; this sin is the
worst of all Malignity, and is always accompanied with a woeful and devilish
satisfaction with, and complacency in, the short-comings of others, that so we
may be the more noticed. 21. Secret disdain at tender Christians beside us, as
Hypocritical. 22. Turning aside to live like others who have been debarred, as
if there ought to be no difference put betwixt those who have this Badge, and
those who want it, or setting up as if all were done, when we have
Communicated. 23. Want of Watchfulness against recur^ing* Tentations and
Snares: Vanity and conceit if we a^^ainany thing, and want of pity to those who
did not come with so good speed. 24. Indiscreet speaking either to the
commending or censuring of Speakers and Forms, but little or nothing to
Edification.

In the last place we shall speak a little to this Question; If and How, the
admission of scandalous persons does pollute the Communion? And if it be sinful
to receive it with such Persons? Or, if ^oynt-Communicants be thereby defiled?
Let us for answer, consider Pollution distinctly, with reference to these Four
things. 1. In reference to the Sacraments themselves. 2. In reference to the
admitted that are scandalous. 3. In reference to the admitters. 4. In reference
to the Joynt-Communicants.

First. As to the Sacraments, there is a twofold pollution: The first is,
Intrin^^^ and Essential, which by corruption of the Institution of Christ,
turns it then to be no Sacrament, as it is in the Mass* or to be hurtful; as
when Signi^^cant Ceremonies, sinfully devised by men, are mixed and added
besides* and contrary to Christ's Institution. The first everteth the Nature of
the Sacrament* and its henceforth no more a Sacrament. The second poysoneth
it, so that it may not be received without partaking of that sin actively.

There is another way of polluting the Sacrament, that is Extrinsick and
Circumstantial, not in Essentials, but in ou^ use making of it; and the
Application thereof beyond Christ's Warrant, as when it is Administered to one
upon whom Christ allows it not. In that case it is not a Sacrament to that
person; yet it is so in it ^ell. This Pollution is a profaning of it to us, or
a making it common. Thus the Word of Promise generally applied in a
Congregation without separation, in Application, betwixt the Precious and the
Vile, is a profaning of the Word, (for the word of Promise should not be made
common more then the Sacrament,) as it is marked, Ezekiel. 22. verse 26. The
Priests have profaned my Holy Name, they have put no Difference between the
Holy and the Profane, between the Clean and the Unclean. Yet in that case, the
Word cease not to be Gods Word, though it be so abused: Or, As an Admonition
cast before a Profane Mocker, is but the abusing of an Holy thing, yet it
alters not the Nature of it; as a Pearl cast before a Sow, is pudled and
abused, yet it does not alter its inward Nature, but it still remains a
Pearl: So it is here in the Word and Sacraments; they are abused in their use
when mis-applyed, yet still (the Institution being kept) they are the
Ordinances of God: Thus was the Temple said to be profaned, when it was made
more common in its use then was allowed; yet was it still the Temple of the
Lord: And so admission of scandalous persons may thus be called, a polluting of
the Sacraments, but not essentially in themselves.

Secondly, Consider Pollution with reference to persons who are admitted; and
so the Sacraments may be polluted. 1. By gros^y scandalous persons* 2. By
Hypocrites. 3. By Believers not exercising their Graces; the Sacrament is
polluted by, and to all these, because as to the Pure all things (Lawful) are
pure, so to the Unclean and Unbelieving nothing is Pure, their Mind and
Conscience being defiled. Thus their Praying, Sacrificing, Hearing, Plowing,
etc: all is unclean; and by proportion, to Believers, though in a good and
clean state, yet in an evil and unholy frame* The Sacrament may be said in some
sense to be unclean, and polluted by them, to themselves.

Thirdly. As to the Office-Bearers, who are the admitters, the Sacrament cannot
be profaned Essentially* the Institution being kept pure; yet may they sin,
and be guilty of profaning it, by opening the Door wider then Christ has
allowed, and not keeping the right bounds: And Ministers may so sin, in
promiscuous applying of the Promises and Consolations of the Covenant, as well
as in applying its Seals, and both these are sins to them* yet these cases
would be excepted.

1. When such a scandal is not made known to them: Scandalous persons may be
admitted, because they are not bound to look on them as such till discovered.

2. When such scandals cannot be made out judicially, though possibly they be
true in themselves, they may, though against the inclination and affection of
the admitters, be admitted yet not against their Conscience, because, that
being a hig^ censure in Christ's House, his Servants are not to walk arbitrarily
(for that would bring confusion with it) but by Rules given them, whereof this
is one, not to receive an accusation, but under two or three witnesses.

3. When by some circumstances it proves not edifying, but rather hurtful to
the Church, or the Persons concerned; As 1. when the scandal is in such a
matter as is not expressly determined in the Word, but is by consequence to be
deduced from it; as suppose it be meant such a point of truth as has Divines,
that are godly, dissentient in it, or in such a practice (suppose perjury) as
is evil indeed in it self; but, by deduction and consequence (which is not so
clear) to be applied; or it is in such things as affect not a natural
Conscience, as Fornication, Drunkenness, and Adultery, etc. do; or in such
things as contradict not expressy any Truth: And 2* When the scandal of these
sins is by universality become little among men, or there is not easy access,
in an edifying way, to decide in them, or censure them; there is still a right
and a wrong in these which a Minister in Doctrine may reprove, yet he may
forbear a judicial sentence in such cases, as it seems Paul did with the
Corinthians, amongst whom there were several sorts of Offenders. 1. Incestuous
Fornicators, or such as sinned against Nature's light; these 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5,
etc. he commands to be excluded or excommunicated. 2. Such as by corrupt
Doctrine made Schisms, and misled the People in factions, to the prejudice of
the Apostles Authority and Doctrine, chap. 3. v. 3. etc. Deceitful Workers, 2
Cor. 11. 13. these for a time, 2 Cor. 10* 6. he spares for the Peoples sake. 2
Cor. 12. 19. 3. Some weakly and carnally misled into factions, 1 Cor. 13. 1,
2, 3, 4. these he endeavors to recover. 4. Some guilty of faults about the
Sacrament, in their wrong manner of going about it, 1 Cor. 11. These he
reproves and labors to amend, yet allows them to go on and celebrate the
Sacrament, but does not debar for the time either factious Ministers, or people
from it, as he had done the other; neither i^ it likely, that the Communion was
omitted, or they debarred, for he does not reprove for not debarring them, as
he does. For wronging the Institution; the reason is, because that which
warranteth debarring and censures of all sorts, is edification: and when that
end cannot be gained to a people or person, such censures may be omitted; and
except some bounds were to be fixed, here, the difficulty in abounding
differences would prove inextricable: And therefore, when a sin is become
Epidemical, and very Universal; On the one hand the more tender and
conscienciously*scrupulous would be instructed to much sobriety, and earnestly
dealt with* not to indulge themselves a liberty to rent the Church, or to
divide from it when such persons are admitted, being otherwise capable of the
privilege; because exclusion in this case by a sentence from the Sacrament,
would probably miss its end* which is, Edification, and would weaken the
Authority of the Ordinance of Discipline, if not hazard the liberty of the
Gospel* On the other hand, Ministers would by all means take head, and ^e
obtested in the name of the Lord, that they (which is readily incident in an
hour of tentation) run not on the Extreme of shifting their duty insulting as
it were over tender Consciences, and strengthening the hands of the wicked by
compliance with, or accession to these sins; but would under the pain of making
themselves horridly guilty, manage obvious ways, deal freely and faithfully in
making use of the Key of Doctrine, when the use of the other will not in all
appearance be so much for edification; that by public doctrinal separating the
Precious from the Vile, and by straight downright private* dealing, they may
in the ^ight of God commend themselves to every man's Conscience.

4. Let us consider if this Ordinance be polluted to the ^oynt-Receivers*
suppose that some are sinfully admitted by the Office-bearers of the Church?
And we say that it is not a pollution or sin to them to partake with such, for
the Sacrament may be blessed to them notwithstanding, as Christ's Ordinance,
even as when the Word i^ unwarrantably applied in (...) and ad^o^itions; so
that Pearls are ^ast before Swine: yet supposing some tend^^ souls to be
present, they may meddle warrantably with that abused Wo^d as Gods Word, and it
may prove useful to them; For confirming this Truth, we offer these Reasons.

The first is, The Word and Sacraments are of o^^ Nature, and are pollu^^d or
made use of, one and the same way; only the difference is in this, That the
one usually is doctrinally wronged, the other disciplina^ily. 2* Because that,
unwarrantable admission of others is not the Communicators* but the Ministers
sin, therefore it cannot wrong them more then want of preparation in others who
come. 3* Any others sin cannot loosen me from my Obligation in a duty: now it
is the duty of every one, a^ to examine themselves, so being prepared by
suitable self-examination, to eat, 1 Corinthians. 11. verse 28. and yet in that
Church of Corinth, many did sinfully approach to the Lords Table: Now though
the Command requiring self-examination, will not warrant Rulers not to examine,
yet it will warrant private Communicants to endeavor rightly to go about that
duty themselves, and not to be much anxious what others do, as if other men's
carriage were the ground of our approaching to the Lords Table. 4. It is
notwithstanding a Sacrament without any mixture of men's corrupt additions, and
so the neglecting of it, is the neglecting of a Sacrament. 5. If scandalous
Receivers did corrupt it to others, then a corrupt Minister could never
celebrate a Sacrament; which would contradict the Lords way i^ appointing such
sometimes to dispense his Mysteries both i^ the Old and New Testament; and if
the Ministers corruption pollute not the Ordinance, much less will the scandal
of any others. 6. The practice of the Lords People in receiving Sacrament^ this
way, both before Christ's Incarnation, and since, proves it. 7. It would be a
great and inextricable snare to Consciences, if the fruit of their
communicating depended not only on their own preparing themselves, but also on
the Ministers and joynt-Receivers; if their not preparation or failing in it,
brought guilt on us, it were impossible that ever we could with clearness
receive the Sacrament.

For 1. It is hard to think, a Communion is celebrated, but there is one or
more who should not be admitted, and the admission of one or two, as well as of
many is a profaning of the Ordinance: yea, if we thought them to be
scandalous; yea, if we knew them not to be holy, we could not in Faith
communicate with them, left the Ordinance be defiled by us, if their defiling
were ours.

2. The presen^e of a Hypocri^^ would defile it to us, for his Hypocrisy
defiles i^ to him, and he has not right before God* to come, neither would it
warrant us that we knew not: For 1. Many do sin* when they kn^w not. 2* It is
not our knowing his sin that defiles the Sacrament, but it is his Hypocrisy
and (...) 3. (...) the same Sacrament might be as Gods Ordinance participated
warrantably by one who knew not, and not by another who knew this; which were
hard to make out.

3. Believers their being out of a frame, would pollute this Ordinance to us,
and incapacitate us to receive it, for it is in that case sin to them, and we
should keep as gr^^^ a distance from their sins, as from the sins of others.

Ye^. 4. One could not communicate with himself (to speak so) if that ground
were true: For 1, We have Corruption. 2. We know we have it, as well as we can
know any other man's. 3. It does pollute the Ordinance in part to our selves,
and brings guilt with it; therefore, if sin known in another, would do it,
much more that which is in our selves; for if it be Corruption as known to be
in others, that polluteth it; then that same known in our selves must have that
same effect: for, a quate^^^ ^d (...) valet consequentia.

If it ^e said 1. This Corruption is but half (to say so) in our selves, being
weakened by grace, and not allowed. Answ. Yet it is Corruption, and certainly
halfcorruption in our selves will weigh more then whole corruption in another;
especially considering that necessarily this polluteth in part all our holy
things.

2. If it be said, We cannot be freed from Corruption, while here. and so we
could not go about any duty, if that reasoning were good. Answ. 1. A mixture of
good and bad in the visible Church, is as certain as a mixture of Grace and
Corruption in a Believer. 2. If our own corruption which involveth us in sin in
the manner of our doing duties, will not loosen us from a commanded duty, much
less sin in others; yea, we are no less prohibited to communicate with sin and
corruption in our selves, then in others; and also we are commanded as
effectually to purge our own heart as the Church.

This truth in Doctrine the sober of the Independents approve as to themselves
(whatever be their practice as to others) as the only way to eschew confusion,
and keep unity and order: So Ho^kers Survey, part 2. Amesius de consc. c^p. 4.
lib. 1. ^orton adver. Appol. Resp. ad ultimam qu^stionem.

As for other Questions, as, How the Sacraments Seal? or what they Seal? the
m^jor or the minor proposition? the Promise as a Covenant, or as a Testament
leg^^ing Christ and his benefits to us? These would require a larger dispute
then our intended work will admit, and therefore we shall not meddle with them.

The last thing in which we shall instance the breath of this Command, is in
reference to the duty of Fasting; concerning which we would take notice of two
things: 1. That Fasting is a solemn piece of external religious worship, when
rightly and religiously discharged. 2. That men may be guilty of many sins as
to their practice in reference thereto.

First: That it is a piece of external worship, is clear. 1. From Precepts
commanding it. 2. From the practices and examples of the Saints in Scripture.
3. From Scripture-directions given to regulate us in it; yet it differs from
Prayer and Sacraments. 1. That those are ordinary pieces of Worship, but this
is extraordinary, proceeding from special occasions, either of a Cross lying
on, or 2. Feared and imminent; 3. or some great thing which we are to Suit for,
or such like. Although it be an extraordinary piece of Worship; yet the more
holy we read any to have been, we find they have been the more in this duty of
Fasting.

2. We are to consider that Fasting is not of it self a piece of immediate
Worship, as Prayer, etc. but medi^^^e only as it is made use of to be helpful
to some other duty, such as Praying humbling of our selves, Mortification, etc.

Again, 3. Fasting may be considered in four respects: 1. As it is gone about
i^^ secret, by one single person setting himself a part for Prayer, and for
Fasting to that end; many instances whereof are in Scripture. 2. As its
private, or a little more public, being gone about by a Family, or some few
persons joining together, as Esther and her Maids. 3. As it is public, being
performed by a Congregation, as Acts 13. 2, 3. 4. As gone about by a whole
national Church: These four are all mentioned, Zach. 12. 11. 12. where we find,
1. the whole Land. 2. Families together. 3. Families apart. 4. Particular
Persons or Wives apart, setting about this duty.

4. Consider Fasting in respect of the causes that call for it, and there are
1. Public causes, Dan. 9. 2. 2. Particular and personal, as of David for h^^
Child* 2. Sam. 12. 16. 3. For others, Psalm. 35. 13. And 4* i^ is to be minded
in a special way for helping us against spiritual evils, casting out of Devils,
mortifying of Lusts, as also under sad temporal Crosses and Losses Math. 17.
21. and 1. Cor. 9 ult.

Next, as there are some times and cases in all these which call for Fasting
with Prayer to be seriously gone about; so we may sin in reference to this duty
many ways: As 1. When it is slighted, and not gone about at all; and thus men
are guilty either 1. By contemning it, or 2 Counting it not necessary; or 3. By
negligence, so that we will not be at pains to stir up our selves to a frame
for it: Or 4. Will not leave our pleasures or work for it. 5. In not esteeming
highly of it. 6. In not laboring to have fit opportunities to go about it. 7.
In scarring at it as a burden. 8. In casting it up as Hypocrisy to others, and
mocking at it in them. 9 In not joining in our affection with others we know
are Fasting* 10. In our unfrequent use of it. 11. In neglecting causes that
relate to the public, or to others; contenting our selves with what relates
to our own necessity* 12. In not being affected with our neglect of that duty,
nor mourning for it, and repenting of it, nor being humbled under the many
evils which the neglecting of it carries along with it. 13. At least
neglecting on part or other of this duty of Fasting. 14. Not setting our selves
seriously to be at the end designed in Fasting, which makes us either neglect
it, or go formally about it

In going about this duty of Fasting, there are two Evils to be avoided* The 1.
is, giving too much to it, as if it did merit, Isa. 58. 1. or as if it self did
mortify sin, or make holy, or were Religious worship in it self: The 2. is one
the other hand, when it gets too little, being looked on as not necessary or
profitable for the framing of ones spirit, and fitting them for Prayer,
self-examination or wrestling with God, and not accounted a fit mean for that
end, more than when it is neglected*

In speaking of the sins we are guilty of, as to this duty, we are to consider
more particularly how we sin before it in our preparation to it. 2. In our
going about it. 3. When it is ended

And first, before our going about it, we sin 1. When the right end of a Fast
is mistaken* and it is not considered as a mean to help us to a more spiritual
frame. 2. When we do not study to be clear in, and to consider the special
grounds that call us to it, not aiming to have our heart from conviction
affected sutably with them. 3. When we are not put to it from the right motive,
but go about it selfily, to be seen of men; as Matthew. 6. 16. or for the
fashion. 4. When its not gone about in obedience to a command of God, and so we
Fast to our selves. Zach. 7. 5. 5 When there is no secret examination of our
own hearts, to try what frame we are in, what ^usts reign in us, or prevail
over us* Nor 6* any particular dealing with God before*hand to be enabled for
this duty* and helped in it, and that both for our selves and others. 7. When
we are not endeavoring to be in good terms with God, and studying to be clear
as to that, before we come to put up suits to him. 8. When we neglect Christ,
and turn legal in it. 9. When we do not separate our selves from all other
affairs ^^mously the night before. 10. When we are lazy in rising so timely
that day, as should be. 11. When we do not (if it be secret) labor to be
unseen in it to any. 12. Not setting our selves seriously to it. Dan. 9. 3.
abstracting our selves from diversions, and rousing up our selves for it.

Secondly. In the time of Fasting, we sin. First, By Eating unnecessarily,
though it be little: as we may sin by not eating, when not eating disableth us
in Duties; yet the Body ought to be in such a measure affected, as may uot
hinder us in Prayer; but many scarce suffer it to be touched, or in the least
measure affected, or afflicted with Abstinence. 2. In Lightness of Apparel, or
such fineness in it, as they make use of on other days. 3. In Gestures,
looking light, like Laughing, and in such a carriage, as is very unsuitable for
that day. 4. In Hypocrisy, there being a more seeming weightedness and
heaviness, then really there is. 5. In having wrong ends before us. As first,
To seem holy. 2. To carry on some Temporal or Politic Design, as Jezabel did
against Naboth to get his Vineyard. 3. To get advantage of some other, and to
make some finister Designs, digest, and go down the better, as Isaiah 58. verse
4. To smite with the Fist of wickedness, as under pretense of Long Prayers, to
take the more Liberty to injure others. 4. For Strife and Debate, and
strengthening of Factions and Parties. 6. We sin here by neglecting Works of
Mercy. 7. By taking pains in Works Lawful on others days, Exacting all our
Labor, or a part of it, which is unbecoming on that day. 8. By taking delight
in Temporal things, finding our own pleasures. 9. By words or thoughts of
Lawful things, diverting us from the Work of the day. 10. By wearying of it as
a burden; Not calling it a Delight. 11. By wishing it were over, that we might
be at our work or pastime again, Amos 8. 5. 12. By negligence in Prayer, or not
being frequent and fervent in it, nor pertinent to that day, and the end of it;
for there should be in all these something on a Fast Day suitable to it; and
which is called for on that day, more then on other days. 13. By not joining
seriously with others, when they pray, especially in particulars which concern
others. 14. By little Mourning or Heart-melting, especially in secret Duties,
which on that day would be more frequent, more serious, and affecting, then on
other days, that day being set apart for it: And if private, we should be more
abstracted, even from ordinary Refreshments and Mirth, then upon a Sabbath: and
the frame of the Heart, would be then more humble, mournful, and denied to
otherwise-Lawful Comforts. 15. By little of the Exercise of Repentance or sense
of Sin, that day for humbling the Heart in the sense of our own Vileness, and
loathing of our selves. 16. By little suitable uptaking of God in his Holiness,
Displeasure against Sin, etc, Which on that day, is in an especial way called
for. 17. By not distinct Covenant with him, and engaging to him against our
seen Evils and Defects; a Fast Day, would be a Covenantingday, as we see in
Ezra and Nehemiah. 18. By being defective in Reading and Meditating on what may
humble us* but much more when by Looks, Words, or Thoughts, we mar the right
frame, and set of our Hearts. 19. By Resting on Fasting, or being Legal in it.
20. By not minding the pro^^ting of others, no^ Sympathizing with their wants
and case, nor being careful to see those of our Family or Charge observant of
it. 21. By nor abstaining from the Marriage Bed. 1 Cor. 7. ^erse 5.

Thirdly. We sin after fasting. 1. Soon returning to other thoughts. 2. Letting
any frame we had attained, slack and wear out. 3. Forgetting our Confessions
and Engagements, and falling to former Sins, and neglecting these Duties to
which we have engaged, 4. Being rigid with others, we have to do with. 5. Not
insisting in Prayer, for those things we aimed at in fasting. 6. Not trying and
observing if any thing we prayed for has been obtained. 7. Not Reflecting upon
our carriage in it, that we may know how it was discharged. 8. Not humbled
under our many short-comings, and failings in it. 9. Glad when it was done,
because that Restraint is taken off our carnal Humors. 10. Sitting down and
resting on that we have done, as if all were done. 11. Thinking our selves
something better, by our outward performance. 12. Being vain of it, if it be
well to our Sense. 13. Being unwatchful after it, and not studying suitableness
in our following carriage, so that it i^ but the hanging down of the Head ^or a
day.

These Particulars applied to our own Hearts, may be useful for our Conviction,
and Humiliation. Ah! Who can say, I am clean? All of us are guilty, either by
neglecting such Duties, or by thus and thus going about them unsuitably: from
these Sins, we may read also the contrary Duties, or Qualifications, that are
required for the right discharge of these Duties. The preventing of these Sins,
will bring in the Duties called for, and the right manner of going about them.
Otherwise, the going about these Duties, without the manner requisite, is but
as it were the making of some Image, for our selves in the Lords worship, which
he has not commanded, and so he may say* Is it such a Fast that I have chosen?
Isai. 58. 5. or, Is it such a Prayer I called for; and, Who has required these
things at your hands? Isai. 1. 12. These Questions, which the Lord puts to
our Conscience, will make many Prayers, and Praises, and much worship, that now
seems to be in great Bings or Heaps, come down to a small bulk, when they are
thus fanned, ^ifted, and searched by this Seive; and all those things casten,
which are found to be Breaches of this Command.

We come now to the manner how this Command is pressed, which is. First, By a
Reason. Secondly, By a Commination. Thirdly, By a Promise. All which speak a
readiness in men to fail in this Command, and a special notice that God takes
of the Duties required in it, and of the Sins forbidden in it. Men might
readily say; What needs so much Rigidity in the manner of worship? and, If it
be to the true God, though it have in it some mixture of those things, which
have been formerly abused, it is no^ much to be stood upon: The Lord therefore
in pressing it, adds this Reason, I am a jealous God, (says he) that will
not only have my Church and Spouse, Honest and Chaste indeed, but Chast-like: As
Casar said, His Wife behoved, no^ only to abstain from all Dishonesty, but
from all suspicious carriage: Even so will the Lord have his People carry it so
to him, as a Wife should carry to a jealous Husband, with such circumspection,
as he may not have any occasion of suspicion. Jealousy here implies two
things. 1. A Facility or Aptness, as it were to suspect any thing which may
look like a giving that to any other, which is due to God: So a Husband is said
to be jealous, when he is apt to suspect want of Love in his Wife, and is ready
to gather from every Circumstance, her inclination to another; even though
there be no palpably Demonstrative ground of it. Thus jealousy is taken
amongst Men.

2. It imports a severe Indignation, against every thing which gives ground
of suspicion; it cannot abide that: Hence jealousy is called, The Rage of a
Man, Prove. 6. 38. This Wrong will not be endured, when many others will be
dispensed with. Any thing that seemingly slighteth him, or inclines the Heart
to another, is to jealousy insufferable. These two, after the manner of men
(as many other things) are applied to God, to show that he will not admit, that
which is suspicious-like in his service; but if his People depart from him in
deviating in the least from the Rule given, He will be provoked to be avenged
on them for it. This is the force of the Reason: The Commination or Threatening
added, confirms this; it is in these Words, Visiting the Iniquities of the
Fathers on the Children. To Visit here, is, To punish the Children, for the
Fathers faults; though God should seem for the time to forget the Breaches of
this Command, and not to take notice of Corruptions introduced by men in his
worship; yet, says he, I will Visit, or revenge that Iniquity, not only upon
the present Race, but upon the following, even upon the third and fourth
Gen^ration.

For clearing this, let us see. First, What is the Punishment here threatened?
2. On whom it is? Upon the Children of them that transgress this Command. 3.
How it is executed? 4. Why the Lord does so? That we may vindicate this place,
and clear it from appearance of Contradiction, with that in Ezekiel 18. Where
it is said, The Son shall not lear the Iniquity of his Father.

The First Question then; is, What it is that is here Threatened? Answ. We do
not think that this place speaks only of Temporal Punishments, and that of
Ezekiel of Eternal: For the scope of both, will contradict this; for that
passage Ezekiel. 18. is occasioned from the People present straits, and speaks
directly of Temporal Judgments; so, that Distinction will not clear this
seeming Contradiction. Therefore we conceive here to be understood mainly
Spiritual and Eternal Evils, which God threatens to the Children of Wicked
Parents. (For, that Temporal Judgments follow them, and are included in the
Threatening there is no question.)

This will be clear. First, By considering that the thing threatened here, is,
that punishment which the Breach of, or Iniquity committed against this
Command, or other Commands, deserves: yea, it is the punishment, that sinful
Parents deserve, he Visits the Iniquities of the Fath^rs, on the Children,
etc. But that which the Breach of this Law, or which the Parents guilt
deserves, is eternal Judgment, and not temporal only. Ergo.

2 The thing threatened here is proportionally of the same Nature, with the
thing promised afterward; the one being opposite to the other: But it were a
wronging of Gods Mercy, to his People, to say, that his Mercy only looks to
Temporal Benefits. Ergo, this Threatening must also look unto, and comprehend
Eternal Plagues.

3. The scope may clear it, which is, To restrain Parents, from the sins here
forbidden; because by such sins they bring Wrath, not only on themselves, but
on their Posterity after them, even when they are gone, as ye have it Jerem.
32. 18. Now this reason would not have such weight, if the Plagues threatened to
Parents were Eternal, and to their Children, but Temporal.

4. This Threatening must put some Difference betwixt the Children of the
Wicked, and the Children of the Godly: But Temporal Difficulties, and Strok^
will not clear up this difference: for often the Children of the Godly, share
most in these. It must therefore be in spiritual Things, they differ mainly.

5. What is threatened here, must especially in the Event* Light upon the third
and fourth generation, And not ordinarily go beyond that. Now ordinarily the
Children of wicked men in outward things, thrive best unto the third and fourth
generation; and after that come their temporal Judgment; therefore it cannot
be that, which is here only, or Principally, meaned.

6. Consider Cain, Ham, etc. upon whose Posterity, this Curse was peculiarly
derived, and there you will find somewhat more then what is Temporal.

The Second thing to be cleared here, is, the Party threatened to be thus
punished: It is not the Fathers that are expressed, but the Children after
them, as it is Jer. 32. 18. All is fore-faulted* the whole Stock, and Family.
Concerning which, let us take these three Considerations along with us.

1. That these Children punished, are not innocent in themselves, but being
guilty before the Lord by Original Corruption; or by both it and Actual Sin,
making themselves liable to such Plagues; they have no reason to say, The
Fathers have eaten sour Grapes; and the Childrens Teeth are set on edge: For
whether the Judgments be Temporal or Spiritual, the Children have deserved
them, and cannot say they are wronged. And this Consideration reconcileth this
place, with that of Ezekiel, where God puts them to it, thus: None Innocent
are plagued; but ye are plagued: therefore says he, Read your own sin out of
your Plagues.

2. Consider, that the Threatening against Children of such Parents, is here
limited to the third or fourth generation; all their Posterity is not cursed
thereby. 1* Because Gods kindness is such, as to leave a Door open for
Penitents. All fell in Adam, yet Mercy opened a Door of Hope to sinful Man: And
surely the Threatenings of this new Covenant, are not so peremptory, as to shut
the Door of Mercy upon Sinners. 2. The third and fourth generation are
especially threatened, because these are nearest the Parent, and have most of
his Nature in them; he knows them best; and often he may live to see these:
Therefore the Lord threatens these, that it may most affect Parents* it being
for the second, third, and fourth generation, that they most ordinarily travel.

3. Consider, that in this Threatening, (as also in the Promise following) God
does not give or lay down a constant Rule, to which he will be tied, as if he
could not do otherwise at any time; For to say that, were Derogatory to his
Election, and the Sovereignty of his Grace* and therefore that is not the
Scope: But here he gives a Declaration of what usually, and ordinarily he
does, and what men, if he deal with them in Justice, may expect from Him: Yet
it is still so to be understood, as the Son of a wicked Person, may be found to
be an Elect, and the Son of a Godly Person rejected: that he may continue his
Plagues longer then the third or fourth Generation, or break them off sooner
when he thinks good: For though by this, He would restrain Parents from sin*
yet has he a Door open to many such Children for mercy; even as the contrary
promise has many exceptions as to the Children of Godly Parents, that walk not
in the paths of their Parents going before them, as many known instances of
both, in Scripture, do make out*

The third Question is, How God does execute this threatening? or, How he does
reach Children with eternal plagues for their Parants sins?

Answ. 1. He does it certainly, and he does it Justly: therefore the Children
must not only be considered as guilty, but as guilty of the sins of their
Parents, which we may thus co^ceive; 1. As to the Child of a wicked Parent,
lying in natural Corruption, God denies and with holds his renewing and
restraining Grace which he is not obliged to confer* and the Lord in this may
respect the Parents guilt* Justly. 2. When grace is denied, then follows the
temptation of the Parents practice, the Devil stirring up, to the like sin, and
they furthering their Children to wickedness by their example, advice
authority, etc. So that it comes to pass in Gods justice, that they are given
up to vent their natural corruption in these ways, and so come as it is, Psalm.
49. 13. to approve their Parents sayings. 3. Upon this follows God's casting
the Child, now guilty of his Parents faults, into eternal Perdition with him*
and that this is the meaning of the threatening, will appear by the examples of
Gods justice in this matter, when wicked Parents have Children that are not so
much miserable in regard of temporal things, as they are wicked, cursed, and
plagued with Ungodliness; so was Cains Children, so were the Children of Cham,
and so were Esa^'^, who were all for a long time prosperous in the world, but
following their Fathers sins (a main part of their Curse) God afterward visited
them, on them, with sad temporal judgments also*

4. If it be asked, Why God thus plagueth and threatens the Children of wicked
Parents? Answ. 1. God does it to make sin hateful, seeing it brings often a
forfeiture of spiritual blessings, yea, of blessings of all sorts, upon whole
Generations and Families* 2. To strike the more terror into others, who by
this may be scared from sin, and made to stand in awe of God, who is so
dreadful as to put a mark of Infamy on the race and posterity of his Enemies.
3. The more to effect and weight the Sinner; it is a part of his punishmen to
know that by his sin he has not only made himself miserable, but all his
Posterity: And these may be the Reasons, why, as it were by the light of
nature, all Nations in some cases are led not only to punish the persons of
some Malefactors, but to fore fault, and put a note of Infamy on their
Posterity, for some kind of faults* 4* This becomes Gods greatness, that men
may know how sovereign he is; and how, Treason against the most high is to be
accounted of. 5. It is to commend holiness, and the necessity of it, to God's
people, and to put them to enrich themselves and their Children, in God, and a
good Conscience, rather then in all temporal riches.

These same Questions and Answers may serve to clear what concerns the
Promise also, they being suitably applied to it.

It is further to be observed that the Lord expresses wicked men under that
notion, Th^^ that ^a^e me, to show what indeed, and on the matter, Sin, even
the least sin, amounts unto its hatred of God, as being done (as it were) in
despite of him, and preferring some lust to him* for there is no question but
were God loved, Holiness, (which is his Image) would be loved also; and where
it i^ universally hated* so must He be; for a man cannot serve two Masters,
where their commands and actings are contrary, but he must hate the one, and
love the other; And seeing it is certain that Sinners make sin their Master,
and do not hate it; therefore, they must hate God, who gives contrary
Commands: and so sometimes Sinners wi^h that there were not such Commands.
Again, he expresses the Godly in the Promise, under these two designations. 1.
Those that love me, that is the inward Fountain and comprehensive sum of all
duties. 2. Those that keep my Comm ndments, that looks to the outward effects
of Love, and is the proofo* it, so that there is no mid's betwixt these two, to
love God, and keep his Commandments, and to hate him, and slight, or break his
Commandments, and so no mid's betwixt Gods gracious promise to Parents and
Children, and his Curse on both.

Lastly: It would be in a particular way observed, that though every sin has
hatred to God in it, yet he puts this name of hating him, in a special way
upon the sin of corrupting his Worship and Service, to show that there is a
special enmity against God in that sin, and that it is in a special way hateful
to him; as upon the other hand he takes Zeal for the purity of his Worship, as
a singular evidence of love to him.

Let us close this Command with some words of use; and 1. Ye may see what good
or evil to us and ours, and that eternally, there is in Disobedience or in
Holiness: O Parents! what mercy is it to you, your selves, and to your Children
that you be Godly? Alace, this Curse here threatened, is too palpable upon many
Children, who are cursed with profanity from the Womb upward: Why do you that
are Parents wrong your poor Infants? and why neglect ye that which is best for
them? Here also there is matter of much comfort to Parents fearing God; this
Promise is a standing portion to a thousand Generations, which though it be not
peremptory, as to all individual persons; yet 1. It secludeth none. 2. It
comprehends many. 3. It gives ground for us to be quiet for all our
Posterity, till they by their own carriage disclaim that Covenant wherein this
Promise is included. 4. It gives Warrant for a Believer to expect that God may
make up his Election amongst his Seed rather then amongst others: It is true,
sometimes he chooses some of the Posterity of wicked Parents, yet oft-times
the Election of Grace falls upon the Posterity of the Godly. 5. It is a
ground upon which we may quiet our selves for temporal things needful to our
Children; certainly these promises are not for naught, Psalm 37. 26* and 102.
ult. 112. 2. Prove. 20. 17.

2 Be humble, O be humble before God, for he is jealous.

3. Abhor sin, for it is hateful.

4. Love holiness, for it is useful to us and ours: First, Thereby our Children
have temporal mercies so far as is needful, Psalm 37. 26. 2. They have
spiritual and saving mercies amongst them. 3. They have all Church Priviledges,
as being the Children of them that are within Gods Covenant.

5. Children! Be hum^led under the sense of the Iniquity of your Parents, when
ye remember their ways: or possess what unjustly they have gotten, ye become
guilty of their sins without Repentance. Especially you have need to take
notice of this, that are the Children of Parents, that have opposed the purity
of Gods Service and Worship, and the work of its Reformation, and have been
Corrupters of it: Children may be partakers of their Parents faults, and so
plagued for them several ways; and we think that this forfeiture is more then
ordinary. And therefore, as amongst men, there are special crimes beyond
ordinary procuring such a sentence, so is it here. And 1. They be guilty by
following their footsteps, in walking in their Parents sins, as Jeroboams
Children did. 2. In approving their Fathers way, praising their Fathers sayings
or doings; as it is Psalm 49. v. 13. 3. In winking at their Parents sins and
wickedness. 4. In boasting of their Oppressions, Bloodshed, etc. as if they
were were acts of valor and manhood. 5. In being content that their Fathers
sinned, if it gained any possession to them. 6. In possessing and enjoying
without Repentance what to their knowledge they sinfully purchased. 7. In
spending prodigally and riotously what the Parents covetously gathered* the sin
of the Parent here, is the seed of the Sons sin. 8. In professing sorrow for
the want of occasion to live in Ignorance, Prophanity, or Looseness as their
Fathers did, as in Jerem. 44. 17, 18, 19. they said that things went well then.
In not being humbled before God for the sins of Predecessors, nor confessing
them to him; as Levit. 26. 42. nor repairing the losses or injuries which we
knew they did to any that were wronged or oppressed by them.

The third Commandment.
Exodus 20. v. 7. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for
the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.
THis Command the Lord presses with a threatening, that it may be known that he
is in earnest, and will reckon with men for the breaches of it: The scope of
it, is, To have the Name of the Lord sanctified, hallowed, and had in reverence
by all his people, and so every thing eschewed that may be dishonorable to
that Holy Name, and which may make him, as it were, contemptible; this scope is
clear from Levit. 22. verse 32* Where having forbidden the profaning of his
Name, he adds this positive precept, as opposite thereto; ^ut I will be
hallowed among the Children of Israel; So then, its that he himself may be
hallowed and had in reverence amongst them, as Psalm 89* 7. and 111. 9. And so
this Command is much more extensive then at first view it appears; the scope
thereof, being to keep the heart in a holy awe and reverence of God, and so in
a holy way of using, and reverent way of going about every thing which
concerns Him.

For more clear handling of it, let us consider. First, What is meant by the
Name of God. Secondly, What is meant, by taking that N me of God in vain.

1. By the Name of God, is often understood God himself; for to call on Gods
Name and on Himself are one. 2. Properly hereby is understood his Titles,
attributed to him in Scripture; as God, Jehovah* he Lord, Holy, Just, etc. or
such Titles as signify that excellent Being which we call God. 3* More largely
it is taken for whatsoever he makes use of, for making of himself known,
seeing other ways he has no name; but whatever Title He takes to himself,
or whatever thing he makes use of, thereby to make himself known, that is his
Name; such are 1. His Attributes, Mercy, Justice, Omnipotency, etc. which Exodus
34. 36, 37. are called his Name. 2. His Word or Gospel, called his Name, Acts
9. 15. 3. His Ordinances, Sacraments, Matthew* 28. 19. Discipline and Censures,
which are the exercise of his authority, Matthew. 18. 20. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 4. Prayer
is a piece of his Name; He is a God that hears Prayer, Psalm 63. 2. 5. His
Works, Romans 1. 20, 21. 6. All his worship, Deuteronomy. 12. 5. Exodus 20. 24. 6. Lots.
Acts 1. 26. By these God makes himself (when he thinks fit) known in his
Will, as he does by his Word. 7. Profession of subjection to him; so they that
profess this, are said to be at his Name, and it should be reverently used, as
all actions which make himself, or his Will and Decree (which is himself)
known, as Lots do, Prove. 16. 33.

By all these God is to be known, and something of him may (...) and (...) take
under Name here all these to be comprehended: The first; because the scop^ is
to Hallow himself in Obedience to all that he Commands, as appears, (...)
22. 3^. 32. and the first Petition in the Lord's Prayer, Hallowed ^e thy Name,
be^^^ compared with the other two that follow, clears it. The second is
propeth and primarily in the very letter here understood. The third comes in
by nat^^^ consequence for attaining the scope of the Command, so that there is
neither word nor work of God, but all relates to this

The Second thing to be cleared, is, What is meant by taking his Name in v^i^*
To take his Name (as it is Psalm. 50. 16. and 16. 4.) is to mention any of those
things before spoken of (which are so many pieces of his Name) or any way to
meddle with them in thought, word, or deed, as by writing, or otherwise: In
vain dot^ not only comprehend, 1. False Swearing, or Blaspheming, Charming, and
wh^^ is wrong as to the matter: Nor 2. Only propane abusing of the Lords Name
when the matter is right, by rashness, precipitancy, frequency in Swearing: Nor
3. Does it only mean unnecessary Swearing when it may be forborne: But 4. I^
vain is also when it is not mentioned or made use of to good purpose, that is t^
God's hononr, the edification of others and of our selves; so when ever Gods
name is any way meddled with without fruit, its in vain.

The scope of this Command then we take to be, To press the manifesting of
reverence to God. 1. In a high esteem of his holy Majesty. 2. In a reverent use
of all his Ordinances in the right way appointed by him. 3. In a good
Conversation adorning this doctrine of the Gospel, and keeping his blessed
Name, tha^ is named over us, from being evil spoken of, or contemned by others,
because o^ us, Rom* 2. 24. 4. And more especially (that God may be honored) in
a right, reverend, and edifying using of his Name in thinking, sPeaking,
praying reading writting, swearing, vowing, etc. and abstaining from all
irreverence in these, (...) becoming the greatness of God, and using each of
them reverently, when called to go about them.

If it be asked what the mentioning of God's Name reverently is? take these
rules to clear it:

1. It is necessary that the matter be lawful i^ which his Name is mentioned*
by this all Heretiq^es, Charmers, Cursers, Forswearers and Blasphemers, are
grossly gnilty of sinning against this Command.

2. It is required that the matter be not only lawful, but important, and of
some weight: hence Lotting for a thing of naught, or Swearing in a thing of no
importance, are an abusing of the Name of God, and a tempting of him.

3. It is required that the matter be necessary also; for if a thing may be
decided other-ways, it ought to be neither by Lotting nor Swearing; hence in
the Hebrew* to Swear is still used in the passive voice, to show that men ought
not to Swear, but when they can do no otherwise, and when alawful call presses
to it.

4. It would be in the manner gra^e, deliberate, understood* done in judgment*
Je^* (...) 3. with fear and reverence.

5. A good end is to be proposed* namely on of these three, God*s Hono^^ the
good of others, or our own necessary vindication in something, that so it be
not taken to no purpose.

There is this difference betwixt this Command and others, in other Commands,
God expresses the highest degree of every kind of sin, to scare men from the
breaches of these Commands; here he mentions not Forswearing or Blasphemy,
but taking the Lord's Name in vain which is the lowest degree of that kind;
that by this God may teach us what reverence we owe to Him, and of what ^arge
extent the Command is, and how careful he would have us to be, lest we should
come upon the borders of any thing that seems to be a breach of it.

If it be asked, Why the Lord is so peremptory in urging this Command, and in
pressing the thing here commanded in the very least?

Answ. 1. That he may in this set out his own Greatness, and work a fear and
reverence of him in the hearts of his people; therefore will he have them
reverently using that which concerns him, that the due distance betwixt God
that is in Heaven, and Creatures that are on Earth, may be imprinted on us, and
entertained by us, Eccles. 5, 1. 2, 3. Lev. 22. 31, 32. Psalm. 89. 9.

2 Because his Name, whereby he holds forth something of himself; or that
infinite excellent Being, called, God, is great, dreadful and glorious, and is
so to be had in reverence, Psalm, 111. that more than ordinary watchfulness
should be used ^n testifying our respect to it.

3. Because this is the way to curb Atheism and Prophanity, which the Devil
drives on by these steps; first to think little of God, and then by little and
little to inure men to prophanity, and habituate them to baffle and affront the
Name of God: Hence it is that he takes possession, mainly, of young ones this
way; and hardly ye will see any that irreverently middle with the Name of God,
but they are gross, or fall at length to be gross in other things.

4. God's Name is precious, and given to his people for a great refuge, Prove.
18. 10. therefore will he not have that which is their singular mercy to be
abused.

5. God is a Friend in Covenant, yet so as that relation may not in the least
wear out his honor and our due distance with him. Deuteronomy. 28. 58. Its the great
and dreadful Name, the Lord our God.

6. Because this honors God, and adorneth the profession of the Gospel
before others, whereas ^reverence therein dishonors God before them.

For more particular considering the matter and breaches of this Commands, we
shall draw it to these heads; and 1. We shall speak to what concerns
Swearing, Vowing, or public Covenanting with God. 2. To what concerns
Blasphemy. 3. Concerning the taking of the Name of the Lord in vain, in
worship, private or public, particularly, how it is taken in vain by
Hypocrisy. 4. Of taking it in vain out of worship rashly and unnecessarily. 5.
How it is taken in vain in our conversation, as others are occasioned or caused
to Blaspheme God's Name by our carriage. 6. Concerning Lots, etc. These we
shall consider, especially with respect to our practice.

In speaking of what concerns Oaths, we would 1. speak of an Oath. 2. Of the
Obligation of it, for this Command both requires Oaths, and the keeping of
them, and it may be broken in reference to both.

We would in the entry distinguish betwixt these four. 1. Oaths. 2.
Asseverations* 3. Simple affirmations or Assertions. 4. Imprecations or Curses.

1. Oaths are such as directly invocate God by such like expressions, as Be, o^
B^ as By my holiness I have sworn, Psalm 89. I swear by the Lord.

2. Asseverations (called vehement Assertions) are expressed thus, As the Lord
live^^, As that Light shi^e^^, in Conscience, Faith, etc.

3. Simple assertions are such as in truth, truly, indeed, which but speak the
thing simply, and affirm that to be true or false that is asserted, and so
belongs to the 9th Command only, as such.

4. Imprecations are either directed to ones self conditionally, as if such a
thing be truth, th^n let me perish; Shame b^fall me, if I do not this or this;
or toward others, especially in these, Shame b^fall thee, the Devil take thee,
a Vengeance on thee, and other expressions abominable to mention.

Again, in Oaths which are for confirmation, let us distinguish betwixt
assertory Oaths* that do but confirm such a thing to be truth, and promissory
Oaths, that engage the person swearing to the performance of such a thing for
the time to come, either absolutely or with qualifications.

For clearing the matter, take this proposition, that Oaths in both these cases
being well qualified, is a lawful piece of Gods worship, and may, and should be
made use of by his People; this is a clear truth from these Scriptures, Deuteronomy.
10. 20. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Jer. 4 2.

As for Anabapt^sts, who deny the lawfulness of Oaths under the New Testament,
we are not now to meddle with them, because there be few in these days that
are i^ such an E^rour, We shall consider 1. What qualifications are requisite
to right swearing: Then 2. Clear some practical questions. 3. Show wherein this
Command i^ violate in respect of swearing.

In an Oath consider, 1. Its matter. 2. Its form. 3. Its rise, or men's Call to
it 4. The expressious its conceived in. 5. Our manner of going about it. 6. Our
keeping of it, which follows after to be spoken to distinctly.

First, for the matter of an Oath, Ass^rto^y Oaths must be of things that are.
1. Tru^ 2. Weighty. 3. They must be such to our knowledge. Again, Promissory
Oaths mu^ be in things just and law^ul, possible, profitable, and in our power,
and which to o^ knowledge are such.

2. The form must be By the true God, it being a peculiar part of his worship
for we can swear by none whom we cannot invocate, therefore Idols, Creatures,
Graces, etc. a^e excluded here, for none of these are God.

3. Its rise must be Edification, that is Gods glory, our own vindication, or
(...) Neighbors good, or the call of a Magistrate putting us to it; and it
should be use^ for deciding of Cont oversies, when no other mean of clearing or
deciding such a thing is remaining; hence we say, j^ratus fuit, he was sworn
passively; and the Hebrews have no active woe d for expressing it, to let us see
men ought not to swear, b^ to be sworn, or by necessity pr^ssed to it.

4. As to the expressions in which it is conceived, or the thing sworn; its
required not only that it be truth to, and in the man's meaning that swears,
but that the expressions be plain and intell gible to his meaning and
understanding, to whom the Oath is given; otherwise it dcludeth, but does not
clear. Hence these two rules are to be observed. 1. That the meaning be so
clear, as may be, and is most ordina ily and obviously gathered from such words
and expressions as are used. 2. That the expressions be according as they are
supposed to be understood by others, especially him that exacteth the Oath; for
if he mean one thing, and we another, Gods Name is profaned, and the end of an
Oath frustrate; much more equivocations in expressions and mental reservations
are to be condemned here, the first whereof takes in Ambiguity in words, the
second, a different sense in our thoughts from what seems to be meaned in our
words.

5. As to the right manner of Swearing, these things ought to be noticed: 1.
That it be in judgment, that we understand the thing we Swear, and the nature
of our Oath, and him we swear by, Jer. 4. 2. 2, Fear and Reverence in going
about it, as being in an especial way in God's own sight; thus, to fear an
Oath, is a good property, and the heart would be filled with the apprehension
of a present God. 3. Singleness in the end, that it be not to deceive any, but
to express the truth truly and faithfully, called Righteousness, Jer. 4. 2. And
for the most part these properties or qualifications may agree to Oaths,
Asseverations and Imprecations.

For the further clearing of this matter, we would speak to some questions.

And the 1. Question is, How then differ Oaths from Asseverations?

Answ. They should both be in Truth and Judgment with fear, and when called
unto; but in this they differ, that in Oaths we are only to make mention of the
true God* and swear by him, but Asseverations may be thus expressed, As thy
Soul liv^th 2 King. 2. v. 2. 4. 6. and yet we do not swear by the Soul of any.

A2d. Question is, What may we Judge of such Oaths, as are By Angels, Saints,
Mary, Paul, and By other Creatures, as Heaven, Light, the World, by Soul,
Conscience. etc. Or by Graces, as by Faith.

Answ. We need not use much Curiosity in Distinctions* For, we conceive them
all to be simply unlawful. 1. Because none of these are God, and swearing is a
Peculiar piece of his Worship, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. And swearing by any thing what ever
it be, which is not God, is condemned, Jer. 5 7. They have sworn by those who
are not Gods. 2. Because we cannot invocate any of these, and therefore cannot
swear by them, seeing an Oath carries along with it, an Invocation of him we
swear by. 3. Because they want these Properties due to such, to whom this
Worship belongs. As 1. Omniscience, to try whether we mean as we have sworn
or not. 2. Omnipotency. And 3. Justice to avenge, if it be not so as we have
sworn. 4. Sovereignty, to call the Swearers to a Reckoning. 4. Because it would
derogate from the Scope of this Command, which gives this to God alone, as his
due, and implies, that he alone has all these Properties in him. 5. Because
such Oaths are expressly Prohibited by Christ, Matthew 3. 34. Swear not at all,
neither by Heaven nor Earth; For, they stand in an Inferior Relation to God,
and are his Servants. 6. Because as none of these things are God to take Order
with us if we swear falsely; so none of them are so ours, as we can lay them in
Pledge, for the least Change to be made upon them* in Case our Oath be not
true; none of them can be added unto or diminished from by us. We cannot make
one of our Hairs Black or White; and therefore ought not to swear by ^ur Head;
much less can we quiet our Conscience* or increase our Faith, that we should so
freely swear by these. That place Mat. 5. ^6. clears this: For that of Mat.
23. 16, 17. etc. speaks of the Obligation of an Oath sinfully made, as to
that manner of swearing, which yet still binds: but it warranteth not the
making of such Oaths.

A 3d. Quest. is* What is to be judged concerning Asseverations: such as, In
Conscience, good Faith, as I shall answer, etc. as I am a Christian; as I have
a S^u^ to be saved, and such like? Answer 1. We think, there is no Question,
but if these were rightily, and in the due manner made use of* they might be
lawfully used, as Scripture clears. 2. Yea, we think* If any Oaths be made
use of, these would first be used; and a man may be called to use one of these,
when he is not, directly to swear. 3. Therefore* we think they cannot be used,
but in necessity when less will not serve, and should be used with Fear,
Reverence, Understanding, and the other Qualifications: And that therefore they
sin, who in Common Discourse, rashly and vainly use them, which we conceive to
be forbidden here; and when they are not Conscientiously used, they lead men to
a greater Degree of the sin, here discharged: as we see some begin with
Asseverations, then idle Oaths; and then Imprecations, as Peter sinfully did,
Mat. 26. Reason 1. All these Asseverations are reductively Oaths, and imply the
contrary imprecations in them. Thus, Let me not be esteemed a Christian, nor
have a Soul to be saved; which must relate to God for executing these;
therefore, being indirect Oaths, they ought to be used as Oaths, and belong to
this Command. 2. Because the very end of any vehement Asseveration, is to
confirm what is said, further, then an ordinary Assertion can: Now in so far,
it is an Oath; it being proper to an Oath, to confirm what is spoken, and
seeing it agrees with an Oath in the Essentialls, they must be materially one,
though Asseverations, be pronounced in another Form. 3. Vain Asseverations, are
against that Rule, Mat. 5 37. Jam. 5. 12. Let your Communication be Yea, Yea,
and Nay, Nay, and whatever is more (i^ ordinary Communication) is Evil: And it
cannot be denied but this is more, and therefore needless and sinful. 4. We do
not find Asseverations, such as My Conscience bears me witness, to be used
(warrantably) by Saints in Scripture; but with great Reverence, even almost in
such things as they used to confirm by Oaths; therefore Swearing is often
joined with them, Romans 9. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 11. 31. 5. For what end are they used?
It Is either to confirm something, or to no end: Beside, the needless use of
them habituateth Folk to baffle and profane excellent things* and do injure
them to prophanity: hence these that use them most are ordinarily less tender
in their other Carriage, and it comes to direct swearing at length. If it be
said good Faith, signifies no more but in Truth, and without Dissimulation,
(as it is understood sometimes in the Laws,) Bon^ Fide, and Mal^ Fide. Ans. Yet
Faith is otherwise taken in our Common Acceptance, and Words would be so used,
as they are commonly made use of by others. 2. If it be not Evil, yet it has
the appearance of Evil, which should be eschewed and abstained from, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 17. 3. Whatever Good Faith signifies, yet certainly in our common use, it is
more than a simple Assertion; therefore, should a man tell me an untruth, and
put Bona fide, or Good Faith to it, to confirm it; will any man think but he is
more then an-ordinary Liar, against the Nineth Command? Yea, would he not be
thought Infamous in breaking his Good Faith? Therefore it is more then Yea or
Nay, and so not ordinarily to be used. Yea, we conceive that these
Asseverations will have more weight on Natural Consciences, than simple
Assertions; and therefore the Challenges of dealing Falsely in these, will bite
and and wound the Conscience, much more sharply than falsifying simple
Assertions, which speaks out this; that they are nearer of kin unto, and more
involved i^ this Command, than at first appears*

The 4. Question is, What may be said of Imprecations? Ans. Distinguish betwixt
such as one uses against himself; as, Let me not see Heaven i^ that be not
Truth, or the like. 2. Such as are used against others, (I speak by private
Persons,) as, Shame fall thee, Divil take thee, and the like; which are either
Conditional, as, If thou do not such a thing, etc. or absolute, without any
such Condition. We say then, 1. That keeping the Qualifications, formerly
mentioned, and required to an Oath; one may in some cases lawfully use some
Imprecations, even to ones self, the Scriptures having such Patterns in them;
but with great Caution, Circumspection, and Tenderness.

2. Cursing of others by private Persons, out of Passion or Revengs, is simply
prohibited, and that is several Respects. For 1. It derogateth from the Glory
of God, if He be therein invocated in making Him subservient to our Passions,
and to Execute our Revenge; or if He be not Invocated in these Imprecations;
it is worse, because the Devil, or some other thing is put in His room* 2. It
derogateth also from that love we owe to others.

3. As mentioning the Devil in such Imprecations, as Devil a bit, or Fiend, a
Body, or such like, it is most Abominable: For thereby the Devil is employed in
Gods Room, and God is forsaken; because there is no ground to exspect a hearing
of such a Suit from Him, and so you betake you to the Devil, praying him,
employing him, reverencing and worshipping him; as if he were just, to Executer
your Judgment, when God does it not: And sometimes by such Imprecations; you
call on the Devil who is the Father of Lies, to witness a Truth. Ah! How
Ahominable to be heard amongst Christians! Men need not go to the Wild-Indians,
nor to Witches, to seek Worshippers of the Devil! Alas! There are many such to
be found amongst Christians! How sound these Words? What Devil now! The Meckle
Devil, etc.* It is Horrible to mention, that which goes out of some Men's
mouths without any fear! What can be the Reason that Christians thus Worship
the Devil, and swear by him, as Israel did by Baal?

There remain yet some things concerning Oaths, especially Promissy Oaths to be
cleared. As 1. How Promissory oaths differ from an Assertory Oath.

And 1. They agree in this, that Truth is the Scope of both. But. 2, They
differ in this, that Assertatory Oaths, have but one Verity, to wit* That the
thing be, in the Present time, true as the man says or swears: But
Promissory Oaths have a Twofold Verity, to wit; One present, that the Swearer
means what he promises. 2. That for the time to come he shall endeavor,
effectually to make the thing Truth which he says and swears: The First is
only a Truth in the Person; The Second is also a Truth of the Thing or Matter.

2. We would difference Vows from Promissory Oaths. Vows have God both for
Party and Witness. Oaths may have some other for Party, but God for Witness, to
the giving an Oath or Promise to such a Party: Yet in some things there is a
great Affinity, as to the matter, in both.

Concerning Promissory Oaths* we may enquire. 1. Concerning the making of
them. 2. Concerning the Obligation of them; That a Man may make such Oaths
tying himself to some things in which he was before free; is without all
Controversy, and clear in the Scripture. Concerning such Oaths, it may be
enquired. 1. In what Matter. 2. On what Occasions. 3. With what Conditions,
they may be engagedin.

And 1. For the matter of them; they may be in three sorts of Matter. 1. In
such matter as is Morally necessary* as the Fearing, Serving, Worshipping the
true God* etc. So was Jacobs Oath and Vow, Genes. 28. 20, 21. That the Lord
should be his God. And many of the Covenants mentioned in the Old Testament;
and David's swearing, Psalm 119. 106. To keep Gods Statutes.

2. There is a Civil lawful good Matter; such as Duties to Superiors, or to
make some Obligation we owe to others forthcoming; or to return and requite
such a particular good turn to one. Such are Oaths of Allegiance to lawful
Superiors: Such did the Spies swear to Rachab, Joshua 2. 12, etc. And David to
Jonathan: and that these are Lawful, having due Qualifications, cannot be
denied.

3. There are somethings indifferent; as Eating, or abstaining from such and
such Meats or Drinks, or on such and such days: and although the thing be not
simply unlawful, yet Oaths therein would be engaged in, with much Prudence, on
such Grounds, and with such Qualifications and Conditions, as may make it
appear* the Swearer is not using the Name of God unnecessarily, and that he
cannot otherwise gain his Point: Nor superstitiously to make it appear, that he
does not bring his Conscience under a Yoke of Will Worship. One of which ways
ordinarily men fail, in these Oaths; and so they are neither to Gods Honor,
nor others good: and therefore such Oaths are either rarely to be engaged in,
or not at all.

Next, such Oaths as to the occasions of parties engaging in them, may be
divided into these three.

The 1. is, When we engage in Public Oaths and Promises solemnly, when
Authority calls us to it.

2. When the Edification or Satisfaction of another in private calls for it.
There are sometimes when a Christian may be; Yea, is called to it, for gaining
Credit to something, (that the other is called to believe) to interpose
reverently the Oath of God, as Jacob did to Laban.

3. One in secret may thus engage himself to God, in Lawful and necessary
things; As David, I have sworn, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.

Yet in the third place, all these Oaths, would still be with these
Qualifications, mentioned Jerem. 4. 2. First, in Truth, namely, the twofold
Truth before mentioned. 2. In Judgment, that is, with Knowledge and
Deliberation, minding and understanding what it is we swear. 3. With
righteousness or justice, that is, That it be in things, that are according to
the Law of Equity, as well as Piety, neither wronging God, nor others by our
Oaths; for Oaths are in themselves still, Vincula ^quitatis, and not
iniquitatis: Bonds of Equity and Justice, and not of Iniquity and Injustice.

There are also to be observed these Tacit or Express Conditions in all
Promissory Oaths, (and sometimes it is fit to express them, and sometimes not;)
If God will, and if nothing intervene to hinder, Jam. 4. If I live, and health
permit. As much as in them lies, they shall aim at it, if some impossibility
intervene not. 3. So far as the fulfilling of this* shall be Lawful; for it can
only tie to Lawful things, and Lawful means and courses; and this is
especially to be understood of Indefinite Oaths. 4, While things stand so; but
if the Case alter Essentially, and men turn Enemies to the Kingdom or
Commonwealth, to whom we were by Oath obliged, to give or sell somewhat that
we know would be made use of, to the Probable ruin or hazard thereof; then its
not in our power, Salva potestate superioris.

It may be asked, How we shall judge of Indefinite Oaths; such as Soldiers
give to their Officers, to be obedient to them; or of Oaths in things which are
indistinct, and the matter not obvious, as Oaths in Colleges, Incorporations,
Towns, etc. Where the things sworn are Complex.

Answ. These cannot altogether be condemned. 1. Because though a man have not,
yea cannot have, a particular and distinct knowledge of all Particulars; yet he
understands such Oaths, as binding to all necessary and lawful things, as the
general Condition requires. 2. Because he takes the Oath for the end, and in
the sense, that it is Commonly taken, which binds in the Essential things,
pertaining to the being of that Incorporation, but takes not in, every
particular strictly.

By what is said, then: We may, 1. Condemn Oaths in Trivial things, as Oaths in
Complements; when men swear they will not go one before an other. That men are
welcome to their Houses: That they will not let them go so soon: That they
shall drink so much, though it may not be to Excess: That they shall return
some petty thing they have borrowed, and the like. 2. Rash Promises, such as
are hastily and unadvisedly or doubtingly made. But ere we come to Particulars;
let us consider what is condemned as Perjury, which is the highest Degree.

There are these several sorts of Perjury mentioned; some whereof are more
direct and immediate; some more mediate and indirect.

The first sort of Perjury is: When one upon Oath asserteth as a Truth, that
which he knows is not a Truth, or doubts of it: or is mistaken in it,
through his own negligence, not being certain that it is as he says, whether
he affirm or deny: Thus Naboths false witnesses were guilty; and many other
Instances may be adduced.

The second is: When one promises something* which he minds not to perform,
and confirms that with an Oath; he is no doubt Perjured, because there is not
a correspondent verity betwixt his Oath and his purpose.

The third is: When men promise and intend for the time to perform* yet, upon
no just ground, fail afterward in performing what they have sworn. This is
Perjury, because there is not Truth in fulfilling the thing sworn, according to
the Oath, These are direct Perjuries.

More largely again, a man may be said to forswear himself. 1. When he swears
to perform a thing, which is simply impossible; especially while he knows it
to be so: For as the former is not a swearing in Judgment and Truth; so this
is a profane and wicked swearing, against Light and Judgment, of a manifest
lie and falsehood: So that betwixt his Promise to perform such a thing, and the
performance, there is employed a Contradiction. As for one to swear, to be to
morrow at Rome, who is to day at Glasgow* the very swearing is forswearing. 2.
When one swears an unlawful or wicked thing* or confirms it with an Oath;
like those forty that swore to kill Paul; especially if that Oath be contrary
to some Duty which lies formerly by Oath on the Person swearing: For, that is
not to swear in Righteousness and Justice: Beside, that it draws on a
necessity, either of breaking that Oath, and ^o of being perjured, or of going
on to fulfill it; and so of being doubly perjured. 3. Men are forsworn and
perjured, when they fulfill a wicked Oath, as Herod did, Matthew. 14 in beheading
John the Baptist; for, though he seemed not to over-turn, and make void his own
Oath, but to keep it: Yet this (as also the former) over-turneth and makes
void, the scope and Nature of an Oath in general, and is a plain Contradiction
to it, and makes an Oath, which should be Vinculum Aequ^tatis, a Bond of
Equity: (there being Nulla Obligation but ad Officium, no Obligation but to
Duty,) to be Vinculum Iniquitatis, a Bond of Iniquity: And so thwa^teth with
the very end wherefore such Oaths are appointed* In which respect David did
better in not executing his rash Oath, but keeping the general scope of all
Oaths, when he refused not to hearken to Abigails Counsel, even to the
Nonperformance of what he had sworn.

It may be Questioned here, Whether one man may be accessory to another
Perjury, if he constrain him to swear, of whom he has a suspicion that he will
forswear?

Answ. Distinguish 1. The matter in which, if it be of grave Concernment, or of
little Moment. 2. Distinguish, betwixt the Publickness and Privacy of it 3.
Distinguish betwixt Parties, as betwixt a Judge, who is to decide, and a Party
that is the Pursuer.

We say then. 1. A Party pursuing, in a Particular of his own Concernment;
especially if it be of no great Concernment; may, Yea, should forbear pressing
such a Person to swear, both for sparing the Party, and for respect to the Name
of God; since he can hardly, in this Case, be very hopeful to gain by it.

2. We say, (notwithstanding in some Cases,) that the Judge may admit such to
swear, especially in Public scandals. 1. Because none can certainly know, but
God may constrain them to swear Truth. 2. Because it is his way, left to decide
all Controversies; and a Judge cannot eschew it, when it lies on him to put a
close to such a Controversy, at which he cannot win by any other means; though
great Prudence is to be used in proceeding in such a case, especially it being
of that Nature as is in Scripture appointed to be decided by Oath, as Exodus, 22.
17.

The great question is concerning a promissory Oath, if in any case it may be
made void, and cease to oblige, or, in what cases that may be?

That every Oath binds not according to the Letter, we suppose needs no
reasons to clear and confirm it: There are two ways in general how the
obligation of an Oath promissory cease. 1. When the Oath it self is null, and
never had any obligation. 2. When by some other thing intervening, there is a
loosing from the obligation which the Oath once had.

That it may be clear that, notwithstanding of this, Oaths are of a most strict
Obligation, having the great and dreadful Name of God interposed in them; and
that many things, whatever weight be laid on them by men that way, do not
loose from it, such as these following which we shall put by, in the first
place.

1. No man's temporal loss in Goods, Name, or Estate, will loose him from his
Oath, nor make it null and void, Psalm. 1^. ult. 12. that our ingagment by Oath
is to something of its own nature indifferent, will not loose us, though there
be here no other tie upon us to the thing, and that without the Oath we were
free; yet the Oath once engaged in, will tie us, as is clear from that same
15th. Psalm. For an Oath is of its own nature Obligatory, and according to Numb.
31. Persons at their own dispose must do even in such cases as they have bound
their Souls. 3. Though we were engaged in the Oath by the deceit and guile of
others, the deceit being circumstantial only, yet if the things be not sinful,
it binds us, as is clear in that Oath to the Gibeonites, wherein the deceit
was such, 4. Though by fear or violence the Oath has been extorted, yet the
matter being lawful, it binds because of the honor of God's Name interposed.
5. Though it was sinful as to the manner, and rashly made at first, as that
with the Gibeonites was; yet is it binding, if lawful in the matter, there
being a great difference betwixt juramentum illicitum, an Oath unlawfully come
under as to its manner, and juramentum de Re illicita, an Oath in an unlawful
matter. 6. Though we could devise and find out some interpretation or meaning
of the words of the Oath that might seem to make forloosing us from its
obligation; yet, if that was not meaned at the first tendering of the Oath, but
otherwise understood by him that did take it, it will not absolve not excuse
from the guilt of Perjury, To put afterward a new gloss on it; because an Oath
is stricti jurts, and will not admit for any respect nor on any account, of
interpretations prejudical to the native truth of it, lest it should be found
to be, according to Psalm. 24. a Swearing deceitfully. 7. Though there may be a
good meaning and intention in reversing the Oath, and going cross to it, men
not doing so for a particular end of their own, but for a public good as is
suposed; yet that will not absolve from obligation of the Oath, nor from the
guilt of Perjury, as is clear in God's punishing Readiness Family for breaking
that Oath with the Gibeonits, even though he did it out of his Zeal to the
Children of Israel and Judah as the Scripture expressly affirms. 2 Samuel 21. 2.
8. Though the Oath be conceived by a Creature, as at least the immediate object
ofit, and so sinfully made in that respect; yet, being made, it tyeth from
respect due to God, who shines in his Creatures. Matthew. 23. 19 20. 21. 9.
Through the thing become impossible, if that impossibility might have been
prevented by our searching our selves as far as in us lay, we are not freed
from the guilt of Perjury, though the thing Sworn do now by onr own
s^oathfulness become impossible; or if the thing Sworn might have been
performed before any such impossiblity came on; or if we might have prevented
it by our suitable circumspection and diligence. 10. Though a sinful Oath, to
wit, being made on a sinful promise, in it self, bind not; yet the sinful
condition being fulfilled it binds; as in the case of Judah, his promising a
Kid to Thamar, upon that wretched condition of prostituting her self to his
sinful Lust, who did offer the performance of what he had engaged to, upon that
most sinful condition now fulfilled; for the condition being fulfilled, the
promise is absolute, and the sin was not in giving the Kid, but in the
condition that was made, which is past. 11. Much less will it exempt any man
from the guilt of Perjury, that in Swearing he had a meaning of the words of
the Oath, contrary to what in common sense they bear, and in the construction
of all in different persons, or to their meaning sine juramento or extra
juramentum; or that he had any reservation in his own mind; the first is,
Aequivocation; the second is mental Reservation, that have no place in such an
Oath which should be plain; single, and clear. Neither 12, will a dispensation
from any other, as for instance, from the Pope, who has no power to dispense
in Oaths, nor from lawful Superiors, except it be in things wherein by our
relation to such Superiors we are subjected to them* loose the obligation of
our Oath, nor free us from the guilt of Perjury; if* I say, the matter of the
Oath be in things to which their power over us does not extend, in such things
doubtless they cannot dispense. 13. The obligation of an Oath cannot be loosed,
nor the guilt of Perjury evited by commutation of the thing sworn, for it must
be according to what has proceeded out of our mouth, Numb. 30. 2. P^^lm 15. 4.
14. Nor can it be loosed, and Perjury eschewed, by any posteriour tie and oath:
for thereby the prior or former oath is not made null, but the posterior or
latter is made null by the former, for juramentum non derog at j^ri ^lieno,
because God is party, and we cannot reverse an obligation to him which He or
any other has by a prior right and tie.

But they are null. and of no force. 1. When the thing sworn is sinful and
unlawful in it self, because there is nullum vinculum iniquitatis. there is
not, neither can there be, any obligation to iniquity. 2. When it is unlawful
to him that swears, as suppose one would swear to do that which were
incumbent for a Magistrate or Minister, he himself being but a mere private
person, and it no ways belonging to his station: it tyeth him indeed to
endeavor by all suitable means the effecting of the thing by them, but not to
do it himself, for it alters not stations. 3. When the thing is simply
impossible, oaths cannot bind, in that case. 4. When the oath is engaged in by
any, in whose power the thing sworn is not, as by Children, Wives, Servants, or
Subjects, in such things wherein they are subject to others, and of which they
are not Masters; it tyeth them only to endeavor it with their approbation or
permission, see Numb. 31. 5. When the deceit is not in circumstantials, but in
essentials: as* suppose one should swear to such another persons to pay him
such a debt, or to give such obedience, thinking him to be the very person to
whom he owes these things, who yet is not the person we suppose him to be* the
ground of the oath is null, and its obligation accordingly cease* as when
Jacob was deceived by his getting Leab first for Rachel, because such an oath
wrongeth another, to whom that which is sworn is due, and supposes the
condition of being due. 6. When the oath is impeditive of a greater good, or of
a moral duty; as suppose a man had sworn not to go to such a place, nor to
speak to such a person. nor to eat such meat; that oath (being at first rash,
and without judgment) if duty and necessity call him to the contrary of what
he has sworn, binds not, because a moral command may require him to go
thither to take on such a charge there, or to speak to that person for his
edification, etc. yet this would be tenderly applied, and with great
circumspection. 7. When the oath is interposed to oblige to the performance of
some thing which has a tendency to an ill end; as for instance, if a Man
should swear to meet with a woman for committing filthiness, to give arms for
helping to oppose an innocent, or any such like thing; for though coming to
such a place, or giving such arms may be lawful, yet as so circumstantiate:
this coming, and this giving of them with such an intention, is nnlawful, and
therefore the oath is null.

For loosing from the obligation of an Oath which is lawful, there are these
cases granted. 1. When it is contradicted by a Superior, having power in that
very particular, as Numb. 31.

2. When the case materially alters, as ifone should swear to give such a man
arms, who afterward turns mad, or an Enemy; to give obedience to such a
Commander, who afterward becomes a private man, and cease to be any more a
Commander, because in such cases the relation upon which the duty and Oath is
founded, cease. 3. When the party sworn unto, relaxeth us: for though none
can absolve from a Vow, yet in a promissory Oath, whereby some right accrueth
to one from another, a man may dispense with his own right; as for instance, he
may in whole, or in part, forgive and discharge such a sum of money that
another by Oath has sworn to give him, which when he does, in so far the Oath
and its obligation is loosed; he having, as himself thinks fit, accepted
satisfaction for whole or part; but in Vows to God no man can dispense, He
being party there. 4. When by some after and unforeseen intervening Emergent,
the man is quite disabled from performing his Oath, as by sickness, plundering,
etc. In that case, so far and so long as he is disabled, in so far and so long
is he loosed; that condition being necessarily presupposed in giving the Oath
at first, though the obligation to performance lies still on him so far and so
soon as he shall be able.

It may be marked, by the way, that often profane men are more strict in
keeping sinful Oaths, then those which are lawful: the Devil putting home that
obligation on them as a snare, and their own corruption siding with the Oath in
its matter, makes it appear strongly binding to them.

If it be asked, Wherein it is that an Oath binds more then a Promise does?

Answ. An Oath binds to nothing but what is in the Promise, but it binds
more strongly, and so the sin is greater in breaking an Oath then a Promise;
because not only our truth to men is engaged in the Oath, but our reverence
and respect to God also, and his dreadful Name thereby notably taken in vain.

So then against this Doctrine of Oaths fails perjury or forswearing,
rash-swearing, indeliberat* swearing, as incomplements (as for instance, if one
should swear he will not drink, or go before such another person:) Solemn
Oaths entered into, at Communions, at Baptism, or in other lawful Covenants not
performed: Ah! how often are these broken, even in that which we might easily
do? We so carry and keep to God as men could not but quarrel; irreverent
swearing even in what is right; grossly profane swearing, as by Gods Soul, his
Wounds, Blood, etc. Uncouth'd, strange, newly-coin'd and invented Oaths, no
doubt, by special help of the Devils art, Cursings, wherein the Devil is
mentioned, and his aid implored for the execution of men's paision^^e and
revengeful imprecations; yea, not being suitably affected with the Oaths of
others, not admonishing them, nor seeking to recover them, not endeavoring by
all requisite care the preventing of them, withholding of instruction and
correction when called for, and not procuring the erection of Schools, etc. may
make many guilty of Oaths they never heard, when they fall out in persons, whom
it became them to teach and admonish, etc.

There are somethings near of him unto (^o say ^o) and of affinity with Oaths;
as (...) Adjurations, when we adjure or charge one by the Name of God to do or
forbear such a thing: as Saul bound the people with a Curse, 1 Samuel 14. And
Joshua charged Achan, Josh. 7. and the High Priest Christ, Matthew. 26. and Paul
Timothy, 1 Timothy ^. 21. and 6. 13.

Adjurations differ thus from Oaths, that by an Oath we bind our selves to do
or forbear somewhat, or to tell truth; by Adjurations we bind others by
interposing the Name of God for commanding, charging, persuading to do or
forbear such a thing, and implying, if not expressing some threatening or curse
if it be not done or forborne: There are three sorts of these in Scripture, 1.
When me^ adjure men. 2. When they adjure Devils. 3. When they adjnre
unreasonable Creatures, as Serpents, etc. To each of these, a word.

As to the 1. We say that men may sometimes adjure other men in matters
weighty, suitable, and necessary to be done: when it is rightly gone about, and
not in passion or for self ends, but soberly, gravely, and singly, for the
glory of God immediately, or mediately by another good being interposed; so,
many examples confirm, and so necessity requires, that when regard to men does
not sutably weigh that such a desire be put home tothe Conscience from respect
to God and his Authority, who is Witness and will Judge: this some way sifteh a
m^^ before God, and so may prove a good means, through his blessing, to make
the man serious; which sort of adjuratious may be distinguished thus.

1. There are proper adjurations or charges authoritatively laid on, in the
Name of God, or of Jesus Christ; this is done by Magistrates or Ministers in
their places, as Paul charge Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 13. and gives him charge to
charge others* ^. 17. This being used in serious and weighty matters, and not
too frequently (lest the Name of God become thereby contemptible) is the most
proper and the most weighty charge.

2. There are Obtestations which are serious and weighty entreaties and b^^
seechings in the Name of God, and for Christ's sake that one may do o^ forbear
such a things as when Paul beseeches the Romans and Philippians by the mercies
o^ God, Romans 12. Phil. 2. 1, 2. and Abigal interposeth seriously with David:
this (...) most properly done by Inferiors, Subjects, Children, etc. to their
Superiors* and has in it also a more implicit threatening if such a thing be
slighted, as i^ Abigals words to David, ^ Sam, 25. is clear.

3. There are Attestations whereby one is seriously put to it to tell some
truth* or to bear witness of some truth asserted by another; thus Joshua
attested A^^an.

4. We say, These have a binding virtue in some cases, and cannot without
contempt of God (who so charge them, and before whom they are so attested) be
slighted; and therefore if it be not properly Perjury for a man, either not to
speak at all, being attested, or to speak what is not truth; yet sure it is
more the^ ordinary contempt, and a greater sin them if no such adjurations,
attestations, o^ obtestations had been used, because the Name of the Lord has
been interpose^ by others: and if such attestations, etc. be lawful, as we have
proved them to b^ in some cases, then ought they to have weight, or they are
used in vain; we se^ our Lord Christ answered to such, Matthew. 26. after a
whiles keeping silence.

And in reference to these ye fail, 1. In giving little entertainment unto, an^
laying little weight upon the charges and obtestations of Ministers, which come
unto you by them from this Word and Gospel; these charges of Ministers are
(...) if an Herald gave a Charge in the Magistrates name, which binds as
from him* and more then another message delivered in other terms* in this then,
Minister^ ^re as Heralds charging you in their Master's Name, even in the Name
of the great God, and of Jesus Christ, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth.

2. When one of you puts not another serionsly to it, to forbear and
abandon fin, or to practice such a duty, charging them, or rather obtesting
them, as they will answer to God to do so, as often in the Canticles we find, I
charge you, O Daughters of Jerusalem.

3. In your overly, rash, and slight way of using obtestations and grave
entreaties, merely or mostly for the fashion, or by way of complement, or in
petty and trivial things; as when ye say, for God's sake, for God's blessing do
this or that, only as acustomary by* word; this is no doubt more then on
ordinary taking of God's Name in vain in common discourse, because ye take on
you to bind others in the Name of God, not considering what ye are doing; and
in a matter not necessary, and of no weight exposing the Name of the Lord to
contempt, and thereby tempting others to care but little for it; this is a most
horrid and crying sin amongst our ordinary Beggars, whereof others also are
guilty, who are not sutably affected with it, and do not in their places
seriously endeavor to have it mended; as also this is, when we desire one
another lightly and irreverently to do such and such a little thing* in the
Name of God, as to sit down or rise up, in God's Name, etc. which things are
alas too too frequent.

2. For adjuring of Devils, it is two ways lawful, and two ways not.

1. It is lawful to command Devils in the Name of God by those who are called
to it and are gifted to cast them out. 2. It is lawful for any by Prayer to
God, and the exercise of Faith on Him to endeavor to repel and resist them,
and to beg that he would rebuke them; as thus, The Lord rebuke thee Satan; this
way we neither command the Devil, nor pray to him, but pray unto the Lord to
command him.

Again: It is unlawful, 1. when one adjureth him who is not called to it, as
those Sons of Sceva did, Act. 19. 13, 14. This certainly being a peculiar and
extraordinary gift, as those of prophesying, foretelling of things to come,
speaking with Tongues, and healing of the Sick with a word, were; ought not
without special warrant to be usurped more then they.

2. It is unlawful when it is done by exhorting or obtesting of, or praying
unto the Devil himself, and entreating him as we do God, which way implies, 1.
Friendship with him when we entreat him as a Friend. 2. Prayer or worship to
him who is not the object of it. 3. An obligation on us to him, when he
yields to obey; and he will not fail, if by any means he can, to put that
complement or obligation on us, and so Necromancers, Witches, Exorcists, etc.
may cast out Devils by collusion (though possibly not in a way so explicit),
whereby the Devil gains his point upon such as effectually, as if there were
a most expressly formed Covenant betwixt him and them, and thus the Pharisees
falsely and blasphemously, charged on our blesed Lord, Mat. 12. as if by
Belezebub* that is by Collusion with the Prince of Devils, he had cast out
Devils. There are no doubt, many Sins committed this way, while some take on
them confidently to Command the Devil, as ^f with an Avoid Satan, they could
put him into Bonds: And others seek Health from Devils or Witches, especially
when it is supposed to come from them,) and ^atreat them to do such and such
things: All which are Breaches of this Part of the Third Commandment.

3. What is said of Adjuring Devils, may be said Proportionally of Adjuring
Unreasonable Creatures, which is the same ways Lawful and unlawful: Charming
also, and naming the Lords Name over Diseases, as if some special worth and
Efficacy were in some words; is unlawful and Condemned by this Command.

It follows now that we say something to Vows, which are Bonds, whereby a
man binds himself (and so they differ from Adjurations) to God only as party,
and that in things belonging to God; willingly, and upon Deliberation. (And so
they differ from Promissory Oaths, wherein we bind our selves to others: and in
matters which are not of themselves Religious.)

Under Vows we comprehend, 1. Sacraments. 2. Covenants, solemnly engaged into
before others. 3. Particular Vows to God. 4. Promises and engagements* whether
inward in the Heart only, or also outwardly expressed to, or before the Lord:
For though these have not always Gods Name, formally and expressly interposed
in them* yet He being Party, and they being made to him, he cannot but be
singularly looked at, as Party, Witness, and Judge, in the making and
performing of them: Therefore, do we comprehend all even purposes, expressed in
Prayer to him, as being of the same kind, though not of the like Degree.

We mind not here to meddle with speculative Debates about Vows, but to hold us
only at what concerns Practice: And say, 1. That such Promises to God, and
engagements, being rightly made and taken on, or rightly goneabout; are not
only Lawful, but sometimes necessarily called for, as appears. 1. From the
Command, which is to Vow, as well as to perform, Psalm 76 11. 2. From Example
of Saints in all Ages: David faith, Psalm 119. when his frame is most tender,
Verse 57. I have said. I will keep thy words. And thereafter, Verse 106. I have
sworn, (...) well perform it, That I w^ll keep thy righteous Judgments. For,
saying and swearing to God are near the same; and who sincerely say in secret,
may in some Cases also Articulatly swear. 3. From the end of Vows, which is to
bind us to something the more straightly, and to evidence our greater desire and
willingness to be so bound: And therefore they being Midses, for that end; when
the end is in a special manner called for: and may, in all probability, be the
better obtained, by the use of this Mean: then is it called for also, and
cannot be omitted. 4. From the Lords gracious accepting of such Engagements and
Vows, and approving of them. 5. From the several Promise and Prophecies of
them, as commendable and good service, from Men to God, under the Gospel, Isai.
19. 18. and 21. Jer. 50. 4, 5. Isai. 44. 5.

So then, I say, 1. In some Cases; to wit, when it glorifieth God, and edifieth
others; or is profitable to our selves: But if it thwart with any of these,
there is a failing: or when some pressure of Spirit, or cogent Reason, puts
us not to it, or some great need calls for it; (as Abraham, for the weighty
Reason, expressed by himself, Genesis 14. swore he would take none of the spoil,
he had rescued from the Kings overcome by him:) For we are not always called
to it.

2. I say, Not in all Things: Because the matter of a Vow, must be one of these
two: Either, 1. Some commanded Duty, as Jacob* Vow, Genes. 28. and David's,
Psalm 119. 106. were: Or 2. Something that relates to Worship: or may further
some commanded Duty, or prevent some sin, to which we are given, and much
inclined: As suppose a Man should engage himself to rise sooner in the morning,
that he might the more effectually cross the lust of his laziness, and to keep
more at home, the better to prevent the snare of evil, and Loose-Company: It is
not Housekeeping simply, or rising soon, that is the matter of his Vow: but as
they relate unto, or are made use of for such ends: Therefore Vows can only be
made to God alone, Ps. 76. 11. and Ps. 132. 2.

3. I say, Rightly gone about: That is, 1. Deliberately, and Judiciously; for
Ignorance, Haste, and Rashness will spill all. 2. With Humility, and due sense
of our own Corruption, which makes us (Alace!) to stand in need of such Bands
to keep it in, and of such Up-stirrings and Excitments to Duty. 3. With fear,
singleness, and Zeal for God; with love to his Honor, and to true Holiness:
Not for our selfends, to gratify an Humor or Passion, or in Fits of
Conviction, to stop the Mouth of a Challenge, and so put it by.

4. The Vow would be heartily, and cheerfully undertaken, not as a piece of
Bondage, but of Liberty, that we may be thereby indeed engaged unto the Lord
having no hink or Hesitation; nor Reservation in the making of it: what can be
expected as to the performance, if therebe Hesitation, in the very undertaking?

5. There should be much denyedness in it. 1. To our selves. 2. To the Oath as
not accounting our selves to be more Religious by it; or more pleasing to God,
as if it merited somewhat; nor yet more strengthened by making of it, but more
engaged to perform, and keep what we have vowed.

6. There should be Diligence in doing, going on, and helping and inciting
others to join with us; that so it may through Grace be made irrevocable,
which is the practice of the people of God, Jer. 50. 4, 5.

7. There should be engaging, in the lively Exercise of Faith; drawing strength
from Jesus Christ, according to his own promise; and of our selves to make use
of him, for that end: Yea, that should be laid for the foundation of our
undertaking: Therefore every such engaging, is a Covenanting with God, and
there is no Covenanting with Him, but by interposing of Jesus Christ, both for
the procuring of Pardon for bypast failings and guilt; and for Grace and
Strength, to perform, called for, and engaged into Duties, for the future. See
a frame of Spirit fit for Covenanting, when seriously and suitably gone about.
Jer. 50. 4, 5.

Concerning these Engagements, we say. 2. That they are of themselves
Obligatory, and binding to those who come under them, as Numb. 30. 2, 3. Vowing
is called the binding of a Man's soul; And Psalm 36. 12. its said, Thy Vows are
upon me, O Lord, as pressing him with a Weight, till they were paid.

If it be asked, 1. How Vows bind? We Answer, 1. In moral Duties, they make the
Obligation no greater; for, they being laid on by the Command of God, and
having his Authority, there can be no Addition to that in it self: But there is
a twofold Addition. 1. In respect of us; so that though the Obligation be not
greater in it self, yet we join our Approbation or Consent unto that, whereby,
as by a positive Super-added voluntary Consent, we bind our selves; so that in
some respect we have two Bonds (the Law, and our Oath both) for one. 2. Though
it make not the former Obligation, to bind more strongly in it self; yet it
makes that Obligation to have a more deep Impression upon us; so that a man,
by Vow bound to a commanded Duty, will think himself more bound to it, then
before; and that Command will have a deeper Impression, and more weight on him,
to persuade him to do, and to challenge him when he has omitted, then before.
Again, in things that are merely Accessories to a Religious end, as Extrinsick
means; for instance, fasting, staying at home, etc. Vowing, never makes the
doing of these of themselves, to be Acts of religious Worship; but it makes
our keeping of them to be by a Religious Tie: so that without Prophanity they
cannot be altered, out of the case of necessity.

If it be asked, 2. What is to be thought of our common and ordinary
Engagements. 1. By Baptism. 2. At the Lords Supper. 3. By Oaths in Covenants.
4. Engagements in Private to God by Vows, Purposes, Promises, Resolutions, in
thoughts within; or expressed in Prayer: (I suppose it does not a little
concern all of you to know, how they bind and when they are broken.) We Answer.

1. That, All these are binding, and still accounted so, (Psalm. 119. 106, Psalm.
67.) is not to be doubted, yea binding in an Eminent Degree, as being made to
God and not only Before Him: The nature of the thing and our consent also
binds, For, 1. If interposing the Name of God to men does bind, much more to
God: 2. If a Promise solemnly ratifyed bind to men, much more to God. Hence 3.
Our, Obligations in Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, receive Strength and
Conviction against us from the Covenant, which we solemnly Ratify and renew
with God therein, and that before the World: And our Breach of these Vows is
charged on us by the Lord, as an open Breach of his Covenant; the Obligation
whereof is pleaded from them, Genesis, 17, verse 10. and 14. and elsewhere.

2. Yet do they not bind absolutely, as the Duty lies upon us and as we should
aim at it; for though we be bound by the Law to be perfectly Holy, and without
sin; yet does not a Vow so tie us, or that Obligation is not from our Vow, but
from the Law; because our Vow is to be understood, 1. With Respect to our
Nature, now Corrupt and sinful: and therefore to Vow, absolutely, to be without
Sin, or absolutely to abstain from it, is injurious and impossible, 2. With
respect to our aim and desire. 3, With respect to our not Approving, or Dis
approving onr selves in any thing, wherein we come short. 4. In respect of the
Obligation to endeavor it, which is, always, and by all suitable means to
press at it, and to leave nothing undone, which may further it: So then 1.
They do not bind Absolutely or Simply, but Respectively. 2. Not as to the
Victory, but as to the Wrestling and Fighting for Victory. 3. Not as to the
Event, but as to the Means which are in our Power; and therefore some plead,
That they had not broken Covenant, though they had Sins, Psalm. 44. 17

3. Though they bind not Simply or Absolutely, (and are not therefore to be so
taken or understood) yet they tie Absolutely, 1. To the main of having God ours
in Christ. 2. In other things, thus:

1. They tie us to live in no known Sin, especially Outward Sins and to delight
in none. 2. To omit no Known Duty, but to essay the doing of it. 3. As to the
Manner, to essay it seriously; so that though a man cannot swear, that he shall
have no Corruption in him, while he is upon Earth: Yet in so far he may* As 1.
Not to approve of it. 2. To leave no means unessayed, consisting in his
Knowledge, that may help to mortify it. 3. Seriously, and in good Earnest, to
be aiming at the Mortification of it, in the Use of these. And so this Tie of a
Vow is, 1. As far as in us lies. 2. As Universal as the Duty is. 3. Constant
and always binding. 4. When it is taken on, we should not let it lie on, (to say
so) till the Sun go down, but endeavor that we may be free of it; it binds
us to quit Sin, as well as to eschew it. It reaches not all Infirmities, to
make them Breaches; but known Sins, or the least sins stuck to.

3. Concerning these Vows, we say; That the Breach of them is a very great Sin,
and does much more aggravate Sin, where it is, then where it is not* So that
the Sins of Christians against Baptism, Communions, Oaths in Covenants, Secret
Engagements, Resolutions, and Promises to God, are much greater then the Sins
of others. Hence the Lord charge Israel with Covenant*Breaking, by virtue of
their Circumcision which they had received as a Seal thereof, and aggravateth
all their Sins by that, and looks on them in that Respect as singularly
sinful, Deuteronomy. 29. 24. Jer. 22. 8. etc. which could not so well be, if there
were not some Peculiarity in that Obligation. Our Baptism, doubtless, is no
less binding unto us, nor the Breach of our Baptism Vows less sinful, Col. 2.
11, 12. Neither can there be any reason given, Why the Breach of an Oath to
man, should be charged on a Person, as a Sin and Infamy; and the Breach of an
Oath to God, not be much more charged so. Oh! Take notice then, ye who sin
willingly, who Drink, Swear, omit Prayer; Let your minds wander, and study not
Holiness in good earnest, that your sins have these Aggravations to make them
horrible, infamous, and inexcusable. 1. There is manifest Perjury against the
Oath of God, which even according to the Pharisees Doctrine, Matthew. 15. 33. was
Abominable: Thou shall not (say they) Forswear thy self, but shall pay or
perform thy Oath to the Lord. 2. There is unfaithful dealing, and abominable
Treachery, to break under trust, and to keep no engagement to Him. 3. There is
not only Perjury, and Treachery simply; but toward God. which is more, and
draws a great deal deeper, then toward any other. It Is Dreadful to deal
Unfaithfully, Treacherously, and Perjuriously with Him. 4. All this is in
things that are very equitable and much for your own good, which makes no
small aggravation. 5. This is done not only against promises, but against many
promises, and many other bands. 6. That its often and in many things that you
sin against these promises. 7. That sin is little resented or laid to heart on
this consideration, and as so aggravated.

If it be said, Then it is better to make no promises at all, then to come
under such aggravations of guilt by breaches of them, for none keep them
exactly: and so men must needs be in great and continual disquietness and
anxiety while under them; Were it not better, then, to be doing without
promising?

Answ. 1. It is not free to us, Not to make them more then it is to break them,
or not to keep them; and when we are called to make such Promises, and make
them not, it becomes sin to us as was said. Its not free to us, whether we
shall be Baptized, etc. communicate, etc. or not; therefore, whosoever would
not so engage, were to be censured and punished as utter despisers of the Lords
Covenant, Genes. 17. 14, etc. and Exodus 12.

2. They, who refuse to take them, say themselves open to the temptation of
being more easily prevailed with, not to perform these duties, or of being
sooner ins^ared in such sins, because they are not formally engaged by Vow
against them, and so they make themselves culpably accessory to the
strengthening of tentation, and weakening of resolution; to the contrary
whereof, they are no doubt obliged.

3. If you intend indeed to perform these duties, then ye may engage to do so;
but if ye will not so much as Promise and engage to do them, it cannot be
expected in reason that ye will do them; especially considering that even these
who honestly promise and engage, do yet notwithstanding, find a great
difficulty to do and perform. O take heed that you be not, by your refusing to
engage, making a backdoor for your selves to go out from your duty, that so
you may the more easily, and with the less challenge, shift it.

If it be yet said, that the sin of simple omitting the duty, is less then the
omitting of it after engagements and Vows to the contrary. Answ. 1. It is not
so to a Christian, who is called to engage himself: yea, who by Baptism is
already engaged; for 1. The man that neither ingageth to do, nor does the duty,
fails twice, whereas he that ingageth and performs not, fails but once:
though that once failing, is, by its being cross to his engagement, not a
little aggravated; so that in some respect each fault or failing exceeds the
other: the one is a greater sin considered in it self, but the other is greater
considered complexly. 2. The man that ingageth not, is more accessory to his
own falling, in respect that he used not that mean to prevent it; yet the other
when fallen, is more guilty, in respect of the breach of his engagement. 3. The
man that will not engage, brings him elf under a necessity of finning; for if
he perform not, he fails twice, as is said; if he perform, he fails,
because he engaged not when he was called to it, so his performing is not the
performing of a Vow to God, who requires promising, in some cases at least, as
well as performing. 4. The man that Promises and Voweth, and also performs
what he Promised and Vowed, his performing is so much the more acceptable, as
it proceeds not only from the awe of a Command, but from a spontaneous and
free will offering of it to God, and so is both Obedience to a Command, and the
performance of a Vow; for thus, he chooses obedience, as it is Psalm 119. 30.
It is not so with the other, whether he perform it or not, though we think,
that God often lets the man fall that will not engage, because he says by
his refusal that he trusts not to God for the performance, otherwise he would
engage and undertake on his account also; he says withal, that he aims to
perform, only because he cannot eschew it: And if he could shake off, and be
freed from that Obligation to Holiness* that he would not out of respect to
God, or love to Holiness, take on a new one. 5. The man that ingageth not,
sins more unexcusably in that he will not do that which is the lesser, and
in his power. The less and more easy a thing it be to promise and engage (as
it is no doubt more easy then to perform) the omission of it is the greater
sin, and more inexcusable. The case is indeed, as to Heathens, otherwise, who
were never thus engaged, nor called to engage themselves; but unto Christians
it will be no excuse.

If it be replied that this is very hard; for then no Christian will be free of
Perjury, not have Peace. Answ. 1. I grant the case is hard, and the Strait
great; but it is such as flows from our own corruption in this, as in other
duties and parts of holiness: for as the Law is holy, just, and good, Romans 7.
and is not to be blamed as accessory to our sin; so she Vow is holy, just, and
good, and is not to be blamed, if in the circumstances right, because of our
breach. 2. As I think, it is hard to keep our selves free of sin* even against
light, so I think it is a difficulty to be kept ^ree of this aggravation of
sin, to wit, of committing it against our engagements; and therefore (as the
manner of the People of God is) I think it safest to take with these
aggravations of our sins, as chief parts of them (to speak so) and to take them
with the rest to Jesus Christ, that we may obtain pardon of them through Him,
and to maintain our peace rather by often washing our selves from the filth of
breaking, then by pleading no breach at all. 3. Yet may Christians (even as in
other duties of holiness) in their Vows and Promises to God, have peace, and
say, in a Gospel-sense, We have not turned back from thee, not dealt falsely in
thy Covenant, as it is Psalm 44. 17, 18. which certainly implies not absolute
holiness, or exact performance of all the Articles of the Cove^^^t* but that 1.
In the great and main Articles, they were honest, and did not put another God
in his room to provoke him to jealousy. 2. That they intended truly the
keeping of all, and said nothing by their profession or engagements, which they
minded not to perform. 3. That they had some testimony as to what was past,
that they had in some measure walked according to their engagements, and had
left nothing undone, at least willingly, and with approbation of themselves
therein, that might have furthered them in keeping Covenant, but had stuck to
him in doing and suffering honestly; a man sincerely, and in the strength of
grace studying this, may attain to such a testimony from his own Conscience,
and to a good measure of peace; yea, a man that may have quietness in his
performing duty upon the account of other ties, without engaging, may also come
to have quietness in his engaging to it.

If then there be a necessity to engage, it may be asked, How peace may be
attained in it, and how we may be helped to perform? Answ. 1. We should
endeavor to be clear and quiet, as to the soundness of our bypast
engagements, and of these we presently enter in, as to the motives, grounds,
ends, and manner of engaging, that all be right there. 2. If any thing be seen
to be wrong, it should be taken with, and mended, that we use not Vows mainly
to put by a challenge for the time, without any more of it. 3. Ye should
seriously mind these directions: 1. Forget not your Vows and Engagements, be
minding them often* and thinking of them so as they may never be forgotten,
Jerem. 50. 4, 5. 2. Defer not to pay them, Eccles. 5. 4. Deuteronomy. 23. 21. Delays
make the impression of the weight of the Vow, and of the dread of him to whom
it is made, much to wear out: and taking liberty to be stack in paying of it,
for, but for this once, or for a little while, is a direct breach of it self,
and makes way for more. 3. Keep in mind, and entertain such a frame of spirit
as ye were in when they were at first made* such humility, tenderness, awe of
God, etc. We often, alace! take on Vows in a good frame, to be on the matter a
sort of excuse for us in letting such a frame go, or at least to ease us a
little for the time, as if engaging were performance, which is not the least
part of the deceit of our hearts. 4. The performance of the thing would be
followed as it is undertaken* to wit, in the strength of grace, and by virtue
of life derived from Jesus Christ, quickening and strengthening us both as
promising and performing. 5. We should be often considering the fearfulness of
the sin of breaking, and examining our selves about our keeping of them; making
breaches, that are particularly observed, the matter of confession to God, and
of serious repentance before him. If we would suffer these things to sink down
deep in us as in the sight of God, this no doubt would make them have a quite
other impression. 6. We should still keep the knot fast, and if one promise or
resolution seem to be loosed* we should forthwith cast another* or if one
obligation given, seem to be weakened, we should give another, that there may be
still some obligation standing over our heads; and following engagements, not
formally, but soberly and seriously renewed, may be made use of to bind on the
former upon us, and to make them more effectual, so say they* Jerem. 50. 4, 5.
going, and weeping as they go, Come let us ^oyn our selves unto the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant, never to be forgotten. This is to be understood mostly, if
not only, of private engagements; as for public solemn Oaths and Covenants, we
neither find in Scripture that they have been frequent* but on some great and
very grave occasion; neither could they well be, (so great multitudes engaging
in them) without diminishing from the weight of them, and so without wronging
of Gods Name. 7. We should by no means suffer breaches, though never so small,
to lie long on, but should get us to the Fountain with them, as foul and
loathsome, lest they bring on more and greater.

Now then try Perjury and breach of Vows and Oaths to God. 1. In Baptism, which
extends to engage professing Believers to the mortification of sin, and to
the study of holiness as to both Tables of the Law, and to a conversation as
becomes the Gospel. 2. In, and at Communions, where the same Covenant is
sealed. 3. In your Oaths solemnly taken in Covenants. 4. In your more private
engagements to G^d, and for him to others.

Beside these which are common, some come under particular Oaths and
Engagements by virtue of their stations; as Ministers, Elders, Magistrates, for
the faithful discharge of their respective duties; some by their Relations,
Office, and Place, as Husbands and Wives each to other; as Parents in reference
to their Children, to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord,
and in his fear; some by virtue of their common Trades and Callings have come
under particular Oaths to such and such Incorporations, Trades, etc. And some
on more particular occasions have come under engagements: O look well what you
do, and have done: there will, I fear, many be found Perjured, I do not here
speak of every particular infirmity, but certainly there is sin against God,
and Perjury before him which cannot easily, if at all, be interpreted so with
men; in which respect, Mal. 2. the Lord condemned putting away an innocent
Wife, even though it seemed to have a permission by Law* in these things when
men do not what they may do, or if there be yet more in their power then is
done, or if the obligation of the Oath on them awe them not, or weight them
not, it cannot but be ^ profaning of the Lords Oath: Many, alace, according to
their several relations and stations, are found guilty here, who have little or
no awe of God on them in these things.

In sum, This Command is broken these three ways, in reference to such
engagements: 1. In shunning to make them when we are called to it. 2. In not
making them rightly. 3. In not performing of them when made; and it bi^deth 1.
Absolutely to many things, which cannot come within the compass of ordinary
infirmity. 2. To eschew all known sinful deeds, as Swearing, and what may be
inductive to it, Drunkenness, unlawful Gaming, needless Contentions, etc. 3. To
do all outward duties, as to Read, Hear, Pray* etc. 4. To do them as seriously
as we may. 5. Not to lie in any seen or known sin here forbidden, not to delay
Repentance, though for never so little a while; it dispenses not at all here,
because these are in our power, and when we fail, it is not out of ordinary
infirmity.

Beside what is said, there are yet two ways of taking or using the Name of
God, which are ^ib or of kin to Oaths; The 1. is that of appealing to God to
judge, as David did, that God might judge betwixt him and persecuting Saul, 1 Samuel ^4. 1^. The second is that of attesting God, thus, The Lord knows, God
is my Witness, my Witness is in Heaven, etc. as Joh does, chap. 16. 19. and
Paul, Romans 1. 9. These are lawful when called unto and rightly gone about, but
when abused in rash precipitant, passionate appeals, or in unjust matter, as
Sarahs was* Genes. 16. and in rash unnecessary attestations, or in triffling
matter; they are more then an ordinary taking of Gods Name in vain; and
therefore should never lightly be interposed and made use of.

The great breach of this Command is Blasphemy, though Perjury be most direct.
That we may see how this sin is fallen into, we shall 1. Define it; 2. Divide or
distinguish it, which we shall find to be exceeding broad* Blasphemy then
against God, (as the word bears) is a wronging of Gods holy Majesty by some
reproachful speeches or expressions, uttered to his disgrace* we say Uttered,
because that which is in the heart is most part Atheism, and Infidelity, and so
belongs to the first Command.

Of this there are three sorts, or there are three ways whereby men fall into
it: 1. When any thing unbecoming God, is in word attributed to him, is unjust,
unholy, unmercyful, etc. such as that complaint, Ezekiel. 18. 25. The ways of the
Lord are not equal. 2. When what is due to him is denied him; as when he is
said, not to be Eternal, Omniscient, Almighty, etc. as he was by proud Pharaoh,
and railing Ra^shaketh in his masters Name, who most insolently talked at that
high rate of blasphemy, Who is the Lord that I should they his Voice? etc. Who
is the Lord that is able to deliver you out of my hand? Exodus ^. Isai. 36. 18.
20. 3. When what is due to God is attributed to a Creature, or arrogated by a
Creature; thus the Jews charged Christ as guilty of blasphemy, Luke 7. 49. and
John 10. 33. (supposing him to be a Creature) because he forgave sins, and
called himself God; of this sort of blasphemy, as to some degree of it, is the
commending or crying up our own or others parts, pains, wit, etc. for
attaining, effecting, and bringing to pass of somewhat to the prejudice of
divine providence; so those of Zidon did to Herod, Acts 12. 22. And thus often
men make Mediators and Saviors, as it were of themselves and of other men.

2. This Blasphemy may either be immediately and directly against God himself,
or any of the persons of the blessed Godhead; or mediately and indirectly
against him, when it is against his Ordinances of the Word, Prayer. Sacraments,
etc. by vilifying them in expressions, or against his people, or the work of
his spirit in them: he is indirectly blasphemed in them when they or it, are
mocked; as when Paul's much learning in the Gospel is called madness, or when
real and serious Religion, Repentance, or Holiness, are called Conceitedness,
Pride, Preciseness, Fancy, etc.

3. Blasphemy may be considered, either as it is deliberate and purposed as in
the Pharisees; or 2. As it is out of infirmity, rashness, and unwatch^ulness,
over*expressions: or 3. Out of ignorance, as Paul was a Blasphemer before his
Conversion, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

4 It may be considered, 1. As against the Father. 2. As against the Son. 3. As
against the Holy Ghost: all are spoken of, Matthew. 12. and Mark 3.

1. Blasphemy against the Father is that which strikes either against the
Godhead simply; or any of the Attributes which are due to God, and so its
against all the persons in common; or against the Trinity of persons when it is
denied, and so that relation of Father in the Godhead is blasphemed.

2. Blasphemy against the Son, is when either his Godhead in the Eternity of it
is denied, as it was by the Phetini^^s and A^ians; or when the distinction of
his Natures in their respective true properties retained by each nature is
denied; or when he is denied in his Offices, as if he did not satisfy Divine
Justice for the sins of the Elect as a Priest, which is done by the Socinians;
or, as if he had not a Kingdom or Authority: or when other Mediators, or other
satisfactions to Justice are set up and put in his room; or when another Head
and Husband to the Church, Prince, or Pope; or another Word then what is
written are made and obtruded upon her* and the like, whereof there are many in
Popery, in which respect Antichrist is said to have many names of blasphemy,
Rev. 13.

3. Blasphemy against the Spirit may be considered, either as it is against the
third Person of the Godhead, and so it is against the Trinity; and was that
error peculiar to Mac^do^ius, or the (...), or pugnantes contr^ Spiritual;
that is, fighters against the Spirit; or it may be considered as it looks
especially to the operation, or work of that Spirit in a man's self, and so it
is that peculiar Blasphemy spoken of, Matthew. 12. 32. Which when all other
Blasphemies are declared to be pardonable, is said never to be pardoned. ^his
is the highest degree of Blasphemy, which may be so, 1. In that it is not at
any time fallen into by a Believer or an Elect. 2. That it is not often fallen
into, even by others that are Reprobates. 3. That it is hardly known to the
person himself that is guilty of it, but much less to others. 4. That it is
never repented of, and (we think) does never affect, because it is never
pardoned; all other sins are pardonable, and many are actually pardoned.

1. This sin then is not every sin, though all sins grieve the Spirit, Ephesians.
4. 27. Nor 2. is it any sin of infirmity, or of ignorance, even such as Paul's
was: Nor 3. Is it any sin (even though against knowledge) committed against the
second Table of the Law, such as David fell into, and may be pardoned: Nor 4.
Is it every sin that is against Christ and clear light, for Peter denied him,
but it was of infirmity, Matthew. 26. ^0.

But this sin is 1. in the main of the Gospel, and as to its saving work. 2. It
is not only against light, but against the Spirits present testifying of it, or
bearing witness to it, and after foregoing convictions yielded unto in some
measure, and sticking or lying on as weighty, and making the Conscience to
challenge, as may be gathered from Hebr. 6. 3. It is not in one particular sin
or act, but in a total and resolute opposing of the Truth, whereof men are
convinced, seeking to bear it down in others, and to extirpate it out of the
World, as the Pharisees did, Matthew. 12. Who not only rejected Christ as to
themselves, but opposed him in all others, and sought utterly to undo the
Truth; This is the Heir, come let us kill him, say they. 4. This opposition
flows from malice against the Truth, hatred of it, and from accounting it a
thing unworthy to be in the World; not out of fear or infirmity, or from
mistake, but out of envy and despite at it for it self: On this account the
Lord objecteth it to the Pharisees, John 15. 24. But now they have both seen
and hated me, and my Father, and Matthew. 21. 5. It is universal against every
thing of the Spirit, and obstinately constant, without any relenting, grief, or
fear, except only left it attain not its end: the fear of that tormenteth it;
but its malice and hatred grows, as it is marred or obstructed, being
deliberately begun and prosecuted. 6. It has in it a special contempt of, and
disdain at those special means and works of the Spirit, whereby a sinner is
reclaimed, as Convictions, Repentance, Renewing again to it, etc. Thus Hebr.
10. 10. It does despite to the Spirit, and to Jesus Christ, as to any
application; it contemptuously rejects him and his satisfaction, and any
glance of the Spirit that bears that in; simple contempt, through ignorance
and infirmity, is against the Son, but this which is thus qualified, is against
the Spirit, and is never to be pardoned; the first is against the object
Christ, but the second is against him who is, or him as born in on sinners by
the Spirit, and as contemned by them after their being under these convictions,
and acknowledging of them; this irremissibleness, is not simply that the sin
shall not be pardoned, for so many sins are to the Reprobates; nor yet simply,
because it ends in final impenitency (though that be with it too) since many
sins are followed by that also: but we conceive it to be in these:

1. That seeing this sin (which can be said of no other sin) does wilfully,
and out of despite, reject Christ, there can be no other Sacrifice gotten to
expiate it, Hebr. 10. ^6. There remains no more ^^crifice for it, and though
the person after the first Commission of it may be kept a while in the Land
of the living, yet the nature of that sin being to grow in malice, and to
reject that remedy there being no other, and this being still wilfully and
maliciously rejected, avails them not; so their sin is never pardoned.

2. That the Person guilty of this sin cannot be renewed by Repentance, the
heart of him suppressing that work maliciously; this impossibility is not from
the inefficacy of Grace, but from the order which God has laid down in the
working of Repentance, and in the pardoning of the Penitent; so that as he will
pardon none but repenting Believers, so he will work repentance in none but in
those who yield, through Grace, to his Spirits Work.

3. That God in Justice has sentenced that sin with impenitency, and
unpardonableness, making that one sin thus Capital and unpardonable; thereby to
scare the more from thwarting with his Spirit, he has denied ever to give them
that are guilty of it, Repentance, and has said, that he will plague them with
spiritual impenitency unto the end.

Fifthly, Blasphemy may be considered as it is. 1. Doctrinal, or maintained by
some men in their Tenants, such were those of the old Heretics, such are those
of the Pelagians, Papists, and Arminians, as to the nature of Providence, and
the work of Grace upon hearts, or 2. As it is in expressions indeliberately
brought forth, or 3. In Oaths, as when men swear by the Wounds, Blood, Soul,
etc. of our blessed Lord, which as they are horrible to hear, so is it
reproachful to his Majesty, that these should be so abused, or 4. In Deeds.
Writing, Painting, Acting, Representing any thing Derogatory to him, which are
also charged with Blasphemy, in abusing Gods Name to such ends. 5. It may be in
a high Degree, when men act such a Blasphemy, or consequently when they punish
it not, when we do not rent our Clothes (as it were) at the hearing and seeing
such things in Testimony of our sorrow and Detestation (which was the sin of
the Princes, Jerem. 36. verse 24, 25. Who though they were somewhat
displeased, yet they had not zeal vigorous against that wicked Deed of the
King:) When we have not suitable hatred against such and such blasphemous
Doctrines, Rev. 1. 23. much more if we Extenuat^ them Defend them, or Plead for
them, or 6. It may be either, as we are guilty of it by our own Deeds, or when
we make our selves guilty of the blasphemy of others, as having sinfully
occasioned it to them, tempted them to it, and laid such and such a stumbling
before them, as is said of David, 2 Samuel 12. 14. and of the Jews, Rom 2. 24.
That they caused others to blaspheme the Name of God because of them* thus
Christians, especially those who have a profession beyond ordinary, and
particularly Wives and Servants, by their miscarriages become guilty of the
blasphemy of others, against Godliness, and such and such Duties of Religion,
because they give occasion to it, though that make it not a whit the less fault
to them that blaspheme: see that casten up to his people, Ezekiel. 36. 20. ^1. O
how tender should Professors be in this matter! lest ungodly men get occasion
to speak ill, who lie a^ the wait to catch all advantages to fortify
themselves in their natural prejudice a^ godliness, and draw their conclusions
from miscarriages, not so much against the particular persons miscarrying, as
against the way of God, and the whole generation of the godly.

There are these things especially that make others blaspheme, 1. Some gross
out*breaking as David* Adultery, 2. Pride, Passion and Contention amongst godly
men, when they walk as men, 1 Cor. 3. and 4. and Contentiously, 1 Corinthians. 6.
3, Covetonsness and earthly-mindedness, 4. Manifest unsingleness, and self
designs, driven under a Cloak of Religion, which makes them call all that are
Religious, Cheats, 5. Sinful shunning; and shifting off Suffering, 6.
Undutifulness of Inferiors in the several duties of their Relations to
Superiors, as of Wives to Husbands, of Servants to Masters, of Subjects to
Magistrates, 1 Pet. 2. 15. Tit. 2. 4. 5. 10. 7. Following of errors by
Professors, 1 Pet. 2. 2.

6. Blasphemy, may be considered either as it is, here in the way by men
living, or as it is by them in the place of Torment; who keeping still, no
doubt their former wicked Nature and Corruption, and not considering God. as he
is in himself but as they feel him in the severity of his Justice punishing
them, cannot have good thoughts of him, but will fret at his power and Justice*
which they cannot get free of, though it is like, after their sentence is past,
this is to be considered, as a part of their cursed Estate* and does increase
meritoriously their Judgment, as Blasphemy in the way did.

These ways of breaking this command spoken unto are more gross and
extraordinary: we should now speak a word to such as are more common in our
practice, and these are of two sorts.

The first is more gross, when the Name of God, or any thing bearing the Name
of God as his Ordinances. Word, Sacraments, Prayer, etc. are profaned, out of
Duty. This is done. 1. When these are mocked, or scorned, which is a high
Degree of profaning his Name, 2. When the Scripture-phrases, expressions, or
terms are baffled (to speak so) to our sinful scoffing, Jeibing, and geiring of
others, though we do not directly mock or geir at the Scripture it self. 3,
When in ordinary discourse, and unnecessarily, Gods Name is used, though we
intend not swearing, neither think that we do swear. 4. When ordinarily upon
such and such occasions* the Lords Name is used in irreverent, and
unwarrantable exclamations, as, O Lord, O God, what is this or that, etc. I
hope in God, or trust in God to see such a thing, etc. And possibly sometimes
in passion. 5. When it is used in way of byword, or of certain irreverent
prayers, when a person is troubled and grieved, and would express that passion
at some thing that falls out not desired, God help me, God save me, what is
that? what mean ye? God forgive me, God bless me, for Gods blessing do such a
thing: If God will, in Gods strength, and I trust in God, etc. I shall do such
and such a thing: for Gods sake do this or that, etc. 6. When it is used in
mere complements, God keep you, God be with you, God bless you, etc. which,
with many, are too ordinary Complements. 7. When it is used lightly in way of
asseveration and indirect swearing, God a bit, God have me, if it be so, etc.
8. When it is used in a senseless and superstitious custom, upon such and such
particular occasions, as when men say, O, God be blessed, and God bless at
sternutation or neesing (which Plinius reports to have been used by Heathens,
and particularly by Tiberius, who was none of the most religious men) God be
here, God be in this house, when one enters into a house; or when the Clock
strikes.

The second way (which is less gross, but more ordinary) whereby we fail in
reference to this Command, is in lawful and necessary duties of worship, by
sinful and unprofitable discharging of these; whereby the Name of God is often
taken in vain, and his holiness which he loves profaned: this fault and
failing is two ways fallen into.

1. In respect of the manner of going about such Ordinances or duties of
worship. 1. When the Lord is not sanctified in them, nor the rule and manner
prescribed by Him, kept; this way, sinned Nadab and Abihu, Levit. 10. by their
offering of strange fire. The Lord complains of Israel as guilty of this,
Esai. 29 ^3. compared with Matthew. 15. 8. 9. While they drew near with their
lips, and their hearts were far away, they worship me in vain, says the Lord,
teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men. 2. When men use not such
ordinances, and perform not such duties profitably, when prayer, reading of the
Scripture, Sacrament, Sermons, etc. want their native fruit, then his Name is
taken in vain, and in that respect his Ordinances frustrated and made, as if
they had not been used or performed, so 2 Cor. 6. 1. To receive the Grace of
God in vain, is to miss or let go the benefit of it, and to frustrate and
disappoint our selves of the native end and use of it; This is the first way in
respect of which our duties are in vain as to God, so as he will no^ regard
them.

The second way is as to our selves, and here again we may consider the taking
of the Lords Name in vain, in ordinances and duties two ways, either 1.
Simply, where there is no honesty at all in them, not fruit from them, but mere
Hypocrisy, or at least Hypocrisy in such particular Acts. Or 2. when it is
Comparative, that is, though there may be some reality and fruit, yet
considering what it should be; yea, considering what means the person has,
there is a great defect as to that which should and might have been; thus were
the Hebrews challenged, Hebr. 5. 12. not that they were altogether fruitless,
but that they were not so fruitful as under, and by such means they might have
been, and that therefore they had in a great part used them and received them
in vain; this may and often does befall even those who have some measure of
sincerity, yet fall far short of what they might have attained of the knowledge
of God, and of other blessed fruits by the right improvement of the means they
had.

We may add a third way how his Name is taken in vain, and that in respect o^
it self, or of the ordinance or duty; what indeed it is, and in respect of what
it appears to be, when the show is much more than the substance; and when the
sincerity, reality, and inward Reverence and esteem of our heart in nameing
God, keeps no just proportion with the words of our mouth, and our large
external profession; thus did the Pharisees, and thus do all Hypocrites take and
bear Gods name in vain, not being at all answerable to what they seem to be;
thi^ may be also in others comparatively, in respect, 1. of the Law. 2. in
respect of the means we have, 3. in respect of our profession.

That our Conviction may be the clearer, let us see what belongs to the righ^
going about of duty, or to the suitable mentioning of the Lords Name, the want
whereof, or any part thereof makes us more or less guilty of taking it in vain
1. Then there is a necessity that we propose a good and right end, and al^^
singly at it; for if all things should be done to Gods glory, this of the
Naming of the Lord should be in a special manner so: this is a man's call to
Pray, Preach* Hear, etc. to wit, the concernment of Gods Name, that is, 1. That
God may be honored. 2. That we our selves, or others may be edified. 3. That a
command may be obeyed in the Conscience of Duty; Those then who adventure to
profess or name God, or to go about any ordinance, seeking themselves and not
the Lord, as is supposed men may do, 2 Cor. 4. 5. 2. out of envy* as they did
of whom Paul speaks, Phil. 1. 15, 16. 3, To be honored of men, as the
Pharisees designed by their long prayers. 4. For the fashion, or out of mere
custom. 5. For making peace with God, by mentioning his name so often in
Ordinances, mis-regarding and taking no notice of the Mediator in the mean
time: these I say and such like will meet with that sad word, In vain doy
worship me.

2. There is a necessity of a good principle in naming the Lord (to speak so)
both of a Moral and Physical principle: the Moral, is Conscience, and not
Custom, which falls in with the end, the Physical is the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
12. 3. No man calls Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. 2. A renewed heart,
thus Duties must be done with the spirit, as well as with the understanding 3.
Sincerity, as to the exercise even of the natural faculties; Thus what ever
unrenewed men speak in Duty, without the Spirits influence and exercise of
grace, they make themselves guilty in it; and, when they say, what in sincerity
they think not.

3. It is necessary that that principle act in the right manner, that is, 1,
Sincerely. Josh. 24. 14. 2. In fear and reverence, Eccl. 5. 1, 2. 3. With faith
an drespect to Jesus Christ, Heb. 11. 6. 4. With Judgment and understanding. To
speak of him, not knowing what we say, or to whom we speak, wrongeth him: thus
ignorant, passionate, rash, irreverent and inadvertent mentioning of God, or
meddling with any Ordinance or Duty, wrongeth him, and is a bringing of vain
oblations, which he expressly forbids, Esa. 1. 13.

4. When ever we make mention of God, we should study to be in case to mention
him as ours, as our God and Father in Christ, in all ordinances and duties,
that is, 1. Taking up our natural distance. 2. Looking to Christ for removing
of it. 3. Resting on him, and making use of him for that end. 4. Delighting in
the mentioning of God as ours. 5. With thanksgiving and blessing, when ever he
is named, as the Apostle often does.

5. It is required in respect of the use, fruit, and effect, that something
which is profitable may remain and stick with us, according to the nature of
the duty which is gone about, or the way of mentioning God, such as some
conviction and testimony of the Conscience. 1. That Gods honor; 2. The
edification of others in way of Instruction, or Conviction, or of Reproof, or
of Comfort, etc. 3. My own edification and spiritual advantage, or, 4. My own
exoneration and peace, as to the performance of such a duty, were in some
measure of singleness aimed at and endeavored; and as there is a missing of
any of these, Repentance should be exercised, and faith for pardon; some fruit,
some sense, some lesson, some discoveries, some convictions, etc. would be
sought after to remain. When these or any of these, (if all the rest of them
can be altogether without one) are wanting, this command is simply broken; if
in part they be wanting, it is comparatively more or less broken.

Let us then take a view in particulars. 1. Look to our profession, Oh! what
emptiness is there, much more appearance and show, then reality and substance?
yea, what desiring to seem something, rather then to be? if our professions
(who are least in them) were met and measured by our reality, O how lamentable
vast a disproportion would be found? the one would be quickly found much
broader and longer then the other, the outer-half much bagged as it were, being
a great deal larger then the inner, even where there is most sincerity and
reality.

2. Look through public duties, if there be not much taking of Gods Name in
vain, in hearing, praying, praising, using the Sacraments, etc. and if so, O
what a Libell might be drawn up against us from every Sabbath, Prayer, Sermon,
etc. whereof we often cannot tell what fruit remains, except it be sin,
guilt, and hardness; and therefore doubtless his Name is much taken in vain in
them.

3. Look through private duties in Families, Reading, Praying, Singing,
Conferring, Catechifing, saying Grace, or seeking a Blessing, and giving thanks
at Table; how little regard is often had to the name of the Lord in these? and
how little care and pains is taken to walk by the former rules in them?

4. Look through secret duties, betwixt God and you, how ye pray in secret
before God: Ah! often so, as ye would be ashamed to pray before men; how do ye
Read, Meditate, etc. in secret? how do ye join in prayer with others? which in
some respect is secret; God knows how poorly we acquit our selves in these
ordinarily, and how much we take his Name in vain in them.

5. Look through occasional duties, wherein ye have occasion to make mention of
God with or to others, as when upon any Emergent of providence, we will say, It
is Gods will, God has done it, God is good and merciful, etc. or in any
particular duty of Christian Communion, in instructing, comforting,
admonishing, or convincing of others, or debating with them; how often, when
the Scripture, and the name of God will be in our mouths: in these, and the
matter of debate may fall to be some of his Ordinances, will there be but very
little reverence and respect to God in our hearts?

6. Consider how this sin of taking his Name in vain is fallen in by writing,
not only when Treatises are written, but almost in every Epistle or Letter,
there will be found some prayer or wish, for fashion-sake, wherein there is but
little Conscience made to have the heart joining in it; how much irreverent
using of the Scripture and of Gods Name, is there in writing of Letters,
particularly of Burial-letters, thus. It has pleased the Lord, it has seemed
good to God, it has pleased God or the Almighty, etc. I am not condemning the
thing simply, but our way of abusing it,

7. Look through accidental mentioning of God (if we may say so) in
saluttations, God save you, God be with you; In prayers for Children,
evidencing rather our fondness on them thereby, then our love and reverence to
the Name of God; for such as are in any present hazard, God save; for any
favor, courtesy or complement, God bless; these are good (as the Apostle says
of the Law) if used lawfully, but they are often sinfully, rashly, ignorantly,
yea profanely abused, we having often more respect to them we speak unto, then
unto God. I would not condemn the use of them being duties, but exhort you to
guard against the abuse, and to use a grave, reverent, understanding, and
sensible way of expressing of them, or of any thing like them.

8. Consider narrations of Scripture-stories, or other stories, questions,
tales, etc. wherein the Name of God is mentioned, and possibly when we tell
them, to make a sport of them, and to make merry with them; how often is his
blessed Name taken in vain in them? certainly the mentioning of his Name were
often better forborne, then so irreverently used.

9. Consider the usurping of Gods Attributes, or of an interest in him, rashly,
as when men confidently, yet without all warrant, assert God is mine; I trust
in his mercy, sweet Christ my Savior, my Mediator: Ah! how often is this,
which is the very Crown of grace, to wit, in Gods doing good and showing mercy,
abused and profaned most sinfully and shamefully!

There is one particular, which yet remains to be spoken of on this Third
Command, which concerns Lots, Omens, Superstitious Observations and such
like, whereby the Name of God is wronged, in being not only slighted, contemned
and taken in vain in these events (which yet are guided by Him) but the
Disposal of things, which is due to God, is denied to Him, and Attributed to
Chance, Luck, Fortune, and such like.

We shall then: 1. Show what Lotting or Lottery is. 2. How it concerns this
Command. 3. Distinguish Lots, into several sorts. 4. Show what are Lawful, and
when they are Lawful. 5. What are Unlawful.

A Lot or Lotting is, The Committing, of the Decision of some thing, in an
immediate way to Divine Providence, without the intervening Causalities, or
influence, of any second Cause, to sway in that Decision: So that when the
thing falls out, and is decided, there can be no Reason given, Why it is so
on Men's part, but that the Lord was pleased to dispose: As it was in that
Instance of Lotting, about the Election of the twelve Apostle, in Judas his
room, Acts 1. So from Prove. 16. 33. It Is clear that that is a Lot; Whereof the
whole disposal is of God: And therefore it is said, Chap. 18. 18. To cause
Contentions to cease, and to part betwixt the Mighty: Because none can quarrel,
concerning that which Man has no hand in.

A Lot may be many ways appointed, either by the throw of a Dice, or the like;
or by some other mean putting difference, betwixt one and other, even as men
shall appoint: as when it is; By what Beast they shall first see, by what
saying, or by what Book they shall first hear, or look on* etc. Only we think
Lots differ from Omens, or superstitious Observations, thus: 1. Lots are to
decide betwixt two; the other are Collections, which one may make concerning
himself. 2. Lots follow on some appointment that is mutual and are free; the
other may be otherwise.

That Lots in the use of them, concern this Command, these things will make it
out several ways. 1. That which puts God to it, in an immediate way,
concerns this Command, especially; I mean, whatever puts him to declare
his mind, or reveal himself, that puts him to it, and is a special implicit
invocating of Him: But Lots or Lotting, puts him to it, in an immediate way;
For, 1. None other can dispose of them but he, Prove. 16. 33. 2. What is
discovered by those Lots, is either Gods mind or the Devils, or is by chance;
but it cannot be any of the latter two, therefore it is the first. 3. It is the
putting him to it, more then he is by Prayer: Because, 1. It is by an
Extraordinary way, and often added to Prayer. 2. It is for the manifesting of a
secret Decree; For by it, we are to understaud, what God has appointed, and
Eternally decreed, concerning such an event. Hence it is, that in Scripture,
Prayer is so often, if not always joined with it; and therefore it must in a
special manner belong to this Command: Yea, if God be slighted in it, he is
wronged: if acknowledged according to his Interest, he is in a special manner
concerned, where he wholly orders the thing.

2. It is either a Mean, appointed by him to understand his mind or not; if
appointed by him, then it is in so far his Ordinance, and his Name is concerned
in it; if not, then it is abused.

3. The meddling with Gods Secret, or with his Will, or Way of revealing it in
his Providence, must belong to this Command; but this especially, meddleth with
all these: Therefore, etc.

4. That which cannot be gone about, but the Name of the Lord, is either
wronged or honored, in it: must necessarily belong to this Command, for that
is the scope of it: But none can Lot without either depending on God, for the
ordering of, and acknowledging of him in it, when it is done; and so without
honoring him, or neglecting him, and so taking his Name in vain. 1. By
miskenning his Providence, and thinking to get that decided some other way. 2.
By irreverent going about it. 3. By Attributing it to some other thing. 4. By
not acknowledging God in it, nor submitting to it, when done so. So then these
three ways men fail, and take Gods Name in vain. 1. Before the Lot. 2. In the
time of it. 3. After it is past.

Lots, are ordinarily divided into three sorts. 1. Divine, which are from
extraordinary Warrants. 2, Devilish, wherein the Devil is either invocated, or,
in Circumstances, the Decision is put to him, and guided by him. 3. Humane,
which are ordinarily gone about amongst men.

Again, They are divided: 1. In Divinatory. 2. Consultatory, whereby men find
out somewhat that is secret, as Soul found out Jonathan; or are led to some
Duty. 3. Divisory. By such the Land of Canaan was divided, Joshua 13. 6. 4.
Lus^ry, or, for Play: This division is large and Comprehensive, and has
several steps, according to the weight of the things, as they are greater or
smaller, or indifferent.

Conce^ning them we say: That all Consultatory, and Divinatory Lots, except ly
an Extraordinary Warrant* are unlawful and a Tempting of God, who has now
given us other ways and means, to direct us in what is meet for (...) to do,

2 Concerning those Devilish Lots, there is no Question of the Abominablen^ss
of them; such as foretelling of Fortunes, Horo-Scopes, or Deaths; the finding
of things lost by naming of all suspected Persons, turning the Ri d e, etc.

Yet 3. We dare not condemn all Divisory Lots, if rightly gone about.

Because, they are frequently made use of, in the Scripture: Joshua 7. 13, 14,
and 15 etc. Acts 1. Yea, they seem to be from the Light of Nature, Jona 1. 2.
The use of them, is Moral and perpetual, Prove. 18. 18. To cause Contentions to
cease, and to part between the Mighty. 3. When they are rightly gone about,
they are a Honoring of God, and are a Manifest acknowledging of his
Providence. I say, Rightly gone about: Where, 1. The matter should be weighty
or of some Consequence; that is, It should either be weighty in it self; or it
should be so by some Con equence, or Inconvenience; making a light thing in it
self weighty, otherwise it is (as Swearing is, in a matter of no moment) but a
baffling of his Ordinance.

2. It should be Necessary, that is a thing, that without many Inconveniences,
cannot be in another way decided: otherwise to put God to reveal his mind, in
an Extraordinary way, when there is an Ordinary at hand, is a tempting of God;
even as, to leap over a Wall is, while there is an ordinary passage to go
through by.

3. It should be with a due Respect to God, acknowledging him, to be the
Decisor, calling on his Name in the use of it, and looking to him for the
Decision, as we see almost in all Lottings, and even of those Heathens, Jonah 1.

4. It should be gone about, in the right manner. 1. With Reverence, as if we
were to hear God pronounce the Sentence, and speak his Mind; as while Saul is
a-taking, the People stand before the Lord, 1 Samuel 10. 19, 22. 2. In the Faith
that God guides it; and so, without Anxiety and fear. 3. In Singleness,
Committing it to Him, even in Heart, as well as in Appearance; Abstaining from
all Fraud or Tricks, or any thing which may have influence, as a second cause,
to mar or cast the Decision; this were a high way of mocking God, to put the
Decision to Him, and yet to endeavor to give the Answer our selves,

Lastly, After the Lot, there should be a reverend acknowledging of Gods Mind,
without fretting or grumbling, and a cheerful submitting to it, as we see in
all the Cases instanced in Scripture. These Rules being observed, we think that
for dividing of Stations or Charges; or of Portions, which cannot be other-ways
done, without offense or prejudice; Lots may be used.

Yet, I would say these few things, for Caution here: 1. Ye should not in petty
things use them, when the matter is of no value at all, or of very small value;
so that ye are indifferent, how it falls out: Or when it is not of that weight,
that ye would give an Oath in it; but rather quit it, (and there would be here
a Proportion kept,) ye should rather in such a Case hazard some Loss then put
it to a Lot, out of that Reverence ye owe to Gods Name: All the Cases in
Scripture are weighty: In your Ordinary Merchandise, I desire you to remember
this:

2. Ye should not fail to use your Reason, and honest skill, more, in Sharings
and Divisions, for preventing of a Lot. Folks sometimes, betake themselves to
these for case, when yet their Reason, rightly made use of, might bring to a
satisfying Decision. God has not given Reason to Man in vain, or for naught:
when Reason then may do it; essay it, and forbear a Lot.

3. Let it be in such a matter, and so used, as ye may seek God in it, and
in-call His Name by Prayer: To lote in a thing, that folks will not, or dare
not pray in, agrees not with Scripture examples, nor with that tenderness
which a Believer should have at such a time: It should then be in a thing
respecting a promise.

On the contrary, we may see how men fail here, 1. In weighty things, by not
keeping the right manner before the Lot, in the time of it, and after it is
past, when it ends not strife. 2. In Trivial things, by making this too
Customary; so that folk use the Lot almost in every thing, making that which is
extraordinary to become ordinary, contrary to the nature thereof. It is an
ultimate Judge and Decider, even as an Oath is for ending all Controversies: it
is like unto Moses (as one says,) the great matters should be reserved to it;
yea, it is greater then Moses, its God himself, thus in His providence passing
a Decision; The lesser things would be other ways decided.

3. We may gather from what is said, what is to be thought of such Games and
Pastimes as run on Lottery (having that for the very foundation of them) and
have an immediate dependence on providence for the issue of them.

1. That they are Lottery cannot be denied, for they have all that is in
Lotting; there is in them a putting of things to a doubtful event as to us; and
that event is guided either by God, or by some other, and which-ever of the
two, we say, it will be a breach of this Command; so trivially for our pleasure
to take the Name of God in vain, as many formally do; for none can tell, how
such a thing will come to pass by any reason.

2. That to do so, or to use a Lot in this case is a sin, may also be made out
clearly. 1. Because it is against the end of Lots, which is to divide or decide
where there is Controversy, and so it interverteth their end, and becomes
sinful; even as swearing where no Controversy is, is a sin. 2. There is either
no necessity at all to take that way, orthere is but a made-necessity of our
own, it must therefore be a tempting of God; as suppose this to be the end of
Lotting, to know in the upshot whether so much Money should belong to you, or
to me; no doubt, that point of right to whom the Money belongs, may be
decided as well at the entry; therefore this way of decision is in vain.

3. That Lotting which has in it no reverence to God, but baffleth his Name,
nor is consistent with the right manner of Lotting, cannot be lawful: but this
is such: for it is not only, de facto, contrary to the former rules, but in its
own nature is inconsistent with them: this is clear, 1. From the great
frequency of Lot^ing in these Games. 2. In the little dependence on God for the
event that is in them; and indeed a spiritual frame of dependence on him,
cannot well, if at all consist with them. 3. From its inconsistency with
serious prayer: what! can or dare men pray in earnest for Gods guiding in these
things, in every throw of Dice, or shuffling of the Cards? or in faith expect
still the revealing of his Decree that way? or when it is done, and past, can
they suitably acknowledge Him in it? Men dare not look so seriously on these
things, yea, they know they dare not.

4. That way of Lotting; which cannot but occasion the wronging of the Name of
the Lord, and his providence, cannot be right; but this is such: for we must
say, that either Gods hand is not at all in such things, and so we deny his
providence; or we must say that he may be put to it, by this common and coarse
way, and that in our sport, and for our pleasure in his immediate providence to
declare his mind; which is a notable Baffling (to say so) and Profanation of
his Name; hence it is that men so often Swear, Curse, Fret, and exclaim in
these Games at Cards, Dice, etc. (wherein chance, luck, fortune, etc. are so
much looked to, and in a manner deified) and altogether overlook and mis-regard
the Majesty of God, as if he had no Providence at all in such things.

5. What is done without warrant of either Scripture-precept or practice,
cannot be dose in faith? Now there can be no such warrant drawn from Scripture
for such plays or games, the very foundation whereof is Lottery, and not only
accidentally and rarely incident to them, as may be on the matter to other
lawful recreations, if that can be called Lottery at all, which is rather an
undesigned, unexpected surprising incident of providence; whereas in the other,
the decision by a Lot is designed, waited for, and all along the game referred
unto, and hung upon: yea, it is insuitable and inconsistent with the
Scripture-way of using Lot is, which is always in most grave and important
things; but this way of ^sing them is manifestly to abuse them.

6. That which has a native tendency to make any Ordinance of God vile and
contemptible, cannot be warrantable; Now that Lotting in these Games has such
a tendency to make the Ordinance of a Lot, and of Prayer, which should at least
be joined with it, Contemptible; is obvious to any serious and impartial
considere^ of it, neither can it in reason be thought that, that which is in so
sacred a manner, and with Prayer to God, to be gone about in one thing, and is
by Him appointed for such an end as an Oath is; can warrantably be used in a
manner, and for ends so vastly different from the former in an other thing.

7. If Lots belong at all to this Command, then these Lotting-Games are
unlawful: for they cannot with any Religious reason be supposed to be commanded
in it, and therefore they must be forbidden. And if in trivial things Lots be
unlawful, much more in such Games which end not strife and contentions, but
often and ordinarily begin them, and bring them to a height: and therefore do
the Ancients declaim against this as a Sacrificing to Devils, and invented by
Idolaters.

If it be said here, that these things are thought but very little of by men:
Answ. It is true, and no great wonder; for most men use but to think little of
the breach of this Command. Yet are their breaches sinful notwithstanding; as
many take Gods Name in their mouth lightly, and think but little of it, and yet
that makes not their doing so, cease to be a sin. God has added his
Certification here the more peremptorily for that very end, that men may not
think little, or lightly of the very least breach of this Command (to let pass
more gross breaches of it.)

If it be further objected here, Why may not such Plays or Games be used as
well as other Plays, wherein sometimes Chance or Fortune (as they call it)
will cast the Balance? Answ. 1. Though in those other, Chance may now and then
occasionally occur, yet that is but accidental, these are simply, or at least
mostly guided by Lotting, and immediate providence, and cannot be prevented or
made to be other ways by the best art and skill of men. 2. In these other
Games there is an intervention of second causes, and an use of men's parts;
Natural and Moral, for obtaining such an end ultimate (in some respect) and
immediate; as for example, when men strike a Ball with a Club, or throw a Boul
to a hole, they are guided therein rationally, as they are in coming down a
Stair; and they act therein, as in other things by second causes and use of
means, whether of Body or mind; but in these Lotting-Games it is not ^o, for
all is cast and hung upon extraordinary providence, even as if a man, who
cannot, would be take himself to swimming in, or walking upon the Water, when
an other betaketh himself to a Bridge, or to a Boat.

In sum: As Lots and Oaths are much for one end, to wit, the ending of
controversy and strife. Heb. 6. 16. Prove. 18. 18. So ought the same Rules
almost to be observed in them both. Then 1. Before the Lot we should look to
and follow Gods call, and depend on him in it. 2. In the time of Lotting, we
should act reverently. 3. After the Lot we should reverence the Lord, and
submit to the event of it as to his mind, even though our frame has not been so
right: As an Oath binds when taken in lawful matter, though there has been
rashness as to the manner, by virtue of Gods Name which is interposed; So do
Lots. Because how ever we be as to our frame, it is He who decideth as to the
event; therefore ought that decision to be looked on as most Sacred; God having
thought good beside the general rules in his Word to give evidence of his mind
by Lots, as to some particular events; and though these Games at Dice or Cards
may in the complete frame of them require some skill, how to manage such throws
or such particular Cards when a man has gotten them; yet that, that-throw is
such, casting up so many blacks and no more, that such a man has such Cards
and no other, that is merely by immediate providence, and so must of necessity
be a Lot* or it is by some other means which would (if assaid) wrong God also
very much: And though skill may possibly influence the event as to the upshot
of the Game, yet in these throwings or shufflings the^e is no skill, or if
there be any thing that is accounted Art or skill, it is but deceit, seeing the
scope is by these to leave it to providence in its Decision.

This Doctrine concerning such Games, was the Doctrine of the Ancients, who did
vehemently inveigh against this sort of Lottery, see Cyprian de Aleatoribu^,
who fathereth it on Zabulus and calls it the snare of the Devil, and
compares it with Idolatry, so Ambrose de Tobia. page 590. It was also in some
Councils condemned, Can. Apost. Canon. 42. Con. Trull. Canon. 50.

This has been the constant ordinary Judgment of Protestant Writers on this
Command, and some of them have written peculiar Treatises to this purpose,
particularly Danaeus; wherein he proves that such Lottry is unlawful in it
self, and most prejudicial to men; this is likewise the Doctrine of the
Schoolmen, though none of the most rigid Casuists, yea it is the Doctrine of
our own Church, these being, as unlawful Games, condemned of old; and of late,
to wit, Anno 1638. by the general Assembly of Glasgow, according to a former
Act of an Assembly held at Edinburgh, anno 1596.

Lastly, Consider for scarring from such Games, these two things. 1. The
contrary events (that follow most ordinarily on such Lottry:) Strifes and
Contentions are occasioned; if not caused by them, which are ended by the
other, so very different are the events. 2. Consider that most men who use
them, fall often into gross profaning of Gods Name, or into high passions at
best.

An Omen, or sign, or Token is, when men propose to and resolve with
themselves* that if they meet with such and such a thing, they will construct
so and so of it, o^ when they seek it from God for that end; Thus Abraham's
Servant did at the Well seek to know the mind of the Lord, and accordingly drew
Conclusions about it, concerning a Wife to his Masters Son, Genes. 24. So did
Jonathan about his assaulting of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14. So likewise did
Gideon about his success against the Midianites, Judgs 6. And Mary for
confirmation of her Faith, concerning what was told her by the Angel, Luke 1.
34. This is still to be understood as to some particular fact or event, and not
in a common Tract, or for the determination of a general Truth; as for example,
Mary believed that Christ was to be born, but knew not that she was to be his
Mother; but Zacharias, John the Baptists Father, did (it seems) doubt of Gods
power, or of the event or Truth of what was told to him; and therefore he
sinned in seeking a sign when the other did not: The Philistines sinned most
grossly, when they sent back the Ark and did hang the Decision of that question,
whether then plagues came from the hand of God, or by chance, upon the motion
of the Kine* 1 Samuel 6. And it is always a sinful tempting of God, when men out
of curiosity from unbelief, or needlessly, put him to give a sign that they may
thereby know his power, will, or wisdom.

An Observation is, when we gather such a thing from such a providence that
occurreth without any fore-casting of ours, or determining with our selves
before hand about it, being a merely surprising unexpected Emergent: we shall
only say in general concerning Omens, and Observations, that when they agree
not with the Word, and our Duty revealed and enjoined therein, they are not to
be adventured on nor regarded, but utterly slighted, because then certainly
they degenerate and become extravagant; neither are the examples of such who
being led by an extraordinary Spirit have used them, to be followed by others
who have not the same Spirit: doubtless it is safe for us to take heed to the
more sure word of Prophecy, and to follow the unerring rule of the Word of
God, and not extraordinary examples for which we have no warrant.

Superstitious Observations are not so much about daily occurring providence,
which all are obliged piously to mark and improve to the best spiritual
advantage, and in the careful marking and suitable improving whereof, there
lies a special piece of spiritual wisdom, more especially of such providence
which may, from the Lord, help either to confirm a man in his Duty, or deterr
him from a sin or snare; as they are about some set and marked actions of
Creatures, and these very fechless and silly too (though I deny not, but that
simply they are providence also) which are reputed to be so many fixed Rules
and Canons of natural wisdom, but really instituted Spells, or Freets, or the
Devils Rudiments and Grammar (to say so) to sink men's minds into Atheism. And
Observations are always superstitious, when we collect and conclude that such
and such events evil or good, will happen to us, or befall us from such and
such occurring works and passages of providence, for which no reason can be
drawn either out of the Word of God, or out of the course of nature; in a word,
for which there is neither Scripture-warrant, nor can any natural cause or
reason be assigned; as for instance, To think, it is unlucky to meet such and
such Persons first in the morning (which uses to be called an evil foot) for a
Woman with child to step over a Hair-teather, for Folks to neese putting on
their Shoes, for one to have Salt falling toward him on the Table (the fear
whereof* makes some to suffer no Salt to com^ to their Table) to have a Hare
cross ones way, to burn in the right ear, to bleed some drops of blood, etc.
Again to think, that it boadeth good luck for folks to have drink spilt on
them, to find old Iron, to burn on the left car, to dream on such and such
things, etc. There is a multitude of such Freets and superstitious
Observations, which many retain still, and but few without some and free of
all; a sin from which it is to be feared the Land has never been thoroughly
purged, since it was Pagan; a sin very natural to men, and which has amongst
Christians its observable increase and decrease, according to the more or less
free course and success of the Gospel; All Christians should abhor such freets,
as smelling strong of much ignorance of God, of much Atheism and Paganism.

Of this sort, or very like them is, Folks meeting with such a word in such a
Sermon, which may have some allusion, or seeming answerableness to a case, or
particular, formerly dark, or doubtful to them, which they take for clearing of
them, or deciding of the thing without due examination thereof, according to
the true meaning of the Scripture, and the Analogy of Faith: And their having
such a place of Scripture brought to their mind, or at the first opening of the
Bible cast up to them, which they look on as more befitting their condition,
and that because so suggested and cast up, without pondering the word it self:
and lay more weight on that word on that very account for solving of such a
doubt, and for clearing and determining them as to such a thing, then on any
other having the same Authority, and no less, and it may be much more
suitableness to the thing, without any further tender and serious scrutiny, as
if that were of special and extraordinary Revelation of Gods mind to them
thereabout; which is a most dangerous practice. And (as we discoursed before on
the practical breaches of the second Command) is to make a Weerd or
Fortune-Book of the Book of God, which he never appointed for such an end;
again I say, a most dangerous practice, and yet too frequently incident to some
Religious Persons, especially in their trouble and difficulty, whereof some
stupendous instances might be given, which would fright all from ever daring
any more to adventure on such a practice not bottomed on the Word it self,
which God has certainly given to his people to be used by them with Christian
prudence, according to its own principles, and not to be lotted with, or to
have their state or condition, or the decision of what they are dark or
doubtful about, at hap-hazard cast on it, according to their own groundless
fancies and imaginations.

We come now to the threatening or certification wherewith this Command is
pressed, The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes His Name in vain. In
which, three things are contained: 1. The fearfulness and terribleness of the
Judgment and Punishment, whereby the Lord will avenge the breach of this
Command. 2. The Extent of it, as to every particular individual person sound
guilty, the Lord will not hold him guiltless. Him, whoever he be, whatever he
be; if there were but one, he shall not escape; and if there be many, not one
of them shall be missed or passed by in this reckoning. 3. There is the
peremptoriness and infallible certainty of it, God will not be dissuaded from
it, nor will he alter this Sentence, but it must and shall stand against him.

The punishment is employed in that, Not to be holden guiltness, wherein there
is more contained then is expressed, implying these Three: 1. That he shall not
be forgiven nor absolved, and so shall never enjoy Gods favor and friendship,
which no man, who has sinned, can without pardon, enjoy; thus the Judgment is
negatively to be understood, He shall never enter into Heaven, nor see the Face
of God, if he repent not. 2. Positively it implies that he shall be found
guilty, and shall be dealt with as a guilty person, that he shall be eternally
condemned, shut out from Gods presence, and cast into Hell to be there
tormented for ever and ever. 3. Eminently it implies a very high degree of
punishment, that the degree shall be eminent, and that in respect of other sins
this sin shall have a peculiar weight added unto its Curse, and be ranked
amongst those sins which shall be in the Justice of God most severely punished;
a particular instance, and proof whereof, i^ in Hypocrites, whose Judgment
shall be in Hell amongst the sorest; the Hypocrites portion of Wrath will be a
large portion.

The peremptoriness is employed in these words, The Lord will not bold him
guiltless, the Lord will not, etc. which implies. 1. That Sinners shall be
reckoned with and judged for sin, in which reckoning this sin shall be
especially taken notice of. 2. That all Sinners shall be summoned to appear
before the Judgement-Sea^ and Tribunal of God, and have their particular Libel
and Accusation of their particular sins, wherein this sin shall be particularly
taken notice of, as a main Article. 3. That there shall be a Sentence and Doom
passed upon the guilty, and that who*soever shall be found guilty of this sin,
shall find Divine Justice severely passing Sentence upon them. 4. That there
shall be a holy rigid execution of that Sentence without mercy, by a high
degree of wrath upon all who shall be so Sentenced.

If any ask, How this Threatening is to be understood? for Answ. We should
distinguish betwixt such, who repenting for it, do by Faith in Christ make
peace with God, and others who continue in it without repentance: and so say.
1. Tha^ it is not to be understood, as if the breach of this Command were
declared to be simply unpardonable to any who shall be guilty of it; for that
is neither consisten^ with the grounds of the Gospel, nor with experience,
whereby it is found tha^ grace often extends it self to the pardoning even of
such. 2. But that it is in it self a sin most hateful to God, and a sin that
brings great Wrath on all that are guilty of it, and shall be found to be so,
before his Judgment Seat. 3. It sayet^ that all who are guilty of it, while
their peace is not made with God through Jes^^ Christ, yea in some respect
there-after, should look on themselves as thus highly guilty; and that all who
are not pardoned, should account themselves to be liable to this stroke of
wrath, and to be under this Sentence of the Law that stands particularly
pronounced against them. 4. It says, that men do by this sin, exceedingly
hazard their eternal Salvation, and that their Repentance is rare, and so
likewise their Pardon; it being found in experience that men, habituated to
th^^ sin of taking Gods Name in vain, do but seldom get Repentance. 5. That
when Repentance comes, and is given, such as are guilty of it, will be in an
especial manner challenged for it, and found to be in a high degree, bitter
unto them in all their after-reflexions upon it. 6. That it will very readily
have much influence in m^^ring a man's peace, and obstructing the intimation of
Gods favor, and the joy of his salvation, even when it is pardoned; as we see
in David, who made the Name of God to be biasphemed, and was therefore put,
Psalm 51. to cry and cry again for the joy of Gods salvation; for removing
(amongst other reasons) of that scandal. And withal, it brings on temporal
Judgments, as it did on David, 2 Samuel 12. 7. That when it is pardoned, it will
in the sad remembrance of it, make the^ loath themselves, and walk humbly,
softly, and in the bitterness of their souls; and withal, to think much of, and
to magnify, and wonder at grace that did ever pardon such Sinners, as it did
Paul, who loatheth himself, and highly exalts Grace on this account, that it
pardoned him who was a Blasphemer: As for such who never betake themselves for
pardon, nor obtain mercy, it has these effects; 1. It makes their Conscience
liable to the sore and grievous challenge of this sin, and to the plain and
sharp threatening that is pronounced against it, which being despised, and God
himself much wronged thereby, cannot but bite, nay, gnaw the Conscience so much
the more. 2. Justice has a clear ground to proceed upon against them, not only
as Sinners in general, but as guilty of this sin in particular, and so because
of it, in a special manner liable to wrath. 3. An eminent degree of wrath in
Hell; for as there are different degrees of torment in Hell, so this sin, no
doubt, will make those who are guilty of it, share of that torment in a high
degree. 4. That it further hardens and incapacitateth for pardon (though not
simply) the persons that are guilty of it.

If it be asked, Why this sin is so threatened and punished even beyond other
sins?

Answ. Because it is accompanied with the most heinous aggravations, and so
draws on the greatest guilt; As 1. It is a sin immediately against God
himself, and is not, as sins of the second Table, nay not as other particular
sins of the first Table, whereby men divert from God to Idolatry, giving to
Idols what is his due, or turn their back on him, or slight his commanded
worship, as in the first, second, and fourth Commands; but this does
immediately and directly, and by commission terminate on God himself most
daringly and presumptuously, as it were baffling and affronting him who has
made himself known by his Name. 2. It is the fruit, sign, or symptom, yea, and
cause of the most gross Atheism in the heart, and enmity against God; for it is
his Enemies property to take his Name in vain, Psalm 139. 20. It cannot be in
the height* but where Atheism is, and the awe of God is not; and where there
is much of it, there is proportionably much Atheism; it speaks forth plainly,
that there is no right knowledge or faith of his Greatness, Holiness, Power,
Justice, etc. which would make men fear him, and stand in awe of him; hence
ordinarily those who are gross in this, are other ways gross in many other
things; for it fitteth and disposes for Atheism, and it inureth and
habituateth a man to contemn and despise God, whereas, on the contrary, if a
man make Conscience of any thing, it will be of this. 3. It is that which
dishonors God most amongst others, and gives them occasion to blaspheme, as
David's sin did, and as those false Prophets and Seducers with their followers
are said to do, 2 Petr. 2. verse 1, 2* and where this prevails, all Religion
is accounted among such, but as a fancy and nothing, and therefore he will
punish it severely. 4. It is often and most ordinarily the guilt of such as
acknowledge God in profession, but in works deny him, and do not worship him as
God: It is against light and convictions, yea, and professions of an interest
in God; therefore, there is an emphasis here, The Name of the Lord thy God. 5.
It is not so of infirmity, as other sins, which pleasure or profit may push men
on to; there is ordinarily here none of these, but either simple Atheism; or
profane custom that makes it so much the worse, that it is customary.

The second reason why the Lord thus threatens and punishes that sin, is that
he may thereby vindicate his own Holiness, and imprint the awe and terribleness
of this great and dreadful Name the Lord our God, upon the hearts of all, it
being one of the greatest benefits bestowed, or which can be bestowed upon men,
to wit the manifestation of the Name of God, when it comes to be abused (being
the abuse of the best thing, and so the greatest abuse) it is the more severely
avenged, and thus one way or other the Lord will have his Holiness and
Greatness known amongst all his Creatures; and therefore, whosoever shall think
little of his blessed and Holy Name here, and thereupon baffle and profane it,
God shall make them think more of it hereafter, when he rises up to take
Vengeance.

3. He so threatens and punishes it, because men take a liberty and latitude
in it, in formal Praying, rash Swearing, Jestings, Writings, Tenants, Disputes,
Plays, by Lots, etc. and therefore he puts the greater stamp of his
Indignation on it, either to restrain them from that liberty, or to make them
smart for it; and men also but very seldom severely punish it, therefore He
himself will.

If any should ask the cause, why men do ordinarily take so little notice of
this Command, and so generally sin against it? I confess it may be at the first
wondered at, considering that it has such peremptory threatenings, and is very
often followed, even here in this World, and in the sight of men, with shame
and visible judgments; and that there is ordinarily no profit, no^ credit, nor
any such satisfaction to carnal lusts or pleasures to tempt and push on to it,
as are to other sins; and that yet, notwithstanding all this, men should so
frequently sin this way, must be also as wonderful as it is abominable. But we
may conceive it to proceed from these Causes.

1. Much Atheism, and the little heart-esteem that there is of God, and of his
Majesty; the little Faith that there is of his dreadful justice, and severe and
peremptory execution of his threatenings; little of these within, makes men
careless to be watchful, and what wonder if this break forth, when in his heart
the man says; There is no God; then this follows, as is clear, Isai. 37. in
Sennacherib, who when once he says, Who is the Lord, then he treads on his
Name.

2. There is a natural pride and stout-heartedness in men against God, flowing
from the former, whereby they set their mouth against God, and think it is a
piece of bravery not to stand in awe of him; and (as Goliath did) to defy the
living God, and to contemn and trample upon all Religion and Holiness which
appears sooner and more clearly in nothing, then in stout words against the
Lord, Mal. 3. 13. and in profaning of his Name; hence it is to be observed,
that where this sin reigns, there is either a height of desperate security
and stupid senselesness, or a devilish gallantry in contemning God and all
Religion, all Prayer, and other spiritual exercises as not becoming pretty men,
or men of spirits; as if, forsooth, topping with God, and bidding a defiance to
the Almighty, were true knowledge, and the grand proof of a brave and gallant
spirit, and of a pretty man: O! what a dreadful length is this that men are
come? to say in effect, Who is the Lord, that I should reverence his Name?

3. The Devil knowing well both these, takes occasion to stir men up to it;
and what by offering occasions of irritation to vent their passion, and what by
habituating them to it from custom, and the example of others, whereby keeping
them off some other sins which others may be guilty of, he is in Gods righteous
Judgment permitted to harden them in this.

4. There may be also something in the nature of this sin, because it does not
ordinarily wrong others externally, or because it may be in a truth, or in
profession of duty, o^ in worship; or because it may be fallen into
inadvertantly without forethought or deliberation; therefore the Devil has the
greater advantage to drive men on to it, if not by swearing falsely, yet
profanely and rashly; if not by God, yet by some Creature; or if not so, yet
by formal and fruitless discharging of duties, or by some other way; and
because ordinarily there is no such evil that sticks thereby to others, as to
make them resent it, nor no ill meant to themselves, as they in their proud
self-love, do conceit; therefore they are the less afraid of it before, and
the less challenged for it afterward.

Let us make some use of all this in a few words. 1. Then see, and gravely
consider what sin this is, what wrath it deserves, how far, and how wide in
its guilt it extends it self, and what severe reckoning will be for it? O
then! what is your hazard, and what will be your sentence when this Judgment
shall be set, and when the Judge comes to pronounce it? tell me, who of you
will be able to purge your selves of this guilt? This Sentence may, and will
one day make many of you to tremble, when the Lord will say; Man, thou tookest
my Name in vain in such a Company; at such a Play and Sport, in such a Contest,
in such an Oath, yea, in such a Prayer, etc. Here is your Sentence, I will not
hold you guiltness, but guilty for this cause; This, this is the Truth of God,
if we believe his Word, yea, whether we believe it or not.

Let me therefore speak two words further to all of you, Old and young, Godly
and Profane, Rich and Poor, etc. O take more notice of, this sin, and be more
watchful against it, think more of it, and look more to every way it may be
fallen into; and by all means study to prevent it, fear to name the great and
dreadful Name of the Lord our God irreverently; tremble when ye hear it named;
and when ye read, hear, pray, or do any duty, as ye would eschew this Curse and
Threatening, and be found guiltless in the day of the Lord, eschew this sin of
taking his Name in vain.

For helps to this, let me commend unto you, 1. A serious endeavor to walk
under the impression of Gods greatness, and to have your heart filled with his
awe; if his fear be in the heart, there will be expressions of reverence to his
Name in the mouth.

2. Believe, and be persuaded of the reality of this Truth concerning the
terribleness of the reckoning for this sin, and the fearful Judgment that will
certainly follow it.

3. Use and mention his Name reverently in Prayer, Hearing, Conference, etc.
For, habituating our selves to formality in such duties, makes way ordinarily
for more gross violations of this commands; and study to be more affected even
when narratively ye are telling something wherein his Name is mentioned, then
otherwise.

4. Tremble at this sin, and suitably resent it; when ye hear it in others, be
affected with it, and labor to make them so, that ye may thus train your
selves to an abominating of that evil.

5. Let it never pass in your selves, especially, without some special g^ave
Animadversion: Look back on all your life, and see if ye can remember when and
where ye were grossly guilty; reflect on your worship, and observe omissions and
defects, at lest in respect of what ye might have been at, and learn to loath
your selves for these, and to be in bitterness for them; especially if the
escapes have been more late and recent, let them not sleep with you, lest ye be
ha^dned, and the Sentence stand in force unrepealed against you; What? will ye
sleep, and this Word stand in the Bible on record as a Registered* Decree
against you?

6. Seek for much of the Spirit, for none can call Jesus, Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3.

7. Frequently and seriously put up that Petition to the Lord, Hallowed be thy
Name, Matthew. 6 9.

The other word of Use i^ for what is past; I am sure, if we could speak of it,
and hear it rightly, there is here that which might make us all to tremble, and
evidence convincingly to us our hazard, and the necessity of Repentance and
flying to Christ: Tell me, Hearers, believe ye this Truth, that there is such
hazard from this guilt? tell me (if ye remember what we spoke in the opening of
it) is there any of you that lies not under the stroke of it? If ^o, what will
ye do? fly ye must to Christ, or lie still; and can there be any secure lying
still for but one hour, under Gods Curse drawn out? O ye Atheists, that never
trembled at the Name of the Lord, and that can take a mouthful of it in your
common discourse, and ye who make it your byword, and mock, or jest; ye, whom
no Oaths can bind; and all ye Hypocrites, who turn the pretended honoring of
the Name of the Lord, and the sanctifying of him in his Ordinances into a real
profaning of it; let me give you these two charges under certification of a
third, 1. I charge you to Repent of this sin, and to fly to Christ for
obtaining pardon: haste, haste, haste, the Curse is at the door, when the
Sentence is past already; O sleep not, till this be removed. 2. I charge you to
abstain from it in your several Relations, all ye Parents, Masters,
Magistrates, Church Officers, Schoolmasters and Teachers, I charge you to
endeavor to prevent this sin in your selves and others: It is sad that the
Children of many are brought up in it, the most part live in it, our Streets
are more full of it then the Streets of Heathens; Advert to this charge, every
soul: Or 3. I charge you to appear before this great and dreadful God, who will
not account any such guiltless, and to Answer to Him for it.

The Fourth Commandment.
Exodus 20. verse 8. 9. 10, 11. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it Holy: Six
days shall thou labor, and do all thy Work, but the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God* in it thou shall not do any Work* Thou, not thy
Son* nor thy Daughter, thy Manservant, nor thy Maid servant, nor thy Cattle,
nor thy Stranger that is within thy Gates; for in six days the Lord made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day;
Wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and Hallowed it.
THe Lord in his infinite Wisdom and goodness, has so far consulted man's
infirmity, as to sum up his Duty in these Ten Commands, called Ten Words, that
thereby his darkness and dullness by sin, might be helped by an easy
abbreviation: The first Command therefore contains man's duty to God in
immediate Worship, requiring that the only true God should be worshipped. The
second stinteth and limiteth men to that worship alone which he p^rscribeth:
The third Commands Reverencing of him in all his Ordinances, and a reverent
manner of going about them,

This Fourth points out the Time which most solemnly the Lord will have set
apart for his Worship, that so He, who is both Lord of us, and of our time, may
show what share he has reserved as a Tribute due to himself, who has liberally
vouchsafed on us the rest; which time is not to be understood exclusively, as
if he would have only that spent in worship (there being no exclusive
determination of the frequency of the exercises of worship, or duration of them
in Scripture, that is to say, that they shall be so long and so often, and no
longer, nor oftener) but that he will precisely have this time as an
acknowledgement from us, even as when he gave Adam the use of all the Trees in
the Garden, he reserved one; so when he gives six days to us, he keeps a
seventh for himself.

This Command is placed in a manner betwixt the two Tables, because it is a
transition as it were from the one to the other, and contains in it duties of
immediate Service to God, and of Charity toward men, and so in some sort
serves to reconcile (if we may speak so) the two Tables, and to knit them
together, that so their harmony may be the more clearly seen: It is also more
largely and fully set down for plurality and variety of expressions and words,
then any other in either of the Tables; yet has it notwithstanding, been in
all times in a special manner assaulted and set upon, and endeavors used to
overturn it: Satan aiming sometimes to darken the meaning of it, sometimes to
loose from the strict tie of observing it, and that not only by old
Sabbatarians, Anti-sabbatarians, and corrupt School men, but even by those whom
God has made Orthodox in the main; And especially by a Generation in these
days, who having a hatred at all Ordinances, and at all the Commands of the
Decalogue, yet do especially vent it against this Command; because in it is
contained a main foundation of Godliness. As it is wonderfully great
presumption for men to assault and set upon Gods Authority, even where he has
strengthened himself (as it were) most, by more full explication, and more large
and particular pressing of duty, and forbidding of the contrary sin, as he has
done in this Command, more then in any of all the rest; So it will be necessary
before we can speak to the practical part of piety comprehended in it,
concerning the sanctification of the Christian Sabbath, or Lords day, either in
the negative or positive part of it, to speak doctrinally (for clearing of the
precept) to these three.

1. Whether this Command be moral, and do oblige us in its Letter as other
Commands do.

2. What is the particular morality of it, and the literal meaning of the words.

3. How our Lords day stands in reference to this Command? and whether
thereby the same sanctification be required as to it, though its institution
arise from another ground, then is required to the Seventh-day Sabbath?
Somewhat of all these must needs be spoken unto, and we begin to speak first of
its morality before we speak of its meaning, because all depends on this,
both in respect of exposition and practice; for if it be not moral and
perpetually binding, it is not necessary either to explicate it, or to study and
press the practice of it; but if it be found to be moral, then no doubt it
concerns us, and requires the same moral sanctification of a day now as it
did before.

Our Assertion then in reference to this is, that, The duty of setting apart
and sanctifying of a portion of time; as it is limited in the fourth Command,
for Gods service as it recurreth, is moral, and the Obligation thereunto
perpetual, even as in the duties of the other Commands; the obligation to this,
being no more dissolved then to those, though there may be difference in the
degree of the obligation which they lay on in respect of the matter contained
in them; my meaning in a word, is, that a day o^ one of seven is as necessary
to be kept holy unto God now, (upon supposition of his determining the
particular day) as it is necessary to hold and keep up the worship prescribed
by God; neither without sin can another day be put in the room of it, more then
other worship can be substituted in the place of divinely prescribed worship;
for the time is set and fixed by the fourth Command (pointing at a solemn and
chief time) as the wo^ship it self is by the second.

For clearing of this, consider, 1. That we mean not here moral-natural, as if
without any positive Law, such a thing had been binding; no, but
moral-positive, that is laid on by a Command which is standing unrepealed, and
so binds by virtue of the authority of the Lawgiver, as several other
commands and precepts do; as namely, those concerning Sacraments, belonging to
the second Command, and those concerning one Wife, and forbidden degrees of
Marriage belonging to the seventh; which being so often broken by many Saints,
and dispensed with in some cases, cannot be thought to be morally naturally
since the Lord dispenses not so in these, nor can it be thought in reason,
that his Servants would have been ignorant of such a natural thing: It is then
moral-positive that we mean, to wit, that which is binding by a positive Law.

2. Consider in this question, that there is a great difference betwixt these
two, to say the seventh-day Sabbath which the Jews kept, is moral, and to say
the four^h Command is moral; the one may be, and is abolished, because another
is brought in its room: The other, to wit, the Command may stand, and does
stand, because it tyeth morally to a seventh day, but such a seventh day as the
Lord should successively discover to be chosen by him; and though the seventh
be changed, yet one of seven is still reserved.

3. There is need to distinguish betwixt the moral substance of a Command, and
some ceremonial appendices belonging to it: So the fourth Command might thea
possibly have had something ceremonial in the seventh day, or in the manner
used of sanctifying that seventh day, which now is gone as double Sacrifice,
etc. or in its reasons whereby it is pressed; (as there is something peculiar
to that People in the Preface, to all the Commands) as there was in the
Sacraments of the old Law belonging to the second Command; yet both a
Sabbath Day and Sacraments may be, and are very necessary and moral in the
Church; it is not then every thing hinging on this Command, as proper to that
administration, and so but accidental to the sanctifying of a Sabbath, that we
plead for; but this is it we plead for, that the Command is, as to its main
scope, matter, and substance, moral-positive, and that it stands as still
binding and obliging unto us, and cannot without sin be neglected or omitted;
it might be enough here to say, that if this Command were never repealed in the
substance of it, no^ did never exspire by any other thing succeeding in its
place, then it must needs be still binding; for certainly, it was once, as
obligatory-proclaimed by the Lawgiver himself, and was never since in its
substance repealed, nor is it exspired or found hurtful in its nature, but is
as necessary now as then: it is true, the seventh day Sabbath is repealed by
instituting and substituting the first day Sabbath, or Lords day, in its place*
but that does rather qualify the Command then repeal it; for 1. It says that
a day ^s moral and necessary. 2. It says a day of seven is moral and
necessary, which is all we say; and why necessary? as agreeable to this Command
no doubt; whence we may Argue, if the substance of this Command be kept even
when the particular day is changed, then is the Command moral (which this very
change confirms) but the former is true, as is clear in experience; therefore
it follows that the Law stands unrepealed; for its palpable that the day, as
to its number or frequency, and duration, with the manner of sanctifying of it,
belongs to the substance of the Commandment, but what day as to its order,
first, second, or seventh does not, because the first comes in immediately
upon Religion, Gods Honor, and the good of Souls, which the other does not:
This Argument will stand good against all who acknowledge this Law, to have
been once given by God, till they can evidence a repeal.

To speak somewhat more particularly to this, the way we shall make out the
morality of it, is by considering, 1. How the Scripture speaks of it in
general. 2. How it speaks of the Decalogue. 3. How it speaks of this
Command in particular. 4. By adducing some Scriptural Arguments for it; As for
the 1. To wit, the Scriptures speaking of it in general, we say, If the
Scripture speak as frequently in clearing the fourth Command, or the Sabbath
(which is the morality of it) and press it as seriously, and that in reference
to all times of the Church, as it does any other moral duty; then for substance
this Command is moral and perpetually binding, (for that seems to be the
Character whereby most safely to conclude concerning a Command, to consider how
the Scripture speaks of it,) but the Scripture does as often mention, and is
as much, and as serious in pressing of that Command, and that in reference to
all states of the Church as of any other, Ergo, etc. We shall make out this, by
showing 1. its frequency in mentioning of it 2. Its seriousness in pressing it.
3. Its asserting of it as belonging to all times and states of the Church.

1. Look through all the Scriptures, and ye will find the sanctifying of a
Sabbath mentioned; as first* Genes. 2. begins with the very first seventh
after the Creation; then it is spoken of Exodus 16. before the Law was given;
then Exodus 20. it is contained expressy in the Law, and that by a particular
and special Command in the first Table thereof, and is often after repeated,
Exodus 31. and Levit. 23. v* 3. where it is set down as the first feast before
all the extraordinary ones* which preference can be for no other reason, but
because of its perpetuity; yea, it is made a rule or pattern, by which the
extraordinary Sabbaths, or Feasts in their sanctification are to be regulate;
again it is repeated, Deuteronomy. 5. with the rest of the Commands, and in the
Historical part of Scripture, as Nehemiah 9. 13. It is also mentioned in the
Psalms, the 92. Psalm, being peculiarly entitled a Psalm or Song ^et the
Sabbath day: The Prophets again do not forget it, see Isai. 56 58. Jerem. 17.
and Ezekiel. 20. 22. In the New Testament the sanctifying of a day or Sabbath is
mentioned in the Evangelists, Matthew. 24. 20. Luke 23. 56. Acts 13. 14, 15. 21.
and 20. 7. in the Epistles, as 1 Cor. 16. and in the Revel. chap. 1. verse 10.
As if all had purposely concurred for making out the concernment and perpetuity
of this duty.

2. Consider how weightily, seriously, and pressingly the Scripture speaks of
^t; first it is spoken of, Genesis 2. as backed with a reason. 2. Through the Law
the sanctification of it in particular is described. 3. It is spoken of as a
mercy and singular privilege that God gave to his people, Exodus 16. 19. Neb. 9
14. and Ezekiel. (...) 12 4 Many promises containing many blessings are made to
the conscientious and right keepers of it, Isa. 56 58. 5. The breach of it is
severely threatened and plagued* Numb. 15. Neb. 13. Jer. 17. and Ezekiel. 20. 6
Many examples of the Godly, their care in keeping it are set down, see Nehem.
13. Luke 23. 56. Act. 20. 7. and Rev. 1. 10. 7. The duties of it are
particularly set down* as Hea^ing* Praying, Reading, delighting in God, works
of mercy, etc. 8. It is in the Old Testament, claimed by God as his own day,
not ours. My Holy day, Isa 58 13 and Nehem. 9. 14 it is acknowledged by the
People to be His; while they ^ay Thine holy Sabbath, which property is asserted
of that Holy day, as being Gods; besides other days* Rev. 1 10. and this is
asserted also in this same Command, where it is called the Sabbath of the Lord,
in opposition to, or contradistinction from the other six days: all which
seems to speak out something more then Temporary in this Duty of setting a
Seventh day a part for God (for we speak not yet of the particular day).

3. Look to it in all times and states of the Church, and ye will find it
remarkably Characterized with a special Observation, As 1. In innocence it is
instituted and set a part from others, and blessed: and Heb. 4. It is called
the rest from the beginning of the World. 2. Before the Law was given, the
Sanctification of i^ was intimated as necessary. 3. In the giving of the Law it
is remembered, and a Command given to us for remembering it. 4. After the Law, it
is urged by the Prophets Isaiah and Jeremiah, and kept by the Godly, Psalm. 92.
5. In the time, or after the time of the Captivity the breach of it is
reproved, Ezekiel. 20. And its Observation restored by Godly Nehemiah.

Hitherto there is no difficulty, the pinch will lie in this, If the Scriptures
speak of it as belonging to the days of the Gospel, In which (for making of it
out) 1. We have these hints, Acts 20 7. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Where Christians going
about the Moral Duties of the Sabbath, is especially observed to be upon one
day peculiarly. 2. That Title of the direct appropriating of a Day to the Lord,
Rev. 1. 1^* Which places will fall in to be considered particularly when we
come to the la^^ question; Besides these we may produce three places to prove a
Sabbath as belonging to the New Testament; though not the very Day used or
observed for the Sabbath in the Old; and this will be enough to make out the
Assertion, two of them are Prophesies, the third of them is in the Gospel. The
first prophecy is it the 66. Chap. of Isaiah verse 23. The second is in
Ezekiels Description of the Ne^ Temple, Chap. 43. 44 45 46, etc. Where 1. It is
clear that these places relate to the Days of the Gospel, as none can deny but
they do so eminently. 2. It is clear that though they Prophecy of the Services
of the Gospel under the names of Sacrifices, etc. proper to the Old Testament
Administration, and of the Sanctified and set a part time of the Gospel, under
the Name of Sabbath which the^ was determined, and whereto men were then bound
by the fourth Command as they were to Sacrifices by the second: yet these
Prophesies infer not by virtue of the fourth Command the very same Day to be
under the Gospel, which was under the Law, more then the same Services by
virtue of the second; which none wi^^ deny to be in force, notwithstanding of
the change of Services: and there is as little reason to deny the fourth to be
still in force as to its substance notwithstanding o^ the change of the
particular day. Yet Thirdly, it is clear that from the mentioning of these
services this will follow, that there should be set and fixed Ordinances, and a
way of worship in the New Testament, as well as in the Old, and that there
should be a solemn chief set-time for the Sabbath which men ought to sanctify,
and that they should no more admit any other times, not so set apart into a
parity with it, then they were to admit any service or Worship not allowed by
God, or that was contrary to the second Command: for if any thing be clear in
them, this is clear, that they speak first of services, then of solemn times
and Sabbaths, and of the one after the other, which must certainly infer, that
both external services, and a solemn chief time for them, do belong to the New
Testament; Hence it is that many Divines (from that Prophecy of Ezekiel) do
draw conclusions for sundry things out of those places, as 1. Concerning the
necessity and continuance of a standing Ministry, and though Ministers now be
neither Priests nor Levites, yet (say they,) it follows clearly, that there
will be a Ministry, because such are spoken of there. 2. Concerning the
necessity of, and a Warrant for Church Discipline, and separating not only
doctrinally, but disciplinarily the precious from the vile, and debarring of
those who are Morally unclean from the Ordinances: because these things (say
they) are Typified in the substance by the Porters being set to keep the Doors,
and by the charge given to the Priests. 3. Anent the continuance of a Church,
and of the Ordinances of Word, Sacraments, etc. And the Congregating of
Christians to attend these, though there shall be no material or Typical
Temple, because of the* Mo^al things there being expressed and prophesied of,
under the names of the old Levitical services; yet could not a warrant be
inferred from them for these, (and that Jure Divine) if the things were not
Morally to bind, which were so signi^^^d.

Hence I argue, if the sanctifying of a Sabbath as a piece of worship to God be
prophesied of to belong to the New Testament, then are we bound to the
sanctification of a Sabbath as a necessary duty; but the continuance of
sanctifying a Sabbath unto God is specially prophesied of, and foretold as a
piece of worship under the New Testament, Ergo, etc.

The third place is Matthew. 24. 20. Pray that your flight be not in the Winter,
neither on the Sabbath Day, where the Lord insinuates, that as traveling is
troublesome to the Body in Winter; so would it be to the minds of the Godly
(for he is now speaking to his Disciples alone) to Travel on that day,
specially and solemnly set ^part for Gods worship; now if there were no Sabbath
to continue after Christ's Ascension, or if it were not to be sanctified, there
would be no occasion of this grief and trouble, that they behoved to Travel on
the Sabbath, and durst not tarry ^^ll that day were bypast, and so no cause to
put up this Prayer; which yet by our Lords Exhortation seems to infer that
the Sabbath was to be as certain in its time as the Winter: And doubtless this
cannot be meaned of the Jewish-Sabbath. For 1. That was to be abolished
shortly. 2. Traveling on the Jewish-Sabbath was to be no cause of grief unto
them, if indeed all days were alike; neither would it be scrupled in such a
case by the Apostles to whom he now speaks. 3. Besides, if no Sabbath were to
be, it had been better and clearer to say, Stand not, and grieve not to Travel
an^ day: but his words imply the just contrary, that ^here was to be a solemn
Sabbath. 4. He mentions the Sabbath Day only, and not the other Festivals of
the Jews which were to be kept holy also, and by this he distinguishes the
ordinary Sabbath from those other days, and opposes it to many, as being now
the only Holy Day on which they should eschew, if possible, to travel; and
would therefore pray to have it prevented: for in the New Testament the Sabbath
spoken of as the solemn time for worship is ever meaned of the weekly Sabbath,
and other Holy days are called the first or last day of the Feast, and
therefore if the Lords meaning were that they should pray, that their flight
might not be on any of the Jewish Holy days, to mention the weekly Sabbath
only, would not be sufficient for that end.

To say that it was for fear of scandal, that they should pray not to be put to
fly, will not remove the former reasons; besides at that time the Apostles and
other Christians had given up with the Jews, and stood not on scandal in such
things in reference to them, on whom, as the Apostle says, 1 Th^s. 2. 16.
Wrath had come to the uttermost, and who were not infirm but malicious, and so
in respect of offense to be dealt with as the Lord did with the Pharisees; and
therefore, all things being considered, it appears from our Lords words, that
a Sabbath among Christians was to be sanctified 40. years, or thereabout, after
his death, which proves that the Scripture mentions a Sabbath to be
sanctified under the New Testament.

We come unto the second way of making out the Morality of this Command, to
wit, by showing how the Scripture speaks of the whole Decalogue, and thus we
reason:

1. If all the Commandments of the Decalogue be Moral, then must this be so
also; for it is one of them; and if it were not moral and binding, there would
not now be Ten words (as they are called by the Lord, Deuteronomy. 10. 4.) but Nine
only, which at first blush, will and cannot but seem strange and absurd to
those who have from Gods Word drunk in that number: But all these are moral and
binding, as is granted by all, (except the Papists who deny the second, and
therefore score it out of their Catechisms.) And that they must be all alike
moral and binding, may be made out, these two waves.

1. All of them in the Old Testament had alike Authority, Privileges, and
Prerogatives, which neither the Judicial nor Ceremonial Law had, as 1. To be
distinctly pronounced by God himself, without adding more, Deuteronomy. 5. 22. 2. To
be written by his own finger in Tables of stone, Exodus 29. 18. 3. To be laid up
and kept in the Ark, Exodus 25. 16. And if these and other Prerogatives did put
a difference, and show a difference to be put betwixt the other nine Commands,
and all Judicial or Ceremonial Laws* Why not betwixt them, and this also? 2. In
the New Test^ment they are all alike confirmed; when the Law in general is
spoken of, none of them is excepted, and therefore this Command is necessarily
included.

For which we would look first to that place, Matthew. 5. 17. Where our Lord in a
special manner intends to vindicate the Moral Law of this fourth, and to
pres^ holiness in Moral Duties upon his Hearers, even in another sort then the
Pharisee^ did: Think not (says He) That I am come to destroy the Law and the
Prophets, I (...) not come to destroy, but to fulfill; Verily, be that breaks
one of the least of these Commands, and teaches Men so, shall be called least
in the Kingdom of God, etc. Where, by Law, must necessarily be understood the
Moral Law, for he was thought to be ^ transgressor of that, and especially of
this Command in it (for that Sermon (...) Natt^ew comes in, in order after his
being challenged for breach of Sabbath, John 5. 10. etc.) And his scope is to
wipe off that imputation, and how? by showing that He still presses the Moral
Law, even beyond what the Pharisees did. 2. It was the Moral Law especially,
which the Pharisees corrupted, and whereof he undertaketh the Vindication, and
it is Holiness in Obedience to that which he presses as necessary beyond what
the Scribes and Pharisees did; and indeed it was in that Law they failed
mainly, and not in the Ceremonial Law. 3. The offense and mistake that Christ
is to preoccupie and rectify amongst his Hearers, requires this: for many of
them fancied that by the Messiah there should be a Relaxation from the duties
of Holiness called for in the Moral Law; and therefore, says he, think not so;
now a Relaxation from some other Laws might have been thought of warrantably.
4. It is such a Law whereof to teach the Abrogation at any time is sinful and
pernicious, therefore it is certainly the Moral Law.

Secondly, We reason thus, when he speaks of the Law, (...), or by way of
eminency (meaning no doubt the Decalogue.) He speaks alike of all its
Commandments, even of the least of them and so of this. 4. Also that he came
not to destroy it, which yet the Lord never did of Ceremonials, but rather
foretold the Abolition of them, as he did of the seeking and worshipping of
God in the Temple at Jerusalem, etc. Yea, when he clears the Doctrine of the
Sabbath from the Pharisees corrupting Traditions, he does never weaken its
former Obligation, nor insinuate its weakness, but shows the true meaning
thereof, which from the beginning made it not only consistent with the works of
piety and mercy, but exceedingly helpful to both.

A second place, Confirming the whole Decalogue (or rather asserting its
Authority,) is in the Epistle of James, Jam. 2. 10. He that offends in one,
is guilty of all: Why! Because he is the same God, and Lawgiver (and no
Servant nor Angel) who spoke them all, one as well as another of them: And it
being clear there, that he speaks of the Decalogue, called the Royal Law;
(there being no Law instanced in; nor any other, that can be of a like
authority, in these Laws instanced, but only it; nor that could be pleaded
for, by James, on such grounds, in such a time,) and it being also clear, That
he gives to all those Laws, which the Lord spoke at that time, alike
Authority; (otherwise, his reasoning would not be good, if any one Law or
Command, could be instanced to him, of the Ten, which the Lord spoke, and was
abrogated, and not binding) it necessarily follows, that this fourth Command,
being one of the Ten, must be of equal Authority with the rest.

It may be noted also, That James here does not, (as neither does our Lord, nor
any of his Apostles, when they cite the Law) give New Authority to the Laws he
cites; but supposes them to have it already; and makes use of them, as
Confirmations of the thing he pressed, which could not be, if their Authority
depended on, or slowed from the present Citation of them.

Thirdly, we reason further thus; Either there is some Moral duty, contained in
this Command, and laid on by it; which is not in any of the former: or there is
but some Ceremonial thing in it, reducible to one of them: For, the Perfection
of this Law requires, that all things needful to the Worship of God, should be
summed in it, and the scope thereof, which is, briefly to compend all requires
there should be nothing in it, that is needless, superfluous, or that might have
bee^ left out.

Now if the matter be Moral; not contained in any former Command, then is the
Command it self Moral; seeing a Moral substance, and Matter denominateth the
Command so* Yea, it must be Moral, otherwise something Morally necessary to
Gods service, (such as the determination of its chief time) should be omitted.
It may be assumed, yet further: It must be Moral, (be it what it will) to
eschew a Tautology in this short Compend of Duties; and that, of Moral Duties
too.

Again, If it be not Moral, but contain some Ceremonial thing reducible to one
of the three former Commands: Then 1. It might have been put amongst other
Ceremonials. 2. Other Ceremonials might have been put in with it: Or. 3. A
Reason given, Why all are not Reducible to some Moral Command. 4. If the matter
of this be Reducible to another Command, then can it not be accounted a
distinct Command, neither ought it here to have been given as such, but
subjoyned to some other; as the Servants and Beasts resting, is sub-joyned to
this* 5. It would be ^hewn to what Command it is Reducible as to the substance
of it, if it be Ceremonial: 6. A Reason would be given, Why amongst Ten, One*
and only One, is set down, so far different from all the rest. And if all
these Absurdities follow the Denial of it is substance to be Moral; then, for
eschewing of them, we must conclude it to be Moral: and so the fourth Command
is Moral.

Fourthly, we reason thus; If it be not Moral, it must either be Judicial, or
Ceremonial, for the matter and substance of it; but it is not Judicial: that
is, it belongs not to External Policy, and Civil Society, principally and
especially, in that one Nation, because no such duties are comprehended, at
least Primarily, in any Command of the first Table; but in the second, which
teaches Duties to others, as this first, does to God: Neither is it
Ceremonial; For, All Ceremonies, that are Typical, have their rise since the
fall, and relate some way to Christ to come. But this of sanctifying one Day of
seven, had it is rise in the state of innocence, and was enjoined to Adam in
Paradise, before he fell, and therefore cannot be called Ceremonial properly,
more then the Command of a Man's leaving Father and Mother, and cleaving to his
Wife, so that they two should be one flesh, which the Apostle Ephesians. 5. makes
use of. Besides, if it were Ceremonial in the substance, then were it Typical
and significant of some thing to come, which is hard to show: Then also had it
not been Lawful to have retained it; for Ceremonials now in their use are not
only dead, but deadly: But this Morality, in substance the same with the
Command which we plead for, was retained by the Apostles, and primitive Church;
(to sav no more) Therefore it is not Ceremonial: And so this Law must needs be
Moral.

To say, That the Command is partly Moral, partly Ceremonial; if we respect
it is substance, will not hold: For, 1. There is no such other Law. 2. That were
to make Confusion, betwixt Ceremonials, and Morals; which it seems, the Lord
himself has aimed and resolved to keep clearly distinct. 3. What ever be
Ceremonial; That which was allowed, and enjoined to Adam in Paradise; and
wherein we may agree with Him, under the Gospel, cannot be Ceremonial: For,
neither of these States are capable, of proper Ceremonies; but both agree on a
seventh Day. Therefore, it is not Ceremonial.

The third way, we make out the Morality of this Command, is, By particular
considering of it self; and here we argue thus:

If it be not only put into the Decalogue, with the other Moral Commands; but
more singularly explicated and pressed even in it then they; then it is
certainly Moral; that is, perpetually Obligatory with the rest, But so it is
put and set down in the Decalogue; and pressed even more then the rest of the
Commands, as on other accounts, so possibly on this; because it is Ground is
Positive, and Men need the more Words about it: Just as in the second Command;
Ergo, etc. Now, that it is thus put, and pressed; appears these several ways.

1. It shareth of all common Privileges, with the rest of the Commands, set
down in the Decalogue, that were all spoken, yea, Written by the Lord
immediately, and laid up in the Ark.

2. It is proposed, and set down in it is Form, both Positively; Remember the
Sabbath, to keep it Holy (and Negatively) in it thou shall do no manner of
work, etc. Whereas all the other Commands, are but one of these ways set down.

3. It has the Particularity in it, that all the rest have; to wit, To be in
the singular Number; Thou shall, etc. To show, That it speaks to every one in
particular; Yea though all the Commands, concern all Ranks, yet only here are
Son, Daughter, Manservant, Maidservant, and Stranger, expressly mentioned, as
comprehended in it.

4. There is a special Equity, holden out here in the proportioning of this
time: There are six days given us, to Labor on; and therefore it is all the
Reason in the World, that the Lord have the seventh: And if this Concession of
Gods, of six days to work on, be Moral, (For all the time is Gods; and we
cannot, for our use, take any part of i^, but by his grant* and there is no
other grant: But this dividing and proportioning of Time, betwixt him and us;
in which Division too, he has given us by far, the la^gest Share: to wit, Six
parts of seven:) Then must the setting a part of a seventh Day be Moral also:
And so the Command it self; wherein both are comprehended. viz. The sixth given
to us, and the seventh reserved for him: they must needs stand and fall
together: For they mutually put each other: Thou shall labor six days, and
rest on the seventh: Thou shall rest on the Sabbath*day, and Labor six.

5. This Day is claimed by the Lord, as a thing wherein he has a special
Propriety: Its the Lords day; for though he did give six, yet he reserved a
seventh. And can, or dare, any say, That he discharged that, or dispensed it
away from Himself, to any other? If not, it must be His still, and cannot
without Sacrilege, be other ways applied.

6 Obedience to this Command, is pressed by an exceeding weighty Reason, drawn
from Gods own Example, which makes it clearly Relative, to its first
Institution. Genes 2. Where it is said. That He rested after six days Work,
the seventh Day: viz. the whole seventh day, and so should we: which is the
more effectual, for proving the Morality of this Command: Because 1. I^s a
Reason that took place, even in innocence, and so respects no Type or
Ceremony. 2. It is Universal, belonging to all Men, who are God's Creatures:
And therefore, since the Reason is perpetual, so must the Command be like-wise.

7. This Command alone, and beside all others, is expressly pressed in the
observation of it, not only on Masters and Rulers for themselves, but as taking
burden on them, for all under them; and within their Families to endeavor the
sanctifying of the Lords day with them, and by them as well as by themselves;
whereby the extent of this Command is clearly and earnestly holden forth in
more express terms, then in any other of all the Commands; though this be
employed in them also.

8. The observation of it is pressed and encouraged unto, by a special blessing
which He has annexed to the time set a part by himself; He blessed it, that
is, He made and still makes it useful and refreshing as a special blessing to
his people who keep his Ordinances, seeking Him therein: this day has a double
portion and increase, beside any other day, for his peoples Repose,
Edification, Comfort, finding of His Presence, etc. And to say now that this
Solemn time were not moral, were to rob the Church of a great blessing; seeing
this day, set a part by God for his Service, has the blessing, beyond any
other day commanded, on it; and in the experience of his People often has it
been found to be so.

9. It is specially and singularly ushered in with a Memento, or Remember,
which is not expressed in any other Command; and, Shall we think, that where
God says Remember, there is nothing to be taken notice of; or, shall we think,
that it says not Remember now as well as then; and if so, Who can warrantably
forget that which he bids remember? which is, not to keep the Seventh day,
but the Sabbath holy unto the Lord: And may not all these Characters, put
together in one Command (so many not being to be found in all the other
Commands if put together); May not all these, I say, convince us that it is the
Lords purpose to have this Command standing obligatory in its substance to the
end of the world? Which is so pressed, that if there be little help from
Natures light, to determine the day, or to press its observation, it may be
strongly born in, by the more clear and weighty reasons.

And so we come to the fourth way proposed for making out the morality of this
Command, which is by adducing some Arguments drawn from Scripture.

The first whereof is, If the Law bind under the New Testament, not only in
respect of its matter, as its natural; nor only as it is repeated in the New
Testament, but also by virtue of the Authority enacting it: then this Law of
the fourth Command, though not explicitly determined by nature, and though it
were not mentioned particularly in the New Testament, must be binding also, for
it has that same Authority: But the first is true, and is acknowledged
generally by Divines (excepting a few) and is clear by Christ and his Apostles
their citing of it, as supposing it to be binding: Therefore the last must be
true also.

2. Arg. If this Command be founded on moral grounds, then it self must be
moral: But the grounds on which it is founded are moral: Ergo, etc. 1. It is
moral that God should have a solemn and chief set-time. 2. That he himself, and
none other should determine that time, seeing no other could do it and bless
it. 3. These reasons in the Command it self dividing time, into six parts of it
to us, and a seventh part to God; and Gods resting after six days working; with
his making only seven days in the week, and employing six of them to work,
etc. these reasons, I say, are all moral and binding now as before.

3. Arg. If all moral duties be contained in the ten Commands, then this
Command must needs be moral: But the first is true: Ergo, etc. This Command
contains a moral duty, which is in none of the preceding Commands; to wit,
the stinting and determining of the solemn and chief time to be set a part for
Gods worship, to be one day of seven. It is true, Time is commanded to be
allowed to Gods worship in those other Commands, wherein the duties of worship
themselves are commanded; for, worship cannot be performed more then any other
duty, without some time; but that the chief time should be so much, and so
often, is only determined in this Command; from which it appears, 1. That an
indefinit time of worship, or for it, is not the morality of this Command,
because this follows necessarily, as being supposed needful for the
performance of every positive duty contained in the other Commands; its
morality, therefore, must be, The determining of that definit time. 2. We may
hence see a reason why there is no new Command for this in the New Testament;
because this stands in the Law; neither are, Thou shall not Swear, Kill, etc
mentioned as new Commands more then this; so that, had they not been mentioned
in the New Testament (as some are not) yet had they still obliged: It is just
so as to this; and the reason why they are mentioned, may be supposed to be,
because the main fault about them was defect and short coming, but in this it
was excess, which our Lord also regulateth by holding forth the right
observance of it, and clearing what was wrong, and so is supposed to confirm
what he repealeth not.

4. Arg. If it be not free for men to carve out Gods solemn chief time of
worship at their pleasure, then is this Command moral (for that liberty is
restrained, by this Command and no other:) But it is not free for them to
choose what time they please, or to carve it out: This seems to be only
questionable, which is therefore thus confirmed.

If it ^e fr^e to men to carve out what solemn and chief time is to be given
to, and set apart for Gods worship; then, either it is free to them to choose
no time at all, or it is free for them to choose a longer or a shorter then
this: But neither of these can be said: not the first as is clear; not the
second, because it will not so quadrate with the end; for if the time be
shorter, it incroacheth on Gods due; if it be longer, it incroacheth on Gods
concession of six days to work in. If it be shorter, it incroacheth on Gods
due (as is said) and our souls good; if longer, it incroacheth on our temporal
calling; and, Can any restrain man when God gives him liberty?

Again, If it be free to men so to cut and carve at pleasure, on the solemn and
chief time for Gods worship, its either free for all men together to agree on a
day, even one and the same; or its free for each Country, or each man, to
choose what day they please: but neither of these are either possible or
practicable to edification: therefore must the day he determined to them: and
if so, then sure by this Command: And so its still binding, and cannot in that
respect be altered without sin, which was the thing to be proved.

5. Arg. That there is a morality in a seventh day, we may argue from four
famous and main Witnesses.

The 1. whereof, is the general practice of all Christians (I say nothing of
Heathens,) Apostles, and generally all in the primitive times, have ever
thought that one day of seven is to be observed, and have in less or more
accordingly observed it.

2. As the practice of all, so the Judgment and opinion (which is often more
sound then men's practices) of all, does confirm it: Was there ever any Churches
that did not in all their Catechisms and Canons, take in this fourth Command
with the rest? do not all Writers, who comment on the Decalogue, comment on
this Command, and urge the sanctifying of the Lords day from it?

3. Take men's Consciences for a third Witness, and it will be found that for no
sin, do they more frequently and more sharply challenge, then for Profaning of
the Lords day: The Conscience directly making use of this Command, and of the
Memento, and other reasons in it for aggravating of that sin, when yet it will
say nothing for the Seventh day; but this first day of seven it presses most
exactly, neither will any reason alleged against its morality quietit; and the
more tender that Christians be, the more will they find a pressure of
Conscience for obedience to this Command; and the more easily will they be
convinced of, and sadly challenged for the least breach of this Command.

4. Gods Dispensations of Blessings or Plagues, especially in spiritual things,
bear witness to this Truth: Does not experience tell us, that those who make
most Conscience of keeping this Command, are often, yea, ever the most thriving
Christians as to universal holiness and tenderness, and most near and intimate
Communion with God? and will not the unsuitable sanctification of but one
Sabbath, or the interruption of their wonted seriousness therein, give them a
sore backset? and on the contrary, does it not appear that those who are gross
and untender in this, are often gross and untender in all manner of
Conversation, and are followed with spiritual plagues of hardness, deadness,
and Hypocrisy at the best, or else fall into gross outward acts of prophanity,
or into errors in judgment, which are the bad and sad effects of profaning
this day, on them who prejudg themselves of the blessing of it; and if the
blessing of this Law continue, must not the Law it self be moral and
perpetually binding? the obedience whereof, has this blessing perpetually more
or less annexed to it, as the profanation thereof has usually Plagues, at
least spiritual.

There are some Objections that are moved against the morality of this Command;
I shall speak to three of them which are most insisted on.

1. Obj. This Law is not mentioned, as being renewed or confirmed, in the New
Testament.

Answ. 1. It Is Authority depends not on the mentioning of it so in the New
Testament: the Law is Gods Word, and has its Authority as well as the New
Testament.

2. What i^ some other clearly moral and binding Law had been omitted, or not
mentioned in the New Testament, as there seems to be no palpable and express
Command against Images, though there be against will worship; sure, it is
enough that it is not repealed in it, so it is here, as is said.

3. Sundry other positive Laws are binding, which are not mentioned in the New
Testament, such as these, For a man not to Marry his Sister or his Aunt. etc.

4. It will be found on the matter to be confirmed, when we shall see what
warrant there is for the Lords day, which is one of seven, and yet is clearly
holden forth in the New Testament: But this Command, as also that relating to
Idolatry* are so little mentioned, because the Jews, after the Captivity, were
not so much in the defect of obedience to these Commands, but were rather
disposed to a superstitious excess, which makes Christ often rectify that
abuse of the fourth Command, but never to annull it. The third Command also
anent Swearing, might be said to be abrogated, because it is not so positively
asserted in the New Testament.

2. Obj. The Apostle, Rom, 14. 5, 6. Gal. 4. 10. and Col. 2. 16. seems to
cast away difference of times, especially of Sabbath days; which could not be,
if this Command were moral.

Answ. The Apostle cannot be understood simply to cast away the observation of
all days as a bondage, and so to make all times alike; For 1. That would
contradict his own practice, and the practice of the other Apostles: for it is
clear that they differenced the first day of the week from other days, and one
day in special is called, The Lord's Day, which other days of the week are not.
2. It all times be alike simply, and all making difference be there reproved,
then could there be no time set apart to be observed by men, to the marring of
that indifferency; and if so, then has the Christian Church been still in a
palpable gross sin; for if the keeping of a day by virtue of Gods Command, mar
that indifferency, much more will the keeping of a day by man's command, and so
there could never be a Sabbath. 3. We must therefore understand these places
not as casting all days and times simply, but ceremonial and Jewish days, or
days invented by men, because the scope of the places runs that way, viz.
against the bringing in of ceremonial worship as necessary, which while some
weak ones, not yet sufficiently informed, did still practice, as Romans 14. the
Apostle would not have them hastily condemned in days, more then Meats; yet is
there still a difference betwixt Bread and Wine in the Sacrament of the Supper
and other meats, which this discourse of the Apostle takes not away; so is it
in days. And in these Epistles to the G^latians and Colossians, he speaks of
days, and not (as would seem of the weekly Sabbath, which is ordinarily called
a day) as taking in all the extraordinary Feasts of the Jews, which is the more
probable, because the ceremonial Law was pressed on them as still necessary, by
false Teachers: or he speaks of mere Jewish days, and so of the seventh day
which they kept; for it is of such observation of days as was sinful, and
brake them off from Grace and the Gospel, as other ceremonies did; that he
speaks of: but that cannot be said of all days, or of keeping one day of
seven: Therefore this cannot be meaned there.

3. Obj. The fourth Command precisely commands the seventh day from the
Creation to be kept; but that is not moral; therefore, neither is the Command
so.

Answ. This Objection goes upon that mistake, as if the very seventh-day were
still commanded in it. as the main substance of it, which our next discourse on
the true scope and meaning of the Command will clear; so that if a seventh-day,
and not that seventh-day be commanded as the main substance of that Command,
that Objection falls. 2. There is a difference to be put betwixt the
mandatory part of the Command, and what is further added for pressing the
observation of it, or for explaining its meaning* The precept strictly is,
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: It says, Remember the Sabbath, or
the Holy re^^* whatever day it shall be on; and so it is said in the close,
that, He rested the seventh day, but that, He blessed the Sabbath: Drawing it
still from the seventh precisely, to the Sabbath: Even as in the second
Command: This is, 1. commanded in special, that no Image be made, then. 2. This
in general, that all Gods Commandment concerning his worship, even such as were
Ceremonial, for the time, should be observed with whatever others should be
given: So here this fourth commands expressly one of the seven; because the
Recurrency of that time is bounded: and generally, whatever seventh the Lord
shall be pleased to pitch on.

We have said the more on this, because it does not only clear the true scope
of the Command, but shows the necessity of the observation of that time,
which the Lord has sanctified for himself. 3. We should put a difference also
betwixt Ceremonial and Mutable: All the Judicial Laws are Mutable; and the
Decalogue it self, in respect of its Curse; and as it was a Covenant giving
life, is actually changed and abolished: Yet is not for that to be reputed
Ceremonial, and not Obligatory: (Though all Ceremonials be mutable, yet all
mutables are not Ceremonial.) Besides, this change is not in the matter. Why
may not therefore, the seventh day in order, (which was observed from the
Creation, to the Resurrection of Christ,) be changed to the first day of the
week, which is a seventh day in number still, without abolishing the morality
of the fourth Command?

Amongst other things in this Command, there is more express mention, of the
whole Families joining in this duty, then is in other Commands: Therefore it
being a concerning-duty to us; and a special thing included in the Command; we
shall speak to that Point concerning Family worship, (before we speak of the
second general proposed about the particular morality of this Command, and the
meaning of the words of it,) that ye may see, that it is no invention of Men;
when ye are called to it, and when it is pressed upon you.

We shall here, 1. show you, that, This Command holds forth a Family, or
Domestic Worship. 2. We shall confirm it more largely from other Scriptures,
and grounds of Reason. 3. We shall show, wherein it consists in particular,
and on whom it mainly lies to be discharged. 4. We shall show the advantages,
of conscientious discharging of it, and the Prejudices of neglecting it, with
the Aggravations of that sin.

That there is such a thing as Family Worship, included in this Command, will
be clear, by considering, 1. What worship to God in general is. 2. What
Family Worship is. 3. What this Command requires

1. By worship, is understood some Tribute paid, by the reasonable Creature to
God, as the great and sovereign Lord Creator; whether it be immediately and
directly paid, and performed to him, as prayer and praise; or for him and at
his Command, and for his honor, as preaching, hearing, and receiving of
Sacraments; which are worship, when rightly gone about. In a word, we call that
worship, more strictly and properly, which is a duty of the first Table; and
comes in as commanded in it, for the honor of God, and not for our own, or
others external profit; which, though commanded in the second Table, cannot be
so properly called worship, much less Immediate - worship. Thus, Teaching
others the Duties of Piety, may be worship, when teaching the Duties of any
other ordinary calling, is not.

2. We call that Family Worship, which is to be performed, by such and such
Relations; or by all the constituent members of the Family jointly: And so it
differs 1. From secret or solitary Worship, which one performs alone to,
and before God. 2. From public Worship, which one performs by joining in a
Congregation of many Families together. 3. From that worship performed
occasionally, in mutual fellowship amongst Believers, or professors of diverse
Families: For 1. That may not be ordinary as this, nor so frequent. 2. That is
free to this or that Believer, as they shall choose; or as occasions do cast
them to be together. This is not at choice, but is necessary, as to the same
persons. 3. This is performed by virtue of domestic relations, and not of
Christian only. 4. This may have, and should have an Authority-Domestick in its
regulation; For a Master of a family, may authoritatively command the members
of the family, to pray, keep the Sabbath, etc. and may suitably correct for the
neglect of those duties; whereas that other is by Christian Communion, and
Admonition only.

Ye will see this Family Worship clear: 1. By considering the Jews eating of
the Passover: Where there was, 1. Secret worship, no question apart. 2. There
was publick-worship; a holy convocation the first day, and the last: But 3.
There was peculiarly a Family Worship; or, if the family was little, two joined
together, for eating the passover within the House, wherein all the members of
that family; or of those two little families that were circumcised were
necessarily to be present, and to be joyners: this is Family Worship.

2. By considering, Psalm 101. compared with other Scriptures, where ye have 1.
David mentioning his private carriage, and longing for God, and walking in a
perfect way. 2. His public carriage as a Magistrate in cutting off the wicked
from the City of God, as ye have. 3. Elsewhere his publick-worship, as Psalm
122. 1. and 2 Samuel 6. 4. His fellowship with all the Godly, being a Companion
to them that feared God, Psalm 119. verse 63. Yet fifthly, and lastly: Ye have
a walk within his House with a perfect heart, mentioned there as contradistinct
from all; which must infer some religious performances of duties, or exercise
of worship in his House in reference to that station, as well as in private or
in public, yea, a joynt-exercise, because it is such an exercise as he
performed only at home in his House; whereas had it been praying for them, or
any thing, that otherwise he might have done apart: he needed not go home to
them, for performing of it: Yet, 2 Samuel 6. verse 20. when the public worship
is done, he goes home to bless his House; which manifestly shows a peculiar
duty performed by him, in his Family, according as he resolved in that 101.
Psalm.

3. It will yet further appear, that there is such a thing, and some way, what
it is; by considering Zach. 12. from verse 10. to the last: where there is,
first, A public mourning of the whole Land. 2. Of several families together:
Families shall mourn then. 3. Families apart. 4. Their Wifes apart, and so
every particular Person in secret. In which place, it is clear, 1. That there
is a worship of families, besides public and secret worship. 2. That, that
worship includes the same duties, jointly performed by the members of the
family, which Persons in secret perform* and so Family Worship, will be a
worshipping of God, (beside what is in public and secret,) in a Domestic and
family-relation, jointly.

Thirdly, That this Command requires such a family worship distinct from
public and secret, and something to be performed in worshipping of God amongst
persons of related, which is not required of others* may thus be made out.

1. The thing called for in this Command is certainly worship, yea immediate
worship; it being a Command of the first Table, and such a thing as the
sanctifying of the Sabbath.

2. This Command takes in all Domestick*Relations, Parents, Children, Son^ and
Daughters, Masters, and Servants, Men or Women, yea and Strangers that may be
for the time, or on that day, sojourning there; these are all constituent
Members of a Family.

3. The thing required of them is not simply rest from labor, for 1. That is
commanded for the Beasts (lest men should be hindered from or interrupted in
their holy rest by their waiting on them) and none will say, we hope, that
there is no more required as to Children or Servants, then as to the Beasts. 2.
Under the Negative, Thou shall do no work, is included the Affirmative, Thou
shall sanctify that day to the Lord. 3. The same Duty is required of all alike
(in some respect) thou Father, and thou Son, thou Master, and thou Servant, and
if worship be called for from the Father, and Master, for the sanctifying of
that day, so it must be also from the Child and Servant.

4. The manner of performing this Worship of sanctifying the Lords day in Holy
duties, is required not only to be in public, nor only in secret, but by the
Members of each Family jointly, and apart from other Families.

For 1. It cannot be understood to require worship only in public together*
because 1. there may be in some cases no access to public worship, and yet the
Command of sanctifying the Lords day lies still on, and no doubt by Families.
2. Waiting on public worship is but one piece of sanctifying the Lords day,
and that but in apart of it; therefore there must be some other thing included
here. 2. It cannot be understood of the Master of the Family, his putting the
Members of the Family separatly to seek and worship God, and of his own going
about Holy duties himself apart.

For 1. Though that be worship, yet is it not worship from persons in such a
Relation or Family*worship, more then if they were not in such a Relation, or
of such a Family; and though it might be said that such and such persons
sanctified the Sebbath, yet could it not be said that the Family as such did
it; even as Families or persons seeking God in secret, could not be exonered
thereby, as to their being in the Congregation; nor their serving of God be so
accepted as Congre; gational service. if they met not together when they might:
Just so it is here*yea as it lies, by this Command, on a Congregation and a
Minister to sanctify the Lords day, and to come together for that end; so does
it lie on the Family and Master of it.

2. By this Command there is more required then secret or solitary sanctifying
of the Sabbath, even a peculiar sanctification of it within one Family distinct
from another: I say* 1. more then solitary worship, because the Lords saying
thou, without repeating Son, Daughter, etc. had been sufficient to have laid it
on all separately for themselves; the enumeration therefore of the whole
Members of a Family must import some other thing, for the former is employed in
all Commands, as Thou shall not kill, that is, as far as in thee lies, thou
nor thy Son, etc. There must I say, be something more understood by the
peculiar enumeration pressed in this fourth Command. I say, 2. Even a peculiar
worship, because it is something laid on by this Command which is holden within
Gates or doors, and neither goes to the Congregation, nor to the persons of
other Families, at least ordinarily, but reaches the Members of such a Family
who are within such a Man's Gates or Doors; therefore it must be a distinct
Family Worship mainly performed by that Family together.

3. The thing required here is not only worship simply, but worship as from a
member of such a Family; therefore it is not solitary worship: for seeking of
God and moral duties in secret still agree to persons in all places and
Families alike* but this draws a line as it were betwixt Families, and so
divides one Family from another; yet makes the duty more obliging to these
within such a Man's Gates or Doors, then others without Doors; therefore it must
be joynt-worship: for apart, or as concerning secret worship, all are every
where alike obliged.

4. If by this Command something more in the worship of this day be required of
a person that is a member of a Family, in reference to that Family, then there
is required of one who is not a member of such a Family, or is required of that
person in reference to another Family whereof he is not a member; then it
requires a distinct Family Worship, for no other thing can be understood, but
a joint going about the sanctifying of that day in a stricter and nearer way of
Communion amongst the members of that Family, then with persons and Families in
and to whom they are not so interested and related.

5. If secret and public worship were only required in this Command, then
should we equally and alike sanctify the Lords day with other Families and
persons, not of that Family whereof we are members; for in these we join alike
for them and with them, but there is some peculiar thing required here, which
will not agree to be performed by all alike; therefore it is Family Worship
that must be here required.

6. This Command requires of Masters, (suppose them to be Ministers, or
Magistrates) another way of sanctifying the Sabbath, and worshipping of God, in
and with their Families, then it does in reference to other Families; the
Command being so particular to him, and to all that are within his Gates or
Doors, and members of his Family, speaks this clearly. But except it be joint
going about of duties with them, there can be no other thing understood to be
required: for, 1. One may exhort another. 2. All come in public together. 3.
By the Masters example after the public, they all withdraw (or should at
least) to secret exercises. 4. Magistrates and Ministers may Command other
Families to sanctify that day; What is peculiar then, as to their own
Families, but to join with them in duties of worship?

7. If there were not Domestick-worship required on this day, then except it
were in public, Members of a Family could not converse together; for they
cannot converse together in doing their own works, or in speaking their own
words, their fellowship therefore must be in exercises of worship, and so that
must needs be required in this Command.

8. Some other thing is required by this Command, of a member of a Family which
seeks God, then of a person in an heathenish Family; or some other thing is
required from so many persons joined together as members in one Family, then
from such persons suppose them to be scattered from one another, amongst
heathenish Families; certainly where Husband, Wife, Children, and Servants are
Christians, and Professors of the same true Religion, there is some other thing
required of them then where only the Husband, the Wife, the Child or the
Servant is so; but if they were scattered and became parts or members of
diverse families among Heathens, they would be obliged to seek God apart;
therefore no less, but much more is joint-seeking of God required of them, when
they are united together as members of one family.

9. This Command (when it mentions all within his Gates or Doors) requires
some other thing of a Master when at home with his family, then when he is
withdrawn from them: But a Master at a distance may command all in his family
to worship God, and pray to God for them, and so may they all if they were
scattered, worship God secretly; therefore when they are together, there is
some other thing required of them by this Command, which is, no doubt, To
worship God together.

10. The duties that are to be performed on this day will require this; such as
instructing one another, exhorting, admonishing, comforting, strengthening one
another, and talking to, or conferring with one another, of the Word, Deuteronomy. 6.
verse 7. 8. Which cannot be denied to be duties called for on this day; and yet
they cannot be done but by joint concurring together in that work, and
therefore it concludes strongly that family worship, at least on the
Lord's Day, is commanded here; and if families be called to worship God jointly
on the Lord's Day by the worship competent for that day, then by proportion are
they also called to worship him jointly on other days by the worship suitable
to them, there being the like ground for all.

11. And lastly, that which is required of families, is such a worship as ought
to be performed by them, supposing there were no public worship, nor yet any
other family, worshipping him in the World. So Joshua reso^veth, Chap. 24. 15.
I and my House will serve the Lord, and sanctify His Sabbath (that being a
special piece of His service) whatever ye will do: but if there were no
worshipping of God in all the World but in one family, then ought that worship
to be joint according to that same word of Joshua's, I and my House, otherwise
we behooved to say, that there might be a plurality of worshippers of God in
the World, and yet without any joining together in worship, which were in it
self absurd, and contrary to Joshua's Religious Resolution.

It being thus made out by this Command, that there is such a worship as
family worship, and that it is commanded, we shall consider in the next place,
how the Scriptures do otherways hold it out.

1. Then consider, that where the Scriptures speak of eminently Godly men, they
speak of them as making conscience of this, and take notice of their honoring
of God in their families as a special part of their eminency; So Abraham,
Genes* 18. verse 19. Joshua. 24. 15. Job in the first Chapter of his Book, and
David Psalm 101. are noted: It must then be a commanded and commendable duty,
which is so particularly remarked in them.

2. Ye will find it almost in all parts of Scripture, as Genes. 18. Exodus 12.
Dout. 6. Joshua. 24. Job 1. Psalm 101. and Psalm 30. At the Dedication of
David's House, which was not sure, without some peculiar worship and craving of
Gods blessing; even as in other cases, those who had builded Houses were to
Dedicate them, or to Consecrate them, and wherefore? because they were hoven in
a manner, and as it were offered to the Lord, for seeking and worshipping Him
in them: So, Altars* Numb. 7. 84. were said to be Dedicated when they were set
apart for Gods service, and Consecrated for that use. So Nehe^. 12. 27. the
Walls were Dedicated, and the Levites brought out for that end; which
Dedication* no doubt, had a Religious use* and, Will any think that they began
with Prayer or praise as David did, and left off such Exercises afterward? see
also 2 Samuel 6. 20. where mention is made o^ David's blessing his House. Esther
and the Maids of her House, and the rest of the Jews in their several Families,
fasted and prayed. We see it spoken of by the Prophets, as Jer. 10. ult. and
Zech. 12. 12. and that as a Prophecy of the Converts carriage under the New
Testament. We find it also mentioned. 1 Timothy 3. 4. and 5. v. 8* and Titus 1. 6.

3. Ye will see it thus practiced and pressed before the Flood; God was
honored and worshipped in families after it (before the Law) by Abraham, Job,
and others in their Families; under it, there was the Observation of it, and
that by peculiar Ordinances, as namely, by the Passover yea, it is mentioned,
and that most expressly in the very Law, as is said; it was kept up under the
Captivity, and after the return renewed by Zachariah especially; yea, it is
also renewed in the New Testament, whereby it appears to be of very special
Observation; from all which it is not a little commended to us.

4. If we consider the many ways whereby the Scriptures press this duty, it
will be found that there is hardly any duty more cleared and pressed then it.
Its pressed: 1. By Command? 2. By examples of Godly-men held forth as Paterns
for imitation. 3. By promises made to it, and 4. By blessings conferred on the
conscientious practisers of it, Genes. 18. Deuteronomy. 11. verse 18. 19. 20. 21. 5.
As evidencing sincerity, Genes. 18. Joshua 24. 6. As making Folks liable to the
curse and wrath of God when neglected. Ierem. 10. 25. 7. As a fruit of the
Spirit, and as a companion of true repentance, Zach. 12. 8. As a specially
commending and adorning qualification of persons that have it and scandalous
where it is wanting; and as declaring one unmeet for public charge, Genesis 18.
1. Tim. 3. 4. Tit. 1. 6.

Hence the Argument runs strong, That duty which in Scripturs is commanded,
by many examples commended, and by other motives pressed, the neglect whereof
brings guilt and offense upon the persons neglecting; is no doubt a necessary
duty, but Family Worship is such: therefore it is a necessary duty.

1 That it is commanded, what we have said from this fourth Command may
sufficiently make it out, yet we further add, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. 8. and Deuteronomy. 11. 18.
19. In which two places it is clear that observing of the Law, is not only to
be studied by a Master of a Family himself alone, but that the Religious duties
of frequent speaking of it, diligent teaching of it, whetting and pressing of
it on his Family, are to be performed by him; yea, it is to be written on the
posts of his Door, to show that Religion must be in the Family, and in all that
enter into it, even as car ying the word on the fronlets betwixt their eyes,
was to mind them of the peculiar and particular sanctification that was called
for from them.

2 That it is commended by examples is clear in Abraham's, who d^aleth both with
Children and Servants in the Family, and that in things concerning the
worshipping of God, as well as in things concerning his own particular affairs:
He circumcised them, and commanded; yea, charged them to serve the Lord, which
cannot be supposed to have been done without other duties of worship. And in
David^, 2. Sam 6. 20. Who when he has been at publick-worship goes home to
ble^s his Family, which was certainly to go about some Religious duty with
them, as he had been doing with the people in the public; in the one he
behaved himself as King, in the other as a Governor and Head of his own Family
in particular; and had it been only to pray for them, that might have been done
elsewhere then at home; but it denotes the changing of public worship
(wherein he had blessed the people as a public man, as a Prophet and godly
King, and had joined with them v. 18.) into Family duties. Wherein he goes to
concur with them; Intimating that a Holy Solemnity should be partly spent in
public, and partly in Familyduties, without neglect of secret duties: beside
that in Psalm. 30* and Psalm. 101. it is clear; and appears to have been also
practiced by all that built houses, who did Dedicate them, and that not without
Prayer, as is manifest by David's Dedication of his, Psalm. 30 as is said, Job's
example likewise makes it out Chap. 1. where there are 1 Sacrifices in his
Family, as well as for his Family. 2. He sends to sanctify them who were
absent, that is, to put them in a readiness for joining with him in that
service with those that were at home, which he needed not to have done had they
been beside or present with him: Yea 3. when he cannot do it personally, he
will do it by another, that God may be worshipped by them all, some way
together.

3. I say the neglect of it is sadly threatened as Jer. 10. v. ult. Pour out thy
fury on the Heathen that know thee not, and on the Families which call not on
thy name* If not worshipping of God in Families, be a Character of a Family
appointed to destruction, and be threatened with a Curse, then prayer-worship in
Families is a necessary duty; for it is clear from that place, 1. That by
calling on Gods Name, is meant Gods worship in general; and prayer in
particular, which is a special part of it* 2. That by Families are meant
particular* Societies and Companies whether lesser or greater that want this
worship, and so are the Objects of that Curse.

Obj. If it be said, that by Families there, are meant People and Nations, yea
(comparing this place with Psalm. 79. v. 6,) Heathens that called not on God.
Ans 1. That does confirm the Argument: for if Heathens, whether Kingdoms or
Families be described by this, that they call not on God; then still it must be
a Heathenish Kingdom that has not public worship, a Heathenish person who
wants secret worship, and so a Heathenish Family that wants Family Worship.
2. The Curse here is not threatened to Families as Families, but as such
Families that call not on Gods Name, therefore it reaches them: for, a
quatenus ad omne, etc. So then what ever profession Families have otherwise,
if they want this duty they are thereby laid open to the Curse. 3. It is all
one upon the matter whether by Families be meant Societies lesser or greater:
for if it be a fault in Nations to neglect Gods worship, and if the neglect
thereof bring a Curse on them, will it not be a fault in particular Families,
and bring a Curse on them? 4. Families cannot be excluded, seeing they are
expressly named; though more be included, to wit, that the Curse comes on
multitudes of Families, or upon Nations made up of Families. And we conceive
Families to be particularly named, 1. To show that the Curse will reach all
Societies lesser as well as greater, who have this Character. 2. Because
Nations are made up of Families, and because there is sibness (to say so)
betwixt the carriage of families in religious worship, and the carriage of the
whole Land. 5. The comparing of Jeremy 10 with Psalm. 79 will not enervate any
of the places; but, when put together, they show that the Holy Ghost does mean
both Families and Kingdoms, and that what is employed in the one place is
expressed in the other, to show that God will have both publick-worship from
whole Kingdoms and Family Worship from particular Families as parts of these
Kingdoms. 6. The ground whence the C^rse is derived, is because that such a
Society neglects such a duty, and therefore how-ever we expond the place and
the word Family there, it will hold of all Societies in general.

4. I said that the having of Family Worship is looked upon as a special
qualification, and the want of it as a scandal and offense, for. 1. Who are to
be admitted Elders or Deacons? Is it not such who have this qualification of
Ruling their own Houses well? 1, Tim. 3. v. 4. Tit. 1. 6. (yea even Widows, 1 Timothy 5. 10. are to be tried by this, that they have brought up Children, no
doubt Christianly and Religiously, which can very hardly, if at all be, without
worshipping of God with them) 2. If that qualification, to wit* Ruling their
own House well, be found to be wanting, they are accounted to be unmeet to rule
in Gods House, 1 Timothy 3. 5.

Whence we may reason thus: That which casts a man as unmeet for bearing Rule
in Christ's House, how-ever otherwise he be qualified, is an offense and a
scandal; but the want of Family Worship does that; therefore the want of it is
a scandal.

In these places it is clear, 1. That Ruling of their own House is meant not
only in outward and temporal things, but also, if not mainly, in what
concerns the honor, service and worship of God; for 1. it is the Ruling of
Servants and Children together, 1 Timothy 3. verse 4. 5. Now it is clear that
Children are to be brought up in the fear of the Lord, 2. It Is a Ruling that
commends them as gracious, which no Ruling in temporal things will do; seeing
many mere natural men, are wiser in their own Generation that way, then the
Children of light. 3. Many much less fit for Ruling in these things, may yet be
fit to Rule in Gods House, as experience clears. 4. These words, having
Children in subjection in all gravity, speak out a Christian and Religious Rule
and order to be kept in the House or Family in reference to a Religous end,
which cannot but take in Family Worship; yet it is also clear, that he means
not simply of inability to rule, but mainly of defectiveness in the improving
the ability which God has given for Ruling; therefore it is not said here, He
that cannot Rule his House (though that be in part truth) but he that does not
Rule; and it is tanked with excessive drinking, striking, pride, and other
gross ills; it having that same effect that they had, to wit, to declare
incapacity for such Offices; Hence this is not to be the Rule of trial, if he
can Rule his own house well, as having gifts fitting him for it, but (supposing
him to have these) it is to be inquired if he does actually Rule it well, which
is the evidence of the right improving of his gifts; therefore here Ruling in
the man's own house, and ruling in the Church or House of God, are looked on as
two degrees of one thing of the same nature, because both taken in, not only
gifts fitting for the discharge of the duty of this respective ruling it, but
conscience and faithfulness in the improving of them* We shall not here to this
purpose insist on the frequent mention that is made in the Scripture of
Churches being in Families; But shall proceed to add to what we have said, Six
or Seven Reasons or grounds that will further prove and clear the thing.

The first is drawn from nature, which teaches not only that the true God
should be alone served and worshipped, but that according to the Stations God
has put (...) in, they should improve them with their gifts and parts for a
higher end then their own behooff or advantage; to wit, his glory: And that as
they have a peculiar fellowship given them by him as his gift, so he should
have answerable and peculiar acknowledgement from them; and therefore seeing
the appointment of Families is Gods Ordinance, and that its he that gives to
some Children and Servants which are withheld from others, there ought in all
reason a Tribute to be given to him resulting from that Society and the Family:
hence it was that before the Law the Patriarchs had their worship specially in
their Families; yea Heathens, beside their public idolatrous worship, and
idolatrous Temples, had their peculiar Penates or Houshold-Gods, on whom for
their particular families, delivery from enemies and protection, they depended.

2. A second is drawn from the nature of Christian Communion amongst Believers,
which as it requires the performing of Christian duties, according as we are
in providence called to them, so it requires the making use of that tie of
Family-interest or relation super-added to the former for furtherance and
entertaining of that Communion, because there is a special access ministered by
such a relation to the attaining of that end; Hence it is we conceive (as is
said) that some Christian Families are called Churches, because so many
Christians casten together, lived in a Christian discharge of all
Family-Ordinances (so to speak.)

3. The Lord by his Covenant does especially (though not always) derive mercies
to Families taking them in together, and making promises to them, and
conferring privileges on them. So Abraham's whole Family was taken in Covenant,
Genes. 17. And in the New Testament whole Families were at once Baptized, which
certainly calls them to a peculiar way of being answerable to such
privileges and engagements: And is not this one special and very proper way of
being answerable to them, that they worship God together, and join in blessing
him for such mercies, and in prayer to him for grace to carry suitably to them?

4. The mutual interest that usually is in the condition of members of the same
Family, calls for joynt-seeking of God, and worshipping of him, as they are
jointly concerned in the same dangers, the same sins often, the same strokes,
the same duties, the same mercies; for what is so to one, is ordinarily some
way so to all, therefore ought they to join in confessing of sins,
acknowledging mercies, deprecating dangers and strokes, and discharging of
duties.

5. Private worship is profitable to all the ends of a family. Its an
acknowledging of God and honoring of him, it helps the Master to keep his
authority, and makes every one in their Family to walk the more respectively
toward the rest, and it keeps from many out-breakings, when they are to meet
so often together to seek and worship God; hence, in experience, we often see
that these families, where religious worship is, are generally more civil, at
least, then other families, where it is not, and that the children and servants
of such families readily profit most, are most countenanced by Gods blessing,
and are in greatest capacity to get good of the public Ordinances.

6. The Lord loves to have a distinction betwixt these that serve him, and
these that serve him not; Now as to a family relation, what difference is there
betwixt a professing Christian family, where the joint worship of God is not,
and a heathenish family? Heathens live, and eat, and work together, and when no
more is seen, they look very like the one to the other. Even as in a Nation
where no public worship is, though private Persons privately seek God, yet
there seems to be no public national difference betwixt that Nation and a
heathen Nation: so in the former case a family difference will hardly be found,
if any should inquire of what sort of families these are.

Add that it will be hard to say that a man should take care of the outward
Estate of his Family, and neglect the spiritual, and keep Communion with his
Family in temporal things, and none in spiritual duties; yea, doubtless he
should be much more in these, as being both more necessary and more excellent.

Having first showed that this fourth Command holds forth a family worship,
and having secondly confirmed it more largely from other Scriptures and grounds
of reason, it follows now according to the method proposed, that we show in
the third place, how particularly the Scripture describes wherein it does
consist, whereby it will further appear to be of God. The Scripture describes
it four ways.

1. In general it is called in Abraham and Joshuas Case, keeping the way of
Lord, serving the Lord, very comprehensive expressions, taking in much, and
here its sanctifying of the Sabbath; that is, performing of the duties which
are to be discharged for the right sanctifying of that day; we conceive it to
be in short, to do these things in a joint family-way, which a Servant of God
may, and ought to do, alone; that is, to pray, read, sing Psalms, etc. or to do
in a Domestic way, what Christians in providence cast together may do, as to
pray, read, further one another edification by repeating of Sermons, spiritual
conference, instruction, exhortation, admonition, etc. for they have their tie
of Christianity, and this of a Family-relation beside, which does not abrogate
the former, nor derogate from it, but does further corroborate and add more
strength to it, as to make it more necessary and less elective, more frequent
and less occasional, and to be now by Domestic rules authoritatively regular
for edification, which cannot so be by the simple tie of Christian Communion.

2. It speaks of particular duties, wherein they should join, as first, Here
of sanctifying the Sabbath in all the duties of it, adding more to our
Family Worship that day then other days, as well as to our secret worship, for
the Sabbath was to have its double offering. Secondly, Of praying, Jerem. 10.
ult. which is necessarily included in that mourning, mentioned, Zech. 12. A
fruit of the poured out Spirit of Grace and Supplications, So 2 Samuel 6. David's
blessing his family is to be unde^stood of his going before them in prayer to
God for a blessing on them, not in common as a public Prophet, which he did
with the People, but as a peculiar duty discharged by him to his family,
whereof he was head. Thirdly, Of family fasting, or setting of time apart in
the family extraordinarily for Fasting and Prayer, as in Zech. 12. in that
solemn mourning, and in Esther 4. where it is recorded, that she and her maids
(who were her family) and all the Jews at Shusan (who yet could not have in
that place a public fast) did go about that duty. Fourthly, Of Instruction, a
most necessary duty to instruct and teach the family the knowledge of God; the
Command goes expressly on this, Deuter. 6. 7, 8. and 11. 19, 20. where we
commanded to talk of the Law within the House, to teach it our Children
diligently, or (as the word is) to whet it on them by catechizing, and to write
it on the posts of our Doors, and on the walls of the House, for what end I
pray? Sure for this very end, that the House might have the means of knowledge
in it, and that the knowledge of Gods Law might be taught and learned in it,
and will any think that the Walls should teach and the Master be silent?
Especially, seeing it is for the Families behoof, that these things were
written? What if some in the Family could not read? which on several accounts
might be* then it would follow that they were lost, if there were no more nor
other teaching then what was by writing on the walls; when Abraham commanded
his house to keep the way of the Lord, and to serve him, will any think he did
not teach them, who he was, and how he should be served? By proportion other
things fit for edification, and as worship to God, come in here, particularly
praise, ^s appears by the 30* Psalm, entitled A Psalm or Song at the
dedication of David's house.

3. The Scripture speaks of, and holds out the duty of the particular
members of the Family, and that in reference to the stations they are in, and
the relations they sustain and stand under, as of Husband and Wife, that they
live together* as the Heirs of the grace of life, and so as their prayers may
not be hindered* of parents, that they do not only provide for their Children
temporal things, but that they also being them up in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, 1 Timothy 3* 4. and 12. both Children and Servants are put in
together.

4. The Scripture speaks of ordering of Families by a special Family
discipline and Authority, therefore it is called in Abraham, commanding or
charging his Servants to keep the way of the Lord, and 1 Timothy 3. a ruling of
their own house well, with some resemblance unto ruling in the Church by
Ecclesiastical discipline, with which it is some way compared, as having a
fitness, or as being an evidence of fitness, for that.

This Discipline consists especially in these three, 1. in making good
domestic Laws for Children and Servants in ordering every thing aright, that
concerns the promoting of godliness and edification amongst them, and in
timing of things rightly, so as every duty that is to be done in the family,
may be done in the beautiful season of it. 2. In putting forth a paternal or
parental and masterly authority in carrying on these ends, commanding or
charging as Abraham did* ruling so as Children and Servants may be kept in
subjection; it is very insuitable and no ways allowable, that Masters should
command in their own business, and only entreat in the things of God. 3. In
exacting an account of obedience and censuring disobedience; Job and David do
reprove their own Wives by virtue of the authority of their headship, David
will not suffer a wicked person to abide in his house; that is, when commands
and rebukes will not do, he will even extrude and put away.

If it be asked here, on whom does the burden of discharging duties in the
Family especially lie, and what is to be thought of Chaplains*

Answ. I will not altogether condemn Chaplains, for certainly, Masters may make
use of helps, and God as often blessed it, and that practice of Levites being
in Families, Deuteronomy. 12. verse 13. 18, 19* (though it was a snare through his own
fault to that Levite, who went seeking a place to sojourn in Judge. 17. in
Micahs house) seems to insinuate that there has been, and might have been,
somewhat of this, and good if well improved; yet when putting the charge upon
Chaplains, either merely for Masters of Families their own ease, and when they
think themselves altogether exoned of that burden, because they have such with
them, or when it is because they think less of, and undervalue that duty
themselves, or account it below them to catechize and instruct servants, or to
pray in their Families, or because they cannot bestow so much time on these
duties, who yet can bestow much more idly, that is utterly culpable and
inexcusable; the burden lies on the Master primarily and chiefly, and
therefore he can never denude himself wholly of it, more then of his other
necessary affairs, except when more public affairs call him, or when
infirmities impede him; for here the Command says, thou, to wit, Master, nor
thy Son, nor Servant, etc. it speaks directly and immediately to him, because
the performance of the duty is especially called for from him; so in that
example of Abraham it is he that commands his household to keep the way of the
Lord, Job himself offers the sacrifice, David will not send home, but goes
himself to bless his house (though they had other ways much employment if that
could excuse) and the man that is to be chosen an elder, is such as rules his
own house well; having of a Chaplain, will give no great proof of the Masters
own dexterity, yet we say, that one may for the better effectuating the end
take help, though he cannot altogether devolve the burden on another; yea, we
think when the Master is negligent or absent, Duty falls to be performed by
these of the Family, on whom the weight of his affairs does in his failing or
falling short, lie, if qualified; so that amongst other defects they should
make up this, or in such a Case the most fit and best qualified in the family
ought to be pitched on for this.

From what has been said Family Worship appears to be so convincingly clear,
necessary and important a duty, that any Objections or Scruples, that can be
moved against it, most needs be but of little weight and importance, and may be
easily solved and satisfied: It will not therefore be needful to condescend
particularly on them: And as for the advantages that wait on the conscientious
and suitable practice of this duty they are many, a few whereof we shall very
briefly touch upon: As 1. It has Gods special approbation, testimony, and
commendation, and he has a great delight and complacency in the diligent and
faithful Practisers of it, Genes. 18. verse 19. 2. It advances to a high
degree of familiarity with God, and is attended with sweet Communications of
his mind as himself thinks fit, ibid. comparing verse 19 with verse 17. and
18. 3. It is readily and often followed with success more or less toward the
spiritual good, and edification of Servants and Children, either in the Masters
life time, or when he is gone, Genesis 18. v. 19. Abraham will command his
children and household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, they
shall keep is emphatick and observable; and with promised blessings on the
Master, or head of the Family, ibid. That the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that
which he bath spoken of him. 4. It is a notable mean of the propagation and
increase of the knowledge of God: O what plenty of the growth of the knowledge
of God might, and would be, in the Church, if all Masters of Families made
Conscience of Family Duties? and particularly of catechizing and instructing
them in the knowledge of the principles of Religion! And what can one Minister
do as to this alone in a numerous Congregation, if all, or most, Masters of
Families be negligent, who yet must answer to God for the Souls of their
Children and Servants, as well as the Minister must for the Souls of all under
his Charge; these being under their Charge, as well as the other are under his,
as is clear, from this same Command. 5. It very much furthers through Gods
blessing all the family for profiting by the Ministry of the Word, and for
joining in public duties of Worship, as is obvious. 6. It procures, or at
least, is a fit, hopeful and promising mean for procuring a suitable discharge
of all sorts of Duties, called for from the several Members of the family in
their respective capacities. 7. It is notably contributive, through Gods
blessing, for preventing many public scandals in the Church, whereby the Name
of God is much dishonored, and the profession thereof disgraced. 8. The ruling
of a man's own house well, does not a little fit him, that is otherwise
qualified for it, and called to it, for ruling in the house of God, 1 Timothy 3.
4. And by proportion for other public Employments* whereof he is capable, and
to which he is called. 9. It is waited with sweetly, smiling, quieting and
satisfying Reflections in a strait, and particularly at death; and failings in
it (let be utter neglects) are waited then with sad and bitter challenges, as
may be gathered from David's last words, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Although my house be not
so with God, etc. The contrary prejudices either of the utter neglect, or of
the careless and overly performance of these family duties, may be easily
discovered by the due consideration of these forementioned, and other such
like advantages: And from all that is said on this Subject the horrid
aggravations of the grievous sin of neglecting family worship so clearly
commanded, so much commended and pressed; so much practiced by the Saints, held
forth to be so advantageous in its practice, and so prejudicial and severely
threatened in its neglect, cannot be but at first view obvious to any that will
but with ordinary seriousness take notice of them.

Having cleared that this Command is moral, not as to the setting a part of
time for duty (which every Command supposes) but of so much time, particularly
stinted and defined in the Command: We come now to see what is specially
commanded here; the Command divides it self in a Mandat, or mandatory part in
the first words thereof, and in an amplicatory part, wherein it is more fully
cleared and pressed: The 1. is, Remember the Sabbath Day to sanctify it, or
keep it holy: for the opening up and winning at the clear meaning whereof, we
would consider three words.

The first is, what it is to remember or (as it is infinitively set down)
remembering to remember; this is prefixed and would look rather like the
inferring of something commanded already, then the new instituting of a
command, and so indeed, it seems to suppose a day formerly institute and set
apart for God (as was hinted before) which by this Command his people are put
to mind: It does beside import these four with a respect it were to four times.
First, A constant and continued duty at all times, and in all days; that is,
that we would remember, that God has set apart a seventh day for himself, and
therefore every day we would remember to cast our Affairs so, as they may not
be impediments to us in the sanctifying of that day, and we would endeavor
always to keep our hearts in such a frame as we may not be discomposed, when
that day shall come, and this affirmative part of this Command binds semper
or always, and its negative ad semper, on other days as well as on the Sabbath.

2. It imports a timely preparing for the Sabbath, when it is a coming, or
when it draws near, this remembering it calls for something to be done in
reference to it; before it come a man by this is obliged to endeavor to have a
frame of heart, that he may be ready to meet the Sabbath, and enter kindly to
the duties of it, when it shall come* or otherways, if it come on him while he
is in his common or course frame, and not fitted for it, it will say he has not
been remembering it before it came.

3. Remembering imports an intenseness and seriousness in going about the
duties of the day, when it comes, and that it should be with all carefulness
sanctified, and that men should be mindful of the duties called for, lest their
hearts divert from them, or slacken, bensil and grow formal in them; whereby
men's inclination to forget this duty, or to be superficial in it, is much
hinted at, this word we take to be moral, being a mean for furthering the great
duty aimed at of sanctifying the Lord's Day, or Sabbath coming.

4. Remembering may import this, that the Sabbath even when it is past, should
not be soon forgotten, but that we should look on the Sabbath past to remember
it, lest by loosing the fruits of it, when it is by, we make our selves guilty
of profaning it.

The next word is, the day of the Sabbath. By Sabbath here is meaned rest, as
it is exponed by the Apostle, Hebr. 4. and that not every rest, but a holy rest
from our own works, that there may be access to positive sanctifying of that
day, for the sanctifying of that day is the end, and this is but a mean and
necessary supposed help, without which the day cannot be sanctified in holy
duties; holy duties and our own works being for the time inconsistent; besides,
that rest on this day is not only called for, as ceasing from our ordinary
affairs in the time of worship is called for on any other day, but more
especially and solemnly in respect of the day it self; for at other times our
duties require a time for them, and therefore that time cannot be employed in
another ordinary work and in worship also, but here the Lord requires time and
rest to be sanctified, and therefore we are to perform holy duties (...) that
time, because it is to be sanctified; other times and rests are drawn after
worship, this time and rest draws worship necessarily after it; hence it was
that only the Jews feasts were called Sabbaths, I mean religious Sabbaths, not
civil or politic, as their years were, because they included a rest upon
destination to an ^oly use.

That which is mainly questionable here is concerning the day, expressed in
this Command, concerning which may be asked, 1. What sort of day, or the
quamdiu. ^. How often, or the quoties. 3. What day of the seven or the quando.
4. When we are to reckon its beginning.

For Answer to the first we say, There are two sorts of days mentioned in the
Scripture, one is artificial of twelve hours, so the Jews divided their day,
making their hours longer or shorter as the day was long or short, but they
kept up the ^umber of their hours always; the other is a natural day, which is a
seventh part ^f the week, and contains twenty four hours, taking in so much
time as inter^eneth betwixt the Suns beginning to ascend, after midnight, the
nocturnal Sol^ice, till it pass the Meridional altitude, which is the Suns
Vertical point for that ^ay, till it come to that same very point of Midnight
again, which is the Suns natu^al course every twenty four hours, comprehending
both the artificial day, which (...) from midnight to midday, and the
artificial night also, which is from midday to ^idnight again.

The day mentioned here is the natural day, because it is a seventh day,
proportionable to each of the six days, given unto us, and they with the
seventh making up the Week, it must contain as many hours as any of the rest
does; but the six days wherein God made Heaven and Earth, etc. are natural
days; therefore the seventh to wit, the day of rest, must be so also.

Let us only for further clearing and for directing our own Practice speak here
a word or two more, 1. We say it is a whole natural day, that is, as it is
usually employed by us on any of the six Days for our own Works, that as we
spend so much time in our ordinary Callings on other days, so would we employ
so much in Gods Worship secret, private* and public on that day; what
proportion of time we use to give, or may and should give ordinarily to our
Callings on other days, we would give as much to God and his Worship, to our
Souls, and our spiritual state on the Lords day or Sabbath.

Therefore* 2. there is not to be understood here a rigid pressing of all these
hours to be spent in Duties of immediate Worship, but our Working and Walking
time, having a respect to our infirmities, and also to our Duties, lest under
pretext of infirmity we incroach upon Gods day, and give him less then we give
to our selves, or should and may give him: And so in Scripture they accounted,
what is betwixt rising and going to bed, as still the Work of one day, or one
days Work; for as God in conceding six days to us, has yet so done it, as
there may be a Reserve of particular times for Worship called for from us to
him every day for keeping up our Communion with him; so on the seventh day does
the Lord allow so much convenience of sleep and other refreshing, as may be
subservient for the main end of the day, these being Works of mercy and
necessity, which Christ allowed on the Sabbath, which was made for man, and not
man for the Sabbath.

3. Yet care would be had lest under pretext of these we exceed, and apply too
much of what is the Lords unnecessarily for our selves and on our lusts; and if
we will wake for ordinary business, and keep up on such and such a Diet, other
Days, yea if we might do it, or others no more strong then we, do it, the
pretense of infirmity will not excuse us, especially seeing hardly it can be
often instanced, that timeousness at Gods Work in that day, or earnestness and
continuance in it, has proved hurtful, which we may account as a part of Gods
blessing on the seventh day, that less meat and sleep may be as refreshful as
more at another time* thus much for the quamdiu, or the Continuance of the day.

Secondly, it may be enquired how often by virtue of this command that day does
recur? if it be one of seven? or, if it be the very seventh? And so if this day
be to be taken definitely for the very seventh day after the Creation, or
indefinitely for one day of seven, as the Lord should otherwise determine, or
had elsewhere determined; a stricting then to a day: but not any particular day
by virtue of this command, but to such a day as was formerly described or
prescribed from the beginning, during the Jewish State, and to such another day
as God should after Christ's coming reveal unto them, and pitch upon for his
service? for taking it for granted, that a Seventh day as moral is commanded,
it follows to be inquired, whether it be the Seventh in number, that is, one
of seven, or the seventh in order, that is, the Seventh day?

For answering this we would permit, 1, That there is a great difference
betwixt these two; the one, to wit, that there be a Seventh does concern the
matter and substance of piety; the other, to wit, which of these Seven it be,
is more circumstantial and is alike, if it be appointed by God, and have the
blessing.

2. That it is usual for God in his commands concerning worship, not at first
to express a particular definitely, but to deliver it in the bosom of a
general indefinitely, mediately, and by clear consequence, as it were several
Species under one Genus.

As for instance, 1* when Deuteronomy, 12. 5. he commands his people to offer their
Sacrifices in the place which he should choose, here there is a stinting or
astricting of them to the place which God should reveal unto them; this before
the Temple was built, tied them to the Ark, and sometimes to one place, and
sometimes to another, as it was removed and placed, till it was brought to
Jerusalem; but after the Temple was built and chosen for the place, it
astricted men to that; yea when the Temple is destroyed, and Christ come, it a
stricteth men to no place by another, but it obliges men to worship God every
where in spirit and truth: It Is true, this is a Ceremonial precept, and will
not hold in all things, especially as to its oblition, yet while it stood by a
positive Authority or Precept, it shows that God may command a particular, as
one day of seven, and yet not instantly so determine, but that one and the same
command may enforce to diverse days at diverse times, upon supposition of Gods
manifesting his mind, even as by one command men were astricted successively to
diverse places

2. See it instanced in the second Command, wherein God requires such a
worship, as he himself should prescribe, which is the moral affirmative part of
it, and discharges all worship by Images, that is, the moral negative part
thereof; by virtue whereof Believers were then tied, to offer Sacrifices, to
Circumcise, to keep the Passover, etc. but now Believers are tied to Baptize,
to celebrate the Lords Supper, etc. yet by virtue of one and the same command*
so here, that command which requires the Seventh day from the Jews, may require
the First day from us Christians, for the Sabbath, because these particulars
are not expressly* directly, and immediately called for by these commands, but
indirectly and by consequence* yet this second command tied the Jews to abstain
from blood, and to circumcise, before the ceremonial Law was added to them,
because these commands were formerly revealed to them, but it tied them to
these accidentally (to say so) and by consequence only, even so we say of the
fourth command as to the Seventh day, it being instituted before: consider for
this Exodus 16. 26. where six days for gathering of Manna, and a seventh for
rest, are spoken of.

A third Instance is in Tithes, which was the Lords requiring apart of their
Means or Substance, as this was apart of their time; he there required the
tenth part of their increase, as here he does the seventh part of their time;
yet God, in proportioning their estates, did not particularly limit to any
exact and precise order, but as to this proportion of their estates whatever
they were; so we say here, had not the day been determined other ways then by
this command, it would not have employed any particular definite day of the
Seven,

3. We premit, that though the seventh day be called moral, as is expressed in
the Command, or understood, yet it is but moral positive, and so alterable at
the will of the Lawgiver, and therefore the question would not be much
different, if acknowledging the seventh day to be commanded to the Jews, as
well as one of seven, we yet asserted the seventh to be discharged, and one of
seven to be still retained* for so one of seven would be binding now, and not
the seventh.

4. Yet lest we should seem to admit somewhat changeable in the very Command it
self precisely considered, we would put difference betwixt the commanding part
of the Law, and its explicatory part; the command may be moral and indefinite,
although some things in reasons and motives were not so* as in the preface
which inforceth all the commands, and in the promise annexed to the fifth*
there was something peculiar to that people, yet cannot we cast off all because
of that; suppose there had no more been in this fourth Command, but remember in
the day of rest to keep it holy, that would not have inferred the seventh day,
though we think the Jews, because of its former sanctification, would have been
obliged to keep that day by virtue of this Command: And suppose that in the
explications or reasons there may be something added peculiar to that people
(which cannot be a seventh day, but at the most (if any thing) the seventh day)
yet that which is in the commanding part, will still stand moral, to wit, that
the day of rest should be remembered; and if it can be made out that it was
determined to the Jews to sanctify the seventh day (though it were in the
reasons added) and to us afterward to sanctify the first day, they will be
both found to be a seventh day, and a day of rest, and therefore to be
remembered and to be sanctified; this would resolve into the same thing on the
matter; yet we conceive it safest to assert that in this Command God has set
apart a seventh day to himself, which is to be sanctified by us, by our
application of it to holy uses, but does not by it expressly, directly, and
primarily bind to the seventh day, but secondarily and by consequence, to wit,
as it was other ways before declared by him, and so it binds now that same
way to the sanctifying of the first day of the week, as being now revealed by
God, just as in the former instances or examples we touched upon.

That a seventh day (whatever it be which is chosen of God) and not the seventh
day in order, is to be sanctified by virtue of this Command, as injoyning that,
as the substance and matter of it, may be made out by these Arguments.

Arg. 1. That which is the substance of this Command is moral, and binds
perpetually, as we have formerly proved (for if its substance be not moral,
then it sel^ is not so either) but that a seventh day should be sanctified has
been maintained in the Church by the Apostles in their retaining the first day
of the week, while the seventh has been laid by and never used; therefore it
was not the seventh, but a^ seventh day which was primarily commanded in this
Command; so that no particular day is instituted here more then any positive
service is prescribed in the second Command: yet the observation of what was
prescribed, or should be prescribed was included. Even so it is here in
reference to that day; and as we may infer that the second Command enjoined
not such and such Ordinances primarily, because they are abolished; and that
such as were negative or prohibited, a^ not making of Images, are moral,
because they are continued, and Images are to be rejected; just so may we
conclude that a seventh day here was primarily commanded, and is moral because
it is continued, and that the seventh was not so commanded, because it is
rejected and laid aside.

This Argument especially made out in the designation of the Lords day will
prove this, for if that seventh day was the substance of this Command, then
either it is to be continued as moral, which were against the current of the
New Testament, wherein, as Christ has set forth different Ordinances, so a
different chief solemn time for worship; or we must say that this fourth
Command belongs not to us at all, the contrary whereof we have made out: It
must then follow, that it was not the seventh day, but a seventh day which this
Command respects, which therefore belongs to us, as it did to the Jews, as
well as any other Command (and particularly the second Command) does.

Arg. 2. If God has put a difference some way betwixt the Sabbath commanded
here, and the day of his own rest, the seventh day, then it would seem its not
that day which it commanded: But he has put a difference, first, in the
mandatory part, Remember; what? not the seventh day, but the Sabbath day, or
day of rest: 2. In the blessing, it is not said, he blessed the seventh day,
but the Sabbath; therefore is that difference so palpable, as being specially
intended; whereas if the scope of the Command were only the seventh day, it had
been much more clear to have set it down other ways; and no other probable
reason of the difference can be given.

Arg. 3. Either a seventh day is commanded primarily, and then the seventh but
secondarily and consequentially, or the seventh was commanded the Jews
primarily, and one of seven but consequentially (for both were commanded to
them) and the first, to wit, the seventh as being in use before. But it cannot
be said that the seventh day was primarily commanded, and one of seven
consequentially only, because the general is first commanded, and then the
particular; as when God required Tithes of increase and Cattle, by the Command
of Tithes he first required the proportion, and then what particular proportion
as to order, he himself should carve out to them; and so consequently came in
the tenth Beast (which passed under the rod) by a particular command, Lev. 27.
32, 33* because there God determined; but if that tenth had not been set down,
the general command had but determined upon the tenth of Cattle, as of Sheaves,
or bolls of Corn, even so it is as to the day, the Command requires one of
seven primarily: but that it is this seventh, follows from another
determination.

Arg. 4. If the moral grounds and reasons which press this Command do most
directly respect a seventh day, and not the seventh; then its not the seventh
day, but a seventh day, which is primarily commanded in it (for the reasons
bear out especially what is moral in it, and principally intended) but the
moral reasons pressing it plead more strongly and directly for a seventh day,
and but indirectly for the seventh day as it was then instituted; Ergo, etc.
That the reasons do directly press a seventh day, and in a manner stick closely
to it, may thus be made out.

1. If the reasons equally press on us the first day, and the observation of it
(supposing it now to be observed according to Divine warrant) then they do not
primarily press the seventh, but the reasons equally press on us the first day,
Ergo, etc. the major is clear, for the same thing cannot press two different
days primarily nor equally; that the reasons concern us as well as them upon
the supposition aforesaid, may thus appear:

1. They are universal, and do not belong to that people more then any other,
for the concession of six days is to all, and Gods example of resting,
concerns all.

2. If the breaking of that Command be equally sinful to us with them, and
strike against the equity of the Command, and Gods example in us as well as in
them, then these reasons concern us also, and us as well as them: Now that they
do so, and agredge the sin of profaning our Lords day as they did the sin of
profaning their Sabbath, we must either grant, or we must deny that they
concern us at all: Beside the weight of a challenge from the conscience by
virtue of them, will put a tender heart out of question of it, seeing God
gives us six days to our selves, as he did to them, and his example proposed
to us ought to be respected by us, as well as by them, and the same general
equity is in both.

3. If the reasons be a sufficient ground of allowance to us for six working
days together, even the last six of the week, as they were to them for the
first six; then they determine not the seventh day to be the day of rest
primarily, but a seventh following these six of labor; but they do allow us
warrantably to work six days, even the last six of the week; Ergo, they do not
determine the seventh day primarily; the connection of the major seems to be
very clear: For first, these must stand and fall together, if the concession
(to call it so) concern us in the six working days, so must the reservation of
a seventh. 2. As the concession concerns us in the six working days, so must
the prohibition of work on a seventh of rest, for the one determines the
other, if the concession be for six in number, so must the prohibition be for a
seventh in number; but if the concession be of six in order, then it is the
seventh that is to be reserved, and if the seventh be related to in the
prohibition of work, then the concession must look to the first six days,
which it does not, as we have showed. And therefore 3. seeing the six days
concession looks to six in number, so many thou may or shall work
together* and no more, the prohibition must also respect the number, to wit, a
seventh* and not the seventh day: the minor will be clear to the judicious
considerer, by a particular application of the reasons of the fourth Command.

Further, if the concession respect not the number, but the order (as it must*
if the prohibition of work on the seventh respect the order and not the number)
then 1. what warrant have we for our six work days? if it be not here, where
is it? for sure we cannot take Gods time without his order and warrant: 2. and
more especially, then could not we by virtue of this Command plead allowance
for working six days different from the first six; if so, we would not be
astricted by the Command to sanctify one (seeing the one infers and
determines the other, and they must go together) which were absurd.

Yet again, it may be made out that the reasons press a seventh, and not the
seventh by considering the words and force of the consequence in both.

The first reason is, Six days shall thou labor, but the seventh is the
Lords. 1. It says not, take the first six, but of seven take six to labor,
and give the Lord the seventh, for he has reserved it to himself. 2. The same
equity is in the inference for a seventh; that is, for the seventh, if not
more; he has given thee six, therefore give thou him a seventh, will conclude
more formally then give him the seventh; a seventh is the seventh part of time
as well as the seventh, which is the equity the Command goes on. 3. Had the
Command intended to infer the seventh primarily, it would have been more
clearly expressed thus, he has given thee the first six, therefore give thou
him the seventh.

The second reason from Gods example infers the same, he wrought six and
rested the seventh, do thou so likewise, and so these that work six and rest a
seventh (as we now do) follow Gods example, as well as they that wrought six
and rested the seventh did.

Arg. 5. If the positive part of the Command must be expounded by the negative,
and contra, then it concerns one of seven, and not the seventh: But the first
is true, 1. To positive part commands a day without respect to its order,
therefore the negative does so. 2. The negative is to be resolved thus, ye
shall not work above six, not thus, ye shall not work above the first six, as
the event clears. 3. If it be not the first six, but six, that is, in the
concession, then it is not the seventh, but a seventh that is in the
inhibition, but the first is clear, Ergo, etc.

Arg 6. If this Command, for the substance of it, concern us, as being moral,
and bind us to the first day, and the sanctifying of it equally, as it obliged
the Jews to the seventh; then its one day of seven and not the seventh* which
is intended primarily by it: But it binds us to the first, Ergo, That its
moral, and binds us now, is cleared. Thus 1. it either binds to this day,
or to nothing, therefore it primarily grants six, and not the first six, for
labor, and by clear conseqnence intends primarily a seventh, and not the
seventh, for a day of rest. 2. If it be a sin against this Command to break the
Lords day or Christian Sabbath, and profane it, then it obliges us to it, and
that directly; for indirectly and by consequence the breach of the Sabbath is a
sin against any, or all of the three former commands* 3. If the profaning of
the Sabbath be forbidden on this ground, because it is the Lords (as it is in
this Command) then profaning of the Lords day is equally forbidden in it,
because its the Lords, and is now appropriated to him according to his own
will. 4. The Testimony of men's Consciences, and the constant challenges of all
(when tender) as being guilty of breaking this Command when ever they profane
the Lords day, do convincingly hold forth that this Command concerns, and are
as so many witnesses of it; and consequently prove that it is not the seventh
day, but a seventh day, whether instituted, or to be instituted by God, which
is the substance of it, and primarily commanded in it; for its never counted a
breach of this Command to neglect to sanctify the seventh day, neither do the
Consciences of well*informed Christians challenge for that, though they do most
bitterly for the other, as is said.

In sum, suppose now the first day being instituted, that the Command were to
sanctify the Sabbath* we would understand it of the first day, because its
already instituted; and the same reasons will enforce it, even so the seventh
day came in then, because it was formerly instituted; beside the Sabbatisme
signifies not this or that day, but what day soever, shall be by God solemnly
set, or is set apart for holy rest; and the Command will run for our observing
the Lords day, supposing its institution as well as it did for that; although
it more directly tie them, yet it does so but as a reason, even as the preface
prefixed to all the Commands, and the promise affixed to the fifth, concern
them literally; yet are binding in so far as they are moral, as appears by
the Apostles applying the last, Ephesians. 6. 2. without relation to that
particular Land or People, but as applicable and common to any Land or People
making conscience of obedience to Gods commands.

But here it may be objected, 1. The Jews kept the Seventh day. Answ. 1. Not by
virtue of this command, but by its prior institution, even as they were obliged
to Sacrifices and Circumcision by the second command, though they were not
particularly named in it. 2. So we are obliged to the keeping of the First day
of the week by this fourth Commandment: yet it follows not, therefore this
is expressly commanded in it, there being indeed no particular day primarily at
least instituted in it.

2. It may be objected, But God rested the Seventh day? Answ. Gods rest is not
principally proposed as the reason of that Seventh day, but that he rested one
day* after six employed in the works of Creation* I'ts to infer the number*
not the order, otherways it would not concern us. 2. The Seventh relates not
to the order of the days of the week, one, two, three, etc, but it is called
the Seventh with respect to the former Six of work.

Thus much for the quoties and quamdiu, how often the Sabbath recurreth, and
what is the day.

It remains here to be inquired what is the beginning of the sanctification
of this day (which belongs to the quando) or wherefrom we are to reckon it,
seeing it is granted by all to be a natural day; Now it is questioned mainly,
whether its begininning is to be reckoned from evening about Sun*setting or
darkness, to Sun* setting the next day, or if it be to be reckoned from
morning, that is (as we fix it) when the Sun begins to ascend toward us
after midnight, which is morning largely taken, as its evening largely taken,
when the Sun begins to decline after midday.

In this debate then, we take morning and evening largely, as they divide the
whole natural day, so the morning is from twelve at night to twelve in the day,
and the evening from twelve in the day to twelve at night: And it must be so
here, for 1. Moses; Genesis 1. divides the natural day in morning and evening,
which two put together, make up the whole day; and these six days, made up
each of them of morning and evening, are natural days, the whole week being
divided in seven of them: and that reckoning from Gods example is no doubt
proposed for our Imitation in this. Hence the morning watch was before day, and
the morning sacrifice about nine of the clock, so the evening sacrifice was
about three in the afternoon, and the evening watch about nine at night* 2. It
is granted by all, and is clear from this command, that as we account the six
working days of the week, so must we account the seventh, for one must begin
where another ends; and if one of them begin at the evening or morning, all
the rest must do so likewise. 3. We suppose the sanctifying of the ordinary
Sabbath was from morning to evening, I say, of the ordinary Sabbath; because
for extraordinary Sabbaths, as of the Passover. Exodus 12. and of the Atonement,
Levit. 23. there were special reasons; and though otherwise they were to be
sanctified as Sabbaths, yet that they were to begin in the evening before, was
added as aspecial solemnity of these solemn times, and therefore the example or
instance of these will not be concludent here to the prejudice of what we
assert, but rather, to the contrary, seeing there is a particular excepting of
them from the ordinary rule, and the particular intimation of their beginning
in the evening, will rather confirm our assertion, that the ordinary Sabbaths
did begin in the morning. 4. Its not questioned, if on the evening before,
people should be preparing for the Sabbath following, we said that this is
included in the word remember; but if we speak of the Sabbath to begin at the
evening before, then it will be comprehended as a part of the very day, and so
it will conclude the work or observation of the day to close at the next
evening.

We conceive, especially to us Christians, the day is to begin in the morning,
as is said, and to continue till the next morning, for which we reason thus.

Arg. 1. As other days begin, or as days began at the first, so must this,
but days ordinarily begin in the morning, Ergo, etc.

If the first six of Moses's reckoning begin so, then this begins so also,
but they do begin so, which may be cleared from Genesis 1. where the evening and
the morning make the first day after the Creation.

1. If there the morning and the evening do fully divide the natural day, then
the morning must go before the evening, every morning being for its own
evening: But they do divide the natural day, all being comprehended under six
days, Ergo, etc. the consequence is clear, to natural sense, for the
fore-noon, which is the morning must be before the afternoon, which is the
evening; the ascending of the Sun is sure before its declining, and seeing the
morning natural (to speak so) of the natural day, is from the twelfth hour at
night, this must be the beginning of the day.

Again, the question then, being only, whether to reckon the evening or the
morning first; it would seem necessary to reckon the morning first; for if the
evening be first, that evening must either be, 1. the evening of a day
preceding morning, seeing every evening supposes a morning to go before it in
proper speech (and I suppose the History of the Creation, Genes. 1. is not set
down in metaphorical terms;) or 2. it must be an evening without a morning, and
that in proper speech (here used) is absurd, and seems also to be as impossible
in nature, to wit, that there should be a consequent and posterior evening or
afternoon, without a preceding morning or forenoon, as that there should be an
effect without a cause; or 3. it must be the evening following its own morning,
and so that morning must be lost proceeding the first evening recorded, Genesis 1.
The evening and the morning were the first day; which to affirm would not only
be absurd, but would also manifestly fasten the loss of a days time on the
Scriptures calculation: and it seems hard in all speech and Scripture Phrase,
to put evening before its own morning, seeing there must be both morning and
evening in each day; neither does the Scriptute speak any way of evening, but
when its drawing toward night, which still supposes the morning of that same
day to be passed, or else we must divide the day in the middle of the
Artificial day, and make the natural day begin at twelve of the noon*day, which
will be as much against the Scripture phrase, that reckons still the whole
Artificial day as belonging to one natutal day, the Artificial day and night
being the two parts of one whole natural day.

All the force of the opposite reason is this, the evening is first named, Ergo
it is first. Answ. Moses his scope is not to show what part of one day is
before another, but to divide one day from another, and to show what goes to
make a whole day, to wit, an evening and a morning; not a morning alone, but an
evening added to the morning which preceeded, that made the first, second,
third day, etc. as one would reckon thus, there is a whole day, because there
is both evening and morning; In this account its most suitable to begin with
the evening, because it presupposes the morning, and being added to it, cannot
but be a day, whereas it is not so proper to say morning with the evening, as
evening now added to its morning compleateth the first day, and evening now
being past as the morning before* God did put a period by and with the evening
to the First day, it being the evening that compleateth the day, and divides
it from the following day, and not the morning: as one would say, the afternoon
with the forenoon makes a complete day, and the afternoon or evening is first
named, because 1. the day is not complete without it, seeing it compleateth it;
2. because the day cannot be extended beyond it, now the first day is closed,
because the evening of it is come.

Arg. 2. What time of the day God began his rest* we must begin ours, but he
began his in the morning of the seventh day, the Artificial night having
intervened betwixt that and the sixth, which is clear; for 1. Gods resting this
day is more then his resting in the other nights of the six days, it being
granted by all, that he made nothing in the night. 2. There had not otherwise
been any intermission betwixt his labor and his rest, which is yet supposed by
distinguishing the days.

Again, if by virtue of the command of a day to be sanctified, we should begin
the night or the evening before, then, these two or three absurdities would
follow, 1. Then we would confound the preparation by the word remember, and the
day together. 2. Then we Christians might also, by virtue of the concession of
six days for work, begin to work the night before Monday, as the Jews on this
supposition might have begun their work the night before Sunday. 3. Then we
were almost no sooner to begin the sanctifying of the day, then to break it off
for rest, and when its sanctification is closed, as soon to fall to our
ordidinary callings.

Arg. 3. If by this Command a whole natural day is to be employed for duties of
Worship, as another day is employed in our ordinary Callings* then is it to
begin in the morning, the antecedent will not be denied, the consequent is thus
made good; if men account all the labor of their working time from one nights
rest to another, to belong to one day, then must they begin in the morning, or
else they must account what they work after the first evening to belong to
another day, but that way of reckoning was never heard of, the twelth hour
belonging to that same day with the first hour.

Again, if by this Command a whole artificial day together (that is, our waking
and working time betwixt two nights) be to be employed for Gods worship, they
its beginning must be in the morning, for if the latter or following evening
belong to this natural day before sleeping time come on, then the even before
cannot belong to it, for it cannot have both; but by this Command a whole
waking day* or an artificial day is to be sanctified together, and the even
after it before waking time end as well as the morning: Therefore it must begin
in the morning, and no^ on the evening before.

Further, if by virtue of the concession of six working days we may not wor^
the evening after; then the day begins in the morning, for the week day
following must begin as the Sabbath did; but the former is true, Ergo, etc.
These things will make out the minor. 1. It can hardly be thought consistent
with thi^ Command to work immediately, when it grows dark before folks rest.
2. I^ said Luke 23. verse 56. and 24. verse 1. of the Women that stayed from
the grave till the first day of the week, that they rested according to the
commandment on the Sabbath day, and early in the morning came to the Sepulcher.
3. Because Christ accounts a whole natural day, that which lasts till men
cannot work, 4. Gods working days (to say so) were such, he made not any thing
in the evening before the First day. 5. The ordinary phrase, To morrow is the
holy Sabbath, Exodus 16. 23, etc. shows that the day present will last till to
morrow come, and to morrow is ever by an intervening night: So if on the
forbidden day men may not work till to morrow, then that evening belongs to
it by this Command, and if on the sixth day the seventh be not come till to
morrow, that is, after the night intervene, then it does not begin at even, but
so it is in these places and phrases.

Yet again, its clear that in all the examples of ordinary Sabbaths keeping and
sanctifying in Scripture, they began in the morning: For instance, it is said,
Exodus 16. 27. Some of the people went out to gather on the seventh day, no
doubt, in the morning, for they knew well there was none of it to be found any
day after the Suns waxing hot; they might have dressed of it the night before,
and not been quarrelled with, they being forbidden gathering on the Sabbath:
the proofs of the former Argument give light to this also.

There are yet two Arguments to be added, which do especially belong to us
Christians, for clearing the beginning of our Lords day to be in the morning;
the first is taken from Christ's Resurrection thus:

That day, and that time of the day, ought to be our Sabbath, and the beginning
of it when the Lord began to rest after finishing the work of Redemption, and
arose; but that was the First day in the week, in the morning, Ergo, etc. This
binds us strongly who take that day on which he arose to be our Christian
Sabbath.

The second is taken from the History of Christ's Passion and Resurrection
together, wherein these things to this purpose are observable; 1. That he was
laid in the Grave on Frydays night, being the preparation to the great Sabbath,
which followed: 2. That the Woman who rested and came not to the Grave till
Sunday morning (to use our known names) are said to rest according to the
Commandment, as if coming sooner, had not been resting according to it. 3. That
his lying in the Grave must be accounted to be some time before the Friday
ended, other ways he could not have been three days in the Grave, and
therefore a part of Frydays night is reckoned to the First day, then the whole
Sabbath or Saturday is the second, and lastly a part of the night; to wit, from
twelve a clock at night, belonging to the First day or Sunday, stands for the
third, and so he arose that morning, while it was yet dark, at which time, or
thereabouts, the Women came to the Grave, as soon as they could for the
Sabbath, and therefore their Sabbath seventh-day ended then, and the First day
Sabbath began.

We now come to the third general question concerning the change, to wit* the
change of the seventh day into the First day of the week; where first, we shall
sum up what is moral in this Command, and then secondly by some Propositions
clear the change and its consistency with this Command.

To the first then, this Command does morally and perpetually oblige to these:
1. That there be a solemn time set apart and observed for Worship: 2. That this
should be one day of seven: 3. That it should be such a day, the very day,
which God commands, the Sabbath of his appointment, whatever day it should
be: 4. That it be a whole natural day of twenty four hours, yet having an
Artificial day together undivided: 5. That six, and no more but six; working
days intervent, and that these be together in a week; and therefore 6. That
the Sabbath be a bounding day, dividing one working week from another; if then
six working days must be in one week, and go together, this will follow also,
that the Sabbath must be the first or last day of the seven.

As for the Propositions clearing the change and consistency of it with this
command, the first shall be this.

The Sabbath may be changed from the last or seventh day to the first day of
the week, without any derogation to this command or inconsistency with it; for
all that is moral in it, to wit, a day, and one day of seven, and a bounding
seventh day, leaving six for work together, remain untouched by the change:
beside, the seventh day not having its institution from this Command expressly
and directly, but only accidentally (the particular day whether the Jews
seventh day, or the Christians first day of the week being supposed by the
fourth Commandment as instituted, or to be instituted elsewhere) as is said,
and its first institution, Genesis 2. being only a positive and temporary Law,
may be therefore changed, and yet the fourth Commandment keep* entire; we need
not insist in further prosecution of this Proposition, much being spoken to it
on the matter already.

2. Propos. Not only may the seventh be altered from what it was under the Law
to another seventh day under the Gospel, but it is meet and convenient from
good reasons) even in the Command) that it should be so.

For 1. If these two ages, before Christ, and after him, be looked on as
diverse Worlds, and if the Redemption by Christ at his coming be accounted the
making of the one, as Gods Creation was of the other, then its meet that when
the World is renewed by Redemption, the Sabbath day should be changed for memory
of that, as well as it was instituted at first for the memory of the former,
there being the same reason for both: But they are looked on as two distinct
worlds, and called so in the plural number, Heb. 11. 2. and this last World
distinguished from the former, Hebr. 2. 5. and the redeeming of the one is
looked upon as the making of the other, therefore from that day forth the day
of rest is to be such as may relate to both, now the day being changed to the
first, it remembers us of Gods rest at the Creation by distinguishing six
days from the seventh, and it remembers us of the new Creation by putting
Christ's Resurrection in the room of the former.

Arg. 2. If the new World be a work as much for the glory of God, and as
comfortable to men, when its begun and closed or finished by the work of
Redemption, as the making of the old World was, then the day of rest of the new
World is to be made to relate to that, much more, if the Redemption of the
World be more for the glory of God, and for the comfort of men; then by the
ground on which the seventh day was at first instituted, its also again to be
changed, to wit, the memory of Gods great work; but both the former are true:
Ergo, or thus, if the ground that made the seventh to be chosen for the Sabbath
in the old World be changed in the new, and tha^ ground agree better to another
then to it; then it is to be changed: But the ground whereupon the old seventh
day was preferred is now changed, and there are grounds to prefer another day
to it for the same ends; therefore it is meet the day be changed also: Or thus,
f the perfecting of the work of Redemption, and the rest of the Mediator after
it, be as much to be remembered as the work of Creation and Gods resting after
it, then the day is to be changed, but so it is, Ergo.

Arg. 3. If by Christ in the new World all the Levitical services be changed,
and the Ceremonial Worship of that day; then it is meet that the day also
should be changed: 1. For showing the expiration of that Worship and Law, it
being hard to keep that day, and to distinguish it from the Jewish former
Worship: 2. To keep Christians more Judaizing, and to abstract them even from
former services of the Sabbath now abolished; just as now no particular family
has the Priesthood, as Levi had it before, nor no particular Nation has the
Church confined in it, as that of the Jews had (though these were not typical
properly) yea, it would be such a day as would point out the evanishing of
former Ceremonies, which the inbringing of the first day abundantly does.

Arg. 4. If the Worship and Ordinances of the new Gospel-world be eminently to
hold their Institution of Christ the Mediator, and to be made some way relative
to his Redemption past; then it is meet for that end that the Sabbath Day be
changed, so as it may be dependant on him as all other worship is, that is
moral-positive or positivemoral, and that cannot be done well, if the former
day be kept unchanged, at least not so well, as when it is changed; but the
former is true, all Gospel Worship holds of him Sacraments, Prayer, Praise,
Ministry, etc. (now Sacraments, as they seal are not ceremonial, for the Tree
of Life was instituted to be a seal of the Covenant of works in the state of
Innocence before the fall, while there were no typical Institutions of a
Savior to come, and so Sacraments as they are Seals may be continued, as
perpetual pieces of worship, without hazard of typifying a Savior to come)
therefore he instituted new ones, and that with relation to his work of
Redemption, considered as past: Hence also his Prayer or Pattern is called the
Lords Prayer, and his Sacrament of the Supper is called the Lords Supper,
because instituted by him and relating to him; in this sense it is peculiarly
said Hebr. 2. 5. That God put in subjection to him the World to come different
from what was before, and he is put as the Son in the New Testament in the
place of Moses, who was the Lawgiver and faithful Servant in the Old, Heb. 3.
upon this ground we think that day is called, Hebr. 1. 10. the Lords day, to
bring it in a dependence on Jesus Christ, and to make it respect what is past
of the work of Redemption.

Arg. 5. If the day of solemn public worship be a piece of Gods worship,
capable of bearing a relation to Christ to come, and falling out under the
Mediators Kingdom properly; then when he comes in the new World, it is meet it
should be changed. 1. To show he is come. 2. To show he is absolute over the
house and worship of God. 3. Some way to preach his Grace and Redemption in the
very change of it: But it is a piece of Worship and Tribute of our time (as is
said before) and a piece of worship capable of his Institution and Remembrance
(therefore called the Lords day) which could not be, were not a day of worship
capable of that; and it falls under the power of Christ, who Matthew. 12. Even
as the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath* and why is that power pleaded in that
particular of the day so often, if it were not to show, that there is reason by
his coming to look on the Sabbath as under him, even as all other worship was,
which stood by Gods positive Command, even as this did?

Arg. 6. If by this Command the day of rest from Gods most solemn work be to be
our day of rest; then after Christ's coming (not so before) not the seventh, but
the first day is to be observed; but by the command the former is true. Again,
if that day be to be kept in reference to any solemn work of God, which was the
first day after his perfecting it, then the First day is to be kept: but by the
command the former is true, because our resting day is to be kept in reference
to the work of Redemption, and therefore must be on the First day, which was
the day after its closing and perfecting, as to Christ's suffering and labor,
though not as to its application, even as the seventh was of Gods resting from
the work of Creation, though not from his works of Providence.

Arg. 7. If the seventh day which the Jews kept, had any peculiar tie or motive
unto them, which by Christ is now taken away* then it was meet that at Christ's
coming that day should be changed. We would understand here, that there might
be somewhat peculiar or typical in their seventh day, and yet nothing so in the
fourth Command, which commands one of seven, but not the seventh: And though
we could not particularly pitch upon what is typical or peculiar in it, yet may
we conceive that something there is, as in Tithes, Offerings, etc. though the
particular thing which is typified be hardly instructed: As 1. If its beginning
was on the evening to them (as some think) the reason of it was peculiar, to
wit, their coming out of Egypt at evening, Exodus 12. And in so far at least it
would be peculiar to them; And by Christ's rising in the morning is changed.

2. It Is pressed peculiarly on the account of Gods redeeming them from Egypt,
they had that to think on, that sometime they were, where they got not liberty
to rest any day, therefore should they ease their Servants, as it is Deuteronomy. 5.
14. 15. This holds especially, if it was on the seventh day that their
freedom from Egypt began, Exodus 12. (which was after that, made the first day
of their year* that is, the morrow after they did eat the Passover) as its made
probable by some.

3. It was peculiarly discovered to them by Gods raining Manna from Heaven six
days, and by his with holding it from them the seventh.

4* It was peculiarly accompanied with special Ceremonial services beyond other
days.

5* Gods manner of dealing with them before Christ, was to press duties by
temporal and external advantages expressly, and more implicitly by spiritual
mercies, therefore it was most agreeable to that way and time to press the
seventh day on them which minded them of the benefit of Creation; but it is
otherwise with the Church under the Gospel: Hence their Sacraments had respect
(externally) to their deliverance from Egypt and temporal things, whereas ours
have respect purely to what is spiritual.

6* The Apostle Col. 2. 16. takes in their Sabbaths with their other days,
and though he take not in all days alike, yet it can hardly be denied but
their seventhday Sabbath comes in there, where all the Jewish times are put
together: Therefore it would seem there is a type, not in the Command, but in
that day, though not properly, yet accidentally in respect of its worship, end,
application, etc. complexly taken, and that therefore this seventh*day Sabbath
is expired at least, if not repealed, seeing that, days and times kept by the
Jews are enumerate with their other Services which were antiquated; even as
when the Apostle condemns difference about meat or drink, his meaning is not
to condemn, what difference is made in the Lords Supper in the New Testament,
but what is from the Old, so may the same be said of days; Its their old
difference he cries down.

Propos. 3. As its meet that the day of Worship under the Gospel, should ^e
another then what was under the Law* and should therefore be changed; so its
meet that the change should be into the First day of the week, and to no other
day. For,

1. No other day has been honored with so many Gospel privileges, as 1. With
Christ's Resurrection, Matthew. 28. It was the First day of his victory and rest:
2. With Christ's appearing twice, at least, on it to his Disciples, singling it
out from other days; or his appearing is for no purpose particularly recorded
by the Evangelist John to have been on that day, if there were not something
remarkable in it beside what is in another day: 3. The Spirits giving at
Pentecost, Acts 2. will be found to be on the First day of the week, now no
other day can claim so many privileges, and so many ways relate to Christ.

2. If the ground, upon which the seventh day under the Law was preferred
during that World, do in this renewing of the World agree only to the first
day of the week; then is the first day to succeed; but these grounds
proportionally agree only to the first day under the Gospel, which agreed to
the seventh under the Law. Ergo.

That which made the seventh day preferrable was. 1. That God had ended all his
works on the sixth, and rested the seventh; It was the first day after the
Creation; so the first day of the Week is that day on which Christ rose (having
perfected the work of Redemption, and obtained victory over death, under whose
power some way for a time his body was before that) and was thereby manifestly
declared to be the Son of God, to wit, by his Resurrection from the dead, Romans
1. 4.

2. The force of the example will hold here: God made the World in six days,
and rested the seventh, therefore rest ye with him; so Christ having for a time
suffered, fully overcame the first day, and began his estate of exaltation,
therefore rest with him, and rejoice that day, it being the beginning of this
new joy full World.

3. No other day can be substituted in place of the old seventh day, reserving
entire the morality of this Command; therefore it must be this that is put in
the place of that; for this Command requires, 1. one day of every seven,
allowing six of every seven to work, and that together: Now if the day had gone
beyond the Sabbath ensuing, it had not been one day of seven, if it had been
the second, third, or fourth day, then the six working days had not gone
together. But now the first being appointed for God next to the seventh, God
has his part or tribute called for, and then came six working days together
unto us of that same week, and so still they run, God has One, and we have Six
of the same week.

If it be here objected, that this way, the new World is begun with a Sabbath,
whereas the Sabbath closed and ended the old World. Answ. 1. Thus God has no
loss of what he required; for this way, no week wants its Sabbath* 2. Its
most suitable that the old World should end in a Sabbath, and the new begin in
a Sabbath, that so the worship of the new (which most distinctly discovers
the change) might the more immediately and convincingly preach the change,
which could not so well have been done i^ working days of both had met
together, or a working day of the one, and the Sabbath of the other. 3. Though
the old Sabbath was the seventh in order from the Creation, yet it was the
first day after man's Creation, God beginning as it were, and entering him with
that, even so when men are brought into this new World or change, God will
begin it with gladness and joy to them.

Propos. 4. The day of solemn public worship required to be observed by this
Command, was really changed from the seventh or last day to the first day of
the week, according to the former grounds. That it was really changed, may be
made out by these.

1. That the Apostles and primitive Christians after Christ's Resurrection and
Ascension, had their solemn day for meeting to worship God, yet neither did
they by themselves together in practice keep the seventh, nor by command
appointed it to be kept, nor gave it the title of the Lord's Day: Its true, that
often they kept it in a sort with the Jews, as they did Pentecost, for the
opportunity of the multitude coming together on these days, or to bury it with
honor; as they did practice for a time several of the Jewish Rites antiquated
for their gaining, and till they were fully informed of their abolition* but in
constituted Churches of the Gentiles, we never read that they kept it, but
another day.

2. The Apostles and primitive Christians kept and esteemed the first day for
their solemn day, beyond and above all days, yea, and it only as the
Christian Sabbath. For 1. on that day they used to meet ordinarily, and that
not occasionally, but purposely and determinately, as John 20. verse 19. and
26. which is clearly the first day. 2. They are purposely together, and not for
fear (for fear scatters) but while they are together, they do for fear shut
the doors, being very probably led from the news of the Resurrection to be
together, and so gain, verse 26. they meet, and Christ with them: And though it
may possibly be, that on other days they met; yet doubtless this holds forth
something peculiar to this day, and some Lesson to be taken from it: That 1.
Christ's coming to them is especially trysted on that day, and that while they
are together. 2. That when they met at any other time, ere he came to them its
never said, they were or came together the second, third, or fourth day of the
week, but on the first; and wherefore does the Holy Ghost record that day, or
their meeting on that day, when he omitteth the naming of other days: but that
that day in its Exercises may be especially taken notice of, and though other
days had been much alike in Exercises to them, yet the recording of this day
so often, and omitting the other, intimates a difference, sure they are not
alike in this, so much for the 20. of John, which is the first place of
Scripture we make use of.

The second is Acts 2. 1, 2. Here they are said to be, all with one accord in
one place when Pentecost came, where its clear, 1. That Pentecost was on the
first day of the week, for it was the fiftieth day after the Feast of
unleavened bread: Now according to the Jews account, their Passover day was on
the Sabbath (called John 19. 31. an high Sabbath) in which Christ lay all the
day in the grave, as appears; for that day is called their preparation for
the Feast, wherein Christ suffered which is our Friday; reckon now what will be
the fiftieth day after, or Pentecost, and it will be found to be the first day
of the week: And its not only observable for their meeting, but for Gods
sending the Spirit on them, as a special blessing of that day, and his
countenancing of their worshipping him on it, according to his promise; 2. It
is clear that they did meet together on this day. 3. That this meeting together
was not a daily or ordinary meeting together (for John 21. we see they went to
Fishing, and no question sometimes they went asunder) for verse 1. Its marked
as a thing not ordinary to every day, that on that day they were altogether in
one place. 4. It was not a meeting in reference to the Pentecost feast:

For 1. They only are together, distinct from the People. 2. Its not in the
Temple, but in some other House fit for their meeting together at public
Worship; it must be therefore, because that day was the time of their solemn
meeting, even their Christian Sabbath.

The third place is Acts 20. 7. And upon the first day of the week, when the
Disciples came together to break bread Paul preached unto them, etc. where it
is clear:

1. That this meeting was for public Worship, as the breaking of Bread and
Preaching intimates.

2. That there is some observableness in this Circumstance, that it was on the
first day of the week, and that that day is mentioned rather then any of the
former six days, in which he had been there at Troas. though its more then
probable they had meetings and preaching on them also; but this is the only
and great difference, that their meetings on these days were occasional, and
it may be but partial (to speak so) but the solemn chief fixed meeting of all,
was usually and ordinarily on the first day.

3. This coming together on that day for these ends is spoken of, as a thing
that was not new, nor occasional; but as their customary, constant, known,
Practice; they came together purposely to break and to wait on other Ordinances.

4. Its clear, that by special applying of these Exercises to that day, and by
mentioning of the day for that end, that, that day was their most solemn day,
and that the old seventh day was not so (at least necessarily) employed by them.

5. Neither is it like, That Paul, who was ready to depart, would have stayed
for the first day of the week, if there had not been some solemn worship in
that, or that he would have passed the old seventh-day Sabbath, especially to
marring of his other occasions had they been equal, if more sanctification had
been required in it, then in the first day of the week, or that he would have
so much insisted in religious public worship on that day, if the former
seventh had been employed in that service, but here the Church being
constituted of believing Gentiles, there is no mention of the old Sabbath, but
as of another common day of the week;

Yea 6. Paul's spending this whole day in that service, and continuing his
Sermon till midnight (yet accounting it still one day) in solemn meeting does
confirm this day to be more then an ordinary day, or then other days of the
week, as being specially dedicated to these Services and Exercises, and totally
spent in them.

7. Its said, that the Disciples came together, they were not sent for that
day, but they came together being called and accustomed so to do on that day,
and as being put to these duties by the day, as the proper Exercises in which
it is to be spent.

Hence we may argue; If the Apostles and primitive Christians did observe the
First day of the week, as their prime and chief time for solemn public
Worship, and did pass over the old seventh day, then is the day changed from
the seventh to the First day of the week, but the first is cleared by the
former Instances, Ergo, etc

And if these meetings on that First day were not such as used to be formerly
on the seventh day, I desire to know a reason: 1. Why their meetings on that
day should be particularly recorded rather then their meetings on any other
day; and then 2. Why the one is so often mentioned, and the other never, to wit
that they met the second, third day, etc. of the week. Or 3. If their meeting
on this First day now (after Christ's Ascension) be not like his going to the
Synagogue on the seventh*day Sabbath, and doing such and such things on the
Sabbath: that day being most frequently mentioned before, whereas now there is
deep silence of that day, and the first day is recorded in its room, neither
can the Scriptures speaking of the one* and silence in the other be for no
purpose, or for any other purpose.

And as the practice of the Church holds out the change of the day, so does
the Title given, Rev. 1. 10 to the first day of the week, to wit, the Lords day
confirm the same, whence we argue.

If the Title, which by the Lord and his people was given to the seventh-day
Sabbath under the Old Testament, and under which, and by which, he claims a
seventh-day in this Command; If I say that Title in the New Testament be not
given unto the seventh, but unto the First day of the week; then is the day
changed from the seventh day to the First, and the First falls now under this
command, as the seventh formerly did; but the former is true, the First is
styled as the seventh was, and as this Command styleth and claims the day to
the Lord to be observed for him; therefore now is the Sabbath changed from the
seventh day to the First day of the Week.

The Titles whereby the Sabbath is distinguished from other days, and
peculiarly claimed and marked by God as his, and that in this same Command,
must certainly evidence that day, which he has set apart and does claim as he
applies them: And therefore if these Titles be given and applied to the first
day now, it must needs show a succeeding of that day unto the former seventh,
for during the Observation of the seventh day these Titles were not, nay could
not be applied to the First* no day being then the Lords but the seventh.

Now we find that the seventh-day Sabbath is in the Old Testament styled by the
Lord under these Titles, and so claimed by him. 1. Its called here the Sabbath
of the Lord, or to the Lord, that is the Lords, as contra distinguished from the
six days he has given unto us, a day that he has right to, and not we,
therefore called the Lords Sabbath. 2. Isaiah 58. 3. Its claimed by the Lord as
his, my holy day, which is so called 1. to distinguish it from other days. 2.
To stamp it with the Lords mark in respect of its use, for it is not to be
applied to our use, but to his own, it being his in a special manner.

But in the New Testament after Christ's resurrection, the seventh day is not so
styled and claimed, but the first day of the week is, Rev. 1, 10. I was (says
John) in the Spirit on the Lords day: In which place these things are clear.

1. That after Christ's Ascension, there was a peculiar day belonging to the
Lord beside and beyond other days.

2. That it was not the old Sabbath, for 1. John's scope being particularly to
clear the time of the Vision by the Circumstance of the day, the particular day
as distinct from other days, to call the Sabbath then used amongst the Jews;
the Lords day had more obscured it then cleared it, yea 2. In that its called
the Lord, according to the phrase of the New Testament, it supposes some
relation to Christ the Mediator, as being derived from him which cannot be said
of the seventh day Sabbath.

3. That it was not any indefinite day of the Lord: For, 1. there is great odds
betwixt the Lords day, and the day of the Lord, the former looks to a
constant special right and peculiar interest that God has in that day beside
other days, even as when the seventh day was called his Day before, the
Temple, his Temple, the prescribed Service, his Service, and the Sacrament of
the Supper, his Supper, etc. 2. That day would be still dark to the Church if
it were indefinite, contrary to John's scope.

4. That it is, and must be such a day as was commonly set apart by Christians
to God as his; and that with respect to Christ the Mediator, and such a day as
was known to them; And by the former practices it is clear, that this day is
the first day of the week, being the Lord Christ's day, who now having conquered
death; and gotten the victory, He does therefore claim this day as a tribute to
him.

This being clear, that no other day can claim this title, and that the First
day has good ground to claim it, we may put it out of question, that it is the
First day or no day, or if it were not the First, that to no purpose were the
designation of that day inserted, seeing to no other day has it been applied,
nor can it be applied.

This truth has been uncontroverted in all Antiquity, and almost by all Writers
(till of late Gomarus begins to question it) as Rivet clears on this
Command against him.

Now (supposing it as unquestionable that this is the very First day) we are to
inquire if the title applied to this day be the same with that in the Command,
and which usually was given to the old seventh-day Sabbath, or that then Lords
day.

And it is clear, 1. That this title claims this day to God as his Day, it
being possessively expressed, as when we say, the Lords Throne, the Lords Altar,
the Lords Sabbath, etc.

2. It contra-distinguisheth that day from other days, as if they were not so
the Lords, but ours, like that in the Command, Six days shall thou labor,
etc. but the seventh is the Lords, so its the Lords in a peculiar way, we
having lesser right to employ that day for our own use then any other day; and
this claim of the First day to the Lords, infers a condescension or
dispensation whereby the last day becomes ours, for had there been two days
belonging to him, one day could not have been peculiarly called his; in which
respect, 1 Cor. 11. (...)* the Lords Supper is distinguished from (...) their
own Supper; even so the Lords day is distinguished from other days.

3. It lays on a necessity of using it for the Lord, and not for our selves,
because its his, and will infer the same moral duties and ends which the
Command obliges to.

4. It will infer an appointment of Christ's, whereby he appropriateth that day
to his service, and claims it to himself; why, because he calls it his,
even as in the fourth Command there is no express institution of the seventh
day, yet because the sev nth was called the Lords, and in his former way and
dispensations intimated as a day to be kept for him, therefore it is understood
and taken for granted by the Jews to be instituted, seeing he calls it his;
so may we conclude here, that there is an institution and appointment of the
First day to be the Lords, because its claimed by him as his, although no such
plain express institution be of it as of other Ordinances, it being clear that
the institution of days is left more generally to be gathered: From all which
we may gather the couclusion* to wit, that the First day of the week is styled
by the same peculiar Titles claimed by the Lord expressly as his right and due,
and upon as valid grounds under the New Testament, as the seventh day was under
the Old; Therefore now the seventh day is changed, and the First is come in its
room, which was the thing to be proved.

In the last room we argue from the Apostles Ordinance, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.
concerning contributions for the Saints; As I have (says Paul) given order to
the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye, that is, the first day of the week let
every one of you lay by him, etc. I say we argue t^us, That not the seventh,
but the first day, is the chief solemn day for worship after Christ's
Resurrection.

If the First day of the week be particularly and eminently pitched on by the
Apostle, and that in diverse Churches as the fittest time for expressing their
Charity, then must there be somewhat eminent in the First day, giving ground
for such an appointment and ordinance, as the Apostles singling that from other
days for such an end (and no other reason can be given, but that that day
being more especially and immediately appointed for God, is most fit for that
duty, which is a Work of Mercy) but its there clear, that the Apostle pitcheth
singularly on that day beside other days, Ergo, etc.

For strengthening of the Argument, consider 1. That it is clear to be the first
day of the week, since that same phrase which is used by the Evangelists, Matt.
28. 1. Mark 16* 2. Luke 24. 1. is made use of here by the Apostle, who no
question follows the Evangelists phrase, yea his following that phrase may
hint at a reason, why he commands Charity to be on that day, or sets it apart
for that use as beyond other days, to wit, our Lords Resurrection.

2. Its clear, that he thinks it not indifferent what day it be done on, nor
that all days are alike, therefore he pitcheth on that day, the first day, and
that not in one Church only, but in many.

3. That this is not commended only to them, but commanded and enjoined even
in reference to the day, and will the Apostle load Churches with Commands in
that circumstance without ground, and universally (to speak so) prefer one day
to another, and so as he will have uniformity in the very day in the Church of
Corinth, with other Churches unnecessarily? Let it not be said, nay nor thought.

4. That this day was commanded even in the Churches of Galatia, in which
Churches he had condemned the observation of days, whereby it would seem to be
clear, that he counts not the preferring of this first day, as one of these
days the observation whereof is prohibited and condemned by him, no^ wills
it to be laid aside; and that purposely he passed the seventh day as amongst
these days, which were not to be observed and retained but laid aside.

5. That the thing required is a duty of the Sabbath, being a work of mercy, as
Isai. 58. giving bread to the hungry, is mentioned particularly, as one of the
duties of Gods Holy day.

6. That the mentioning of the First day of the week must be looked on, as
relating to, and as compared with, the practice of keeping solemn meetings on
that day, and this Command of doing this on the First day of the week must be
more strong, and infer somewhat more being compared with other places, then if
such things were not recorded other ways of the First day.

7. This Command supposes them to be already acquainted with some special
privileges of the First day beyond others, when he commends this as a motive
to them to be more charitable, to wit, that it was to be done on that day.

8. That there must be some peculiar thing in this day making it fit, yea more
fit for such a purpose, as doing works of Charity on it; rather then on any
other: And the Apostles commanding this (and that in many Churches) does
necessarily presuppose a reason why he does it, drawn from some fitness of this
day by another. Now, if we will enquire, no reason can be given but that the
seventh-day Sabbath was expired, and that this first day was instituted in its
place, for otherwise any day was alike; yea, the seventh-day being the last day
of the week, and the day when men usually reckon their weeks success, it would
seem more reasonable for this end, that men at the close of the week should lay
up by them, as God had blessed them, then to reserve it, to the beginning of
another week, were not the first day more especially to be sanctified then the
last, and the last to be accounted but an ordinary working day: The fitness
then flows from this, that the first day of the week being the day of their
solemn Communion with God, and with one another, and the day of their partaking
most liberally of spiritual blessings from him, that therefore they should be
most readily warmed in their affections, and be most liberal in their
Communications to such as wanted, especially if we consider the Jews to be
parties for whom that Collection or Contribution was; Its the Apostles great
Argument, whereby he pleads for Charity to the poor Jews from the Christian
Gentiles, Romans 15. 26, 27. That the Gentiles were their Debtors in temporals,
because they had received spiritual things from them; now this argument is most
fresh and powerful, when Believers do on the first day of the week record Gods
priviledging them with his Ordinances, and giving them his day in place of the
Ordinances and day, which the Jews once had, and yet deriving these unto them
by the Jews, I say, this Argument will then be most fresh to incite to that
duty in particular.

If any say that it was accidental, that the first day was chosen or named
rather then another, because one behoved to be named, and it was alike which:
But 1. I demand why is it universal? If it were from one Church only it might
possibly, have been thought so, but he does call for this duty on that day from
more Churches: 2. Why does he not recommend it, but command it as having more
then an indifferency in the very day: And 3. Can it be by guess or accident (to
speak so) that so many privileges are fallen on that day? And that so many
things are recorded of it, and astricted to it by commands, which is not done
of, and to, any other days: And if one place would not suffice to prove, that
the first day and not the seventh day was preferred by the Apostles, as the
chief day of solemn public worship, yet all these things put together must
prove a preference in that day, or we must say that the Penmen of Holy
Scripture have been very partial, who have marked many things, and recorded
them concerning Gods Worship on that day, and have never so much as once for
solemn Service named* what was done on the second, third, fourth, fifth days;
we must either say, that this is inadvertently done (which were blasphemy
considering by what Spirit they wrote) or we must say its done to put a
preference on that day, and to show that its especially to be taken notice of,
as the most solemn day for Gods worship by Christians (which is the thing to be
confirmed) for, the day that is claimed as the Lords, kept for him, and
singularly marked to be privileged beyond other days, must be his day; but
this First day is such* Ergo, etc.

Propos 5. This change of the day whereby the seventh is laid aside, and the
first substituted in its room, is of divine authority and institution; and not
by any mere humane or Ecclesiastic Constitution. I conceive there is indeed no
mids here betwixt a Divine Institution, which has Gods warrant and authority
stamped on it, and for Conscience sake is to be observed as being obligatory
thereof, and that immediately; and humane or Ecclesiastic Constitutions, which
may reach the external man, but in the matters of worship cannot bind the
Conscience or impose them as necessary: Now that this change is not by the
last, but by the first, we prove these ways.

1. Thus, if it be not humane or Ecclesiastic* then it must be Divine, but it
is not humane or Ecclesiastic, ergo* its Divine: That it is not humane will
appear 1* If it reach the Conscience, and that immediately; then it is not
humane but Divine, but it does so. 2. If no man or Church on Earth have power
to alter Gods day, now, nay, nor simply, or at all, then its not humane or
Ecclesiastic, but first, none can change it, as we might clear from great
absurdities, that would follow. 2. If any Church have this power let them show
it, the Old Church had it not, neither the new, as is cleared in the first
question.

2. We proceed to evince this change to be by Divine Institution these four
ways.

1. From reasons flowing from Scripture, or Consequences drawn from it* 1.
Thus, where by genuine and native Consequences drawn from Scripture any thing
is so imposed, as it cannot without sin be altered or neglected, there is a
Divine Institution; but in the change of the seventh*day Sabbath to the First
such Consequences may be drawn from Scripture, as will (upon supposition of the
change) a strict it to the First day, so as that cannot be altered or neglected
without sin, Ergo, its of Divine Institution: The question can be only of the
minor, which is made out from what is said in the third Proposition, thus:

If these very grounds which plead the convenience of the change simply, do
plead the convenience of that change to the First day, then by clear and
unforced Consequence, the first day is chosen and cannot without sin be passed
by, altered or neglected, except we say these reasons have no weight; but these
very grounds will be found to plead for* and to be applicable to, the First day
of the week alonely: and therefore beside all other days in the new World it
may be called the day* which God specially made, as it is the day of Christ's
rest from the work of Redemption, answerable to Gods rest after the Creation,
etc. and therefore as being most conducible to that end, the First day cannot
be without sin past by, neglected or altered.

2. Thus, if the very day of Christ's rest in the new World be to be rested on,
and sanctified as the Sabbath, then the First day is to be rested on and
sanctified; but by Analogy from the works of Creation, we may see that the
First day of rest after the finishing of the work of Redemption is to be
sanctified, Ergo, etc. and Psalm 118. is very considerable to this purpose,
wherein there is 1. a Prophecy of Christ* 2. O^ a day which God has singularly
made for us to joy in* 3. That day is the day wherein the rejected stone is
made the head of the Corner, which day is clear from Romans 2. 4 to be the
Resurrection day, yea, suppose that day there does signify the time of the
Gospel, wherein we should joy, yet even that way, the first day is by
proportion that day eminently, wherein Christ's Victory was manifested, and so
the day wherein Christians ought especially to rejoice.

The second way we may reason for the change to be by Divine Institution, is
from this Command: If (supposing still a change) by the morality of this
Command, the seventh can be changed into no day but the first day of the week*
then is the change into the first day, of Divine Institution (for so that must
necessarily be, which is by virtue of a Command) but by this Command no other
day can be admitted; for each week is divided in six working days* and these
together to us, and one of rest and that to God; now by changing it to the
first God gets one, and we six and that together; but if the day were the
second third, fourth, etc. it would not be so; for the six working days would
be interrupted, which is contrary to that morality of the Command, whereby our
days are distinguished from his, that ours, for one week being fully by, we
may with the greater freedom give God his.

The third way we take to prove the change of the day to be by Divine
Institution is this: If by the practice of the Apostles, who were guided and
inspired by the Spirit in things belonging to their Office infallibly, this day
was observed as different from other days; then there is a Divine Institution
of, and warrant for, this day; but by the practice of the Apostles this day is
celebrated as different from, and preferred to, other days, or as Divine,
therefore its of Divine Institution: If the Divine practice and example of the
Apostles in things moral and common to all, do not either suppose a Divine
antecedent institution, or infer a subsequent, then their practice and example,
which in these things is infallible and unerring, will have no more force then
the example of others* which were absurd, their examples being especially
pressed on us; and if in any thing their example be Divine, it must be in this
so particularly and so well circumstantiated; and where their meeting is not
recorded to have been on any other second, third, etc. day, certainly their
practice must be not only more then nothing, but very significant; and indeed
in positive worship, the Lord has been pleased to be more sparing (to say so)
and to leave us more to gather from Examples then in negatives, as in the
positive part of swearing* admitting of Church members, in government, baptism
and admission to the Supper, yet none can say that there is no Scripture
Institution in these, where there may be such grounds or examples.

4. The Divine Institution of the change may be argued from the title thus, if
that which is called the Lords, be his by Divine Institution and separation
from other things not so called; then this first day must be his by Divine
Institution and separation from other days, but all that is called the Lords,
is his after this manner: Ergo, Let the minor be confirmed these three ways;
1. By looking to what is called the Lords generally in the Old Testament, as
his House, his Altar, his Priests, his Tithes, etc. are they not still his,
because by him separate for distinct uses in his worship: 2. By looking more
particularly, how the seventh day was called his day, or the Sabbath his, is
not this the reason, because it was appointed by him for his worship beside
other days? And can any reason agree better to this? 3. By looking how any
thing is called the Lords in the New Testament, there is no other or better
phrase or designation to try by, then that 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21. (...) is opposed
to (...), even as this first day, called the Lords day, is opposed to our days
or common days, and that is called the Lords Supper, because instituted by him,
for such and such spiritual ends and uses: And therefore there can be no better
ground gotten for showing why this is called the Lords day beside others, then
by comparing it with other Scriptures, and if in other things that phrase
import a Divine institution, why not in this? I do not mean that this is an
institution, or that it will prove that there must be a clear and express
institution shown but I mean this, that it will infer there is one, and that
it is Divine, seeing God is to choose and not we. We might here again produce
the four Witnesses already attested for the morality of this fourth Command, to
wit, 1. the general practice of primitive Christians, 2. their general opinion
and judgment, 3. men's Consciences, 4. the dispensations of God; which will
also all clearly depone in this, about the change of the day.

Propos. 6. Although we know not the peremptory and precise time when this day
was instituted, and the very first day sanctified, nor whether it was
immediately by Christ, or mediately from him by the Apostles instituted, which
is of no great concernment to the main of its institution; yet we think it most
probable that our Lord did from the very day of his Resurrection either himself
institute it, while as Acts 1. v. 3 he taught them what concerned the Kingdom
of God; or did inspire his Apostles to observe it from that time forth;
Because, 1. If it was not then instituted, the Church had for some time wanted
a Sabbath, the seventh-day Sabbath being expired by the Resurrection. 2. The
reason moving the change and preferring the first day before others, as in a
nearer capacity of sanctification for that end, was from that time forth. 3.
The Apostles practice of meeting, and Christ's keeping with them, has been from
the first change, even on the first two first days of the week, John 20. verse
19. 26. 4. All the practices and other grounds whereby the change is evidenced,
suppose still the institution to preceed; which makes it appear to be very
ancient.

And so we resume and close these six propositions. 1. The day may be changed
from the last to the first: 2. Its meet it should be so, and there is good
reason for it: 3. It can only be to one first: 4. Its so changed actually: 5.
Its change is not by Humane, but by Divine institution: 6. Its institution
seems to be from the rise of the Gospel Church, and the very day of Christ's
Resurrection. Hence we infer 1. good warrant, even Gods warrant for employing
the seventh-day to our selves, seeing God seeks but one day in seven, and now
has chosen and claims the first. 2. Gods warrant for sanctifying the first
day Sabbath or the Lords day as his institution. 3. That the Lords day is to be
sanctified by us Christians, and that by virtue of this Command, as the
seventh-day was by the Jews on its grounds.

We come now to speak of the sanctification of this day, which is the main
thing, and for which all the rest is intended, we shall first consider the
precept, and then 2. the reasons whereby it is enforced.

The precept is, sanctify it, or keep it holy, sanctifying of it is twice
mentioned in this Command. 1. In the end, its said God hallowed or sanctified
it, that is by separation, destination, and appointment for holy uses, and as a
part of worship, so he sanctified the Temple, Altar, etc. not by infusing any
holiness in them, but by appointing them for holy uses: Thus only God can
sanctify a day, or any other thing so as to make it a part of worship, and no
man or power on Earth whatsomever can do that. 1. In the precept it self we are
commanded to sanctify it, that is, by the application of it unto the uses
wherefore he has set it apart; thus we sanctify what he has sanctified when
we use it and employ it, according to his appointment. And so we are to
consider, the sanctifying of this day in these duties called for from us on it*

This sanctification is two ways set down. 3. In its cessation and rest,
separating it from other uses, and so keeping it from the common uses, to which
other days may and use to be applied: 1. In its special application to and
employment in holy uses.

For clearness, we shall consider this sanctification. 1. In respect of its
rest, what we are to abstain from: 2. Comparatively, with that strictness
called for from the Jews: 3. Eminently, what is required more as to holiness
this day then on other days wherein also the Lords people should be holy? and
wherein this goes beyond these? 4. Positively, in what duties it should be
taken up: 5. Complexly, in respect of what is called for to the right
sanctifying of that day before it come on, in the time of it, and after it is
past, and that in public and private, and by all relations, Master, Servant,
etc. and throughout the whole man, thoughts, words, and deeds, and throughout
the whole day: 6 Oppositively, or negatively, what are the breaches of this
Command, and the aggravations of these sins which break it.

First then, we consider it in its rest, which is required; and because there
are extremes, some giving it too little, as the Jews did before the captivity;
some too much, even to being superstitious, as the Jews after the Captivity,
and the Scribes and Pharisees particularly in Christ's time did; streaching this
rest too far. We must therefore consider it more narrowly and particularly for
quieting of our Consciences, for the Jews are by the Prophets, Ezekiel. 20. Jerem.
17. and by Christ, Matthew. 12. reproved for both extremes respectively.

We do then in this matter assert first, That there is a rest required here,
which is extensive to a man's words, thoughts, and actions, whereby many things
lawful on other days* become unlawful on this day.

Yet 2. we assert, That by this rest all sort of actions are not condemned, but
only such as are in consistent with the end and scope of this Command, as by
other Scriptures, and the practice of Christ and the Saints is clear: we
conceive therefore these to be permitted.

1. All duties of Piety, as was sacrificing under the Old Testament, or
preaching, hearing or going about the Sacraments under the New Testament: In
which sense, Matthew. 12, our Lord says, the Priests profaned the Sabbath and
were blameless, not that formally they profaned the Sabbath, or did indeed
break that Command, but materially they wrought in killing beasts, etc. which
had been unlawful* had it not been in the exercises of piety.

2. All* things that have a tendency, as necessary* helps and means to the
performance of the former works of piety, are lawful, as going to the
Congregation to hear the Law, calling the Assembly for worship by Trumpets, or
Bells, or by a Voice, journeying* going or riding to Church, etc. because the
duties of the Sabbath cannot well be done without some of these, not at all
without others of them.

If it should be asked here, What that, which is called a Sabbaths day journey,
Acts 1. 12. was among the Jews? and whence it came, and what way may it be
stinted or limited among Christians? Answ. It was to them 2000. Cubits, which
according to the different measuring of that distance of ground consisting of
these 2000 Cubits by a lesser or longer Cubit, is reckoned to be more or* less
by learned Men; but all agree (says Goodwin in his Moses* and Aaron) in this,
that these 2000. Cubits was a Sabbath days journey.

It arose to be reckoned so from these grounds; 1. From their expounding, Exodus
16. 29. Let none go* out of his place; thus, Let none go without the bounds of
the City, which with its Suburbs was 2000. Cubits, or a mile about. 2. That the
Tabernacle of the Congregation was so far from the Tents of these who pitched
about it in the Wilderness* Numb. 2. as they supposed; and that the Priests
kept that distance from the people in entering with the Ark into Jordan, Jos 3.
4. whence they gathered that a man might still go to the Ark or place of
worship, as it was then in these cases at a distance from them, and no further
on the Sabbath day.

But we say whatever superstitiously or on custom they took up (for that is
but their Tradition) we cannot stint a Sabbath days journey to so many miles,
fewer or more, but it must be as the man is in providence cast to reside
further from, or nearer to the place where the Ordinances are dispensed; for
one may go many miles and not profane the Sabbath, if he cannot have the
public Ordinances nearer, whereas another may break the Sabbath by going but
to his Neighbors door, yea by walking in his own house, or to his door, if
either it be done idly, or with respect to another civil or worldly end, which
agrees not to that day; it is not here remoteness or nearness, but what
sweyeth us, and what is our end, that we are to try by.

3. All works of mercy are lawful on that day, as laying beside us something to
the poor. 1 Corinthians. 16. verse 1. sending or dealing something to those who are
in want, Isai. 58. verse 7. visiting others, to comfort; strengthen, or
otherwise to edify them christianly; though idle and carnal visits (albeit,
alace! too rife) are not permitted.

4. Good Works, as Christ says Matthew. 12. 12. Its lawful to do good or well on
the Sabbath, such are giving of Physic (when it is necessary) bringing of
Physicians* saving a man's life, and taking pains for it, etc. Luke 13. (these
good Works may be classed either with Works of mercy before, or with Works of
necessity that follow, both being good Works as they are Works of mercy or of
necessity:)

5* Works of necessity, such as feeding Beasts, leading them to the water,
pulling them out of Ditches, when they are fallen into them on that day, and
much more preparing honestly sober allowance for the susteining of the body, as
the Disciples plucked the ears of Corn, Matthew. 12. and the Jews, Exodus 16. 23.
dressed the Manna on the Sabbath, though they were not to gather it; yet on the
sixth day to bake and seethe a part, and to keep a part till the morrow, but
not till the day following, and therefore they behoved to dress it also; yea,
Jesus Christ went himself to a Feast on the Sabbath, Luke 14. (that he might
take that opportunity by his spiritual discourse to edify the Company as he
did notably) which he would not have done had it been unlawful to dress any
meat on the Sabbath, yet his carriage was such at that Feast most remarkably,
that it would be followed as a pattern by such as may be invited by others to
eat with them, and shall be disposed to go on the Sabbath: And if this were the
design of the inviters and invited, men's eating together* on that day would not
readily prejudice the sanctification of it, as very often it does: Such is
flying on the Lords day from a destroying enemy, and in other warranted cases,
Matthew. 24. defending our selves against unjust violence, etc*

6. Works of comeliness, tending to honest or decent walking, as putting on of
clothes honestly, making the house clean from any uncleanness that may fall in
it throughout the Sabbath, etc.

By all which Believers have allowance, 1. for piety, 2. for charity, 3. for
what is needful for their beasts, 4. what is needful and convenient, or comely
for themselves; and more is not necessary: In these the Lord has not
straightened them, neither has he pinched and pinned them up to absolute
necessity, but has left them to walk by Christian prudence (yet so as they may
not exceed) for the Disciples possibly might have endured that hunger, and not
plucked the ears of Corn, or beasts may live a day without water, and not be
much the worse, or some sort of Victuals may be provided to be set beside men
on the Sabbath needing no dressing or preparing; yea, a man may live on little
or nothing for one day: but the Lord has thought good not to streighten them,
so as to make his day and worship a weariness and burden unto them, seeing he
has made the Sabbath for man, to be refreshing to him, and not man for the
Sabbath; nor will he have their Consciences to be fettered with inextricable
scruples: He leaves it to men on other days how much to eat and drink by a
Christian prudence (yet allows them not to exceed even on these) so here
there is some latitude left to conscientious reason to walk by; for some may do
something at one time, and not at another, yea, one man may take more pains in
upholding his body then is called for from another who is stronger, so that its
impossible to set particular rules which will agree to all, but men* would
look, 1. to their end, 2. to their need, 3. to what may* conveniently attain
the end.

Yet it is needful here to add some qualifications or caveats* lest folk
indulge themselves too much, and exceed under the pretext of the former
liberty, which the Lord has condescended to leave men at,

1. That men would*see that the necessity be real, that real sickness keeps
at home, that real hazard makes them fly, or makes them bide at home* that
it be such a necessity as they cannot contrive a way conveniently to evite when
it comes, or could not foresee before it came.

2. Men would see that, that necessity be not brought on by themselves* If the
thing might have been done at another, time that necessity will not excuse*
though if the sin be taken with, and repented of, and Christ fled unto for the
pardon of it, we may go about the doing that lawfully which sinfully we have
necessitated our selves unto; as suppose one had got warning to fly the day
before, to bring such a Physician, or to provide such drugs, etc. if he did it
not, then he sins, yet when necessity comes he may still do it, but not
with a good Conscience, till he first acknowledge the former fault of his
neglect.

3. It would be adverted, if that thing may be done, as well another time, or
may not without prejudice (that is considerable) be delayed till the next day;
Thus taking or giving of Physic on the Lords day, making ordinary civil
visits, beginning voyages, etc. will not sustain and bear weight before God,
when folk do them that day, to have their own work day free, and so put by the
proper duties of the Lords day, for some things that may be done the day or
days following: Thus rest is commanded Exodus* 34. 21, even in sowing rhyme and
Harvest; because the necessity is not clear, but depends on ordinary
providence, and folks are to expect occasion and opportunities for them
afterward.

4. Men would take heed that they have not a tickling complacency that such
necessities fall on the Sabbath, and be not glad to have diversions from the
proper duties of the day. They would go about such works with a sort of
sadness, though yet with clearness and peace of Conscience as to their
lawfulness: Therefore Christ says to his Disciples, Matthew. 24. 20. pray that
your flight be not on the Sabbath day* because it would be heavy to Gods people
to fly on that day, though it was lawful.

5. We would see that it mar not a spiritual frame, and that in doing these we
turn not to mind the World as on other days; There would be still a respect to
the day in our frame (which is called for in the word remember) and even when
our hand is otherwise employed, the heart should not be taken up with these
things, but so far as is necessary to the acting of them.

6. It would be adverted to, that they be done without inregularity, and so as
not to give offense by them (hence it was that Christ ever gave the reasons of
what he did on the Sabbath) lest others, not knowing our necessity, judge us
guilty of Sabbath-breaking, or be involved without necessity to do the like,

7. Folks would have great respect to the end in these works, and to the motive
which swayeth and puts them on. If it be outward gain or fear of some
temporal loss; as if for gaining money a Physician should go rather on the
Sabbath then on another day to save the life of a man; that turns then to be
a servile work, and one of his ordinary Week day calling (to speak so:) So if a
Minister should preach with respect to gain or applause on the Sabbath, or if
any man should make a visit for a mere civil end, as we visit on other days,
without a suitable respect to spiritual edification or furtherance of Piety, it
will mar all, and will be found a breach of the Sabbath.

8. We would beware of spending too much time in these things, but would
endeavor timely and quickly to expede and dispatch them, and rightly to tryst
them: Dressing of meat, and trimming, adorning, and busking of folks bodies
will not be found a well spent part of the Sabbath, when it shuts out other
duties, and gets too much time, as it does with many.

By all which we may see what need there is to watch over our selves in these
things, lest our liberty be turned into licentiousness, and lest we grow either
idle or carnal on that day.

Let us then consider how far this rest extends: and under it we take in. 1.
The rest of the whole man, outward and inward, in deeds, words, and thoughts*
so is it Isai. 58. 13. we should not speak our own words (nor by proportion
think our own thoughts) nor find our own pleasures. 2. It goes through the
whole day, for though every minute of the day cannot be applied to positive
duties, yet in no minute of it, is it lawful to do another work (inconsistent
with the qualifications and scope aforesaid) that is the negative part in it,
thou shall do no work, which binds ad semper. 3. It is to be extended not
only to a man's own person, but to all under him, children, servants, etc* he
must be answerable for it, that they rest, and must give them no occasion of
work. 4. Its to be extended even to the least work of any sort, if unnecessary,
as gathering sticks, speaking our own word, etc. these are all breaches of the
Sabbath. 5. This rest extends to all actions or sorts of actions or cases
which are not comprehended under the former exceptions which are permitted, or
are consistent with the sanctifying of the Sabbath: As;

1. All works which tend to our external profit, pleasure, satisfaction, etc.
all works of our callings which make for the increase of outward gain and
profit, such whereby we ordinarily sustain our lives: These Hebr. 4. 15. are
called our own works, and here its such works as ordinarily are wrought in the
rest of the six days* So it is doing thy own pleasure as well as works, Isai.
58.

2. Such works as tend to others external gain or profit as the great motive of
them, as Servants may be working for their Masters profit, and yet profane the
day*

3. Such as are not necessary on that day, as ploughing, sowing, reaping, or
gathering in, and that even in Seed-time and Harvest; and so fishing, going of
mills, etc. when these are not done for the very preserving of life, because
they are not necessary out of that case; neither is there any thing here of an
extraordinary dispensation that makes them necessary, the weather depending on
an ordinaryprovidence, or ordinarily depending on providence, which is to be
reverenced: Hence though the weather and season be rainy, yet it is not lawful
to cut down or gather in Corn on the Sabbath, their hazard in this ease being
common and from an ordinary immediate providence; yet suppose that a River were
carrying away Corn, or that Winds were like to blow them into the Sea, it were
lawful in such a case to endeavor to prevent that, and preserve them; because
1. that comes by some more then ordinary dispensation of providence in the
weather, and affects and puts in hazard this Corn more then others: 2.
Because there is no probability of recovering these in an ordinary way, though
the weather should alter, but there is hope of gathering in of such as are in
the fields without that reach of hazard, if the Lord alter the season.

4. Such as are for carnal pleasure or civil ends, thus playing, gaming, much
laughing, etc. being our own works, more especially our own pleasure, are
unlawful on that day.

5. Consider that all things are prohibited which mar the end of the day, and
are not consistent with the duties thereof* such are buying, selling, etc. out
of the cases of pressing necessity* folks cannot be spiritually taken up, and
with these also; so playing and gaming is no less consistent with praying,
reading, conferring* etc. then ploughing or such like, yea, is much more
indisposing for it, and so we do necessarily thereby incapacitate our selves
for the duties of the day.

6. All things are forbidden, which consist not with this rest and the duties
of worship called for from our selves and others; thus unnecessary journeying,
walking, even suppose one could or should be exercised in meditation, is not
resting as is required, much less is gadding in companies, in the street, or
fields, to the neglect of secret and family duties.

In a word, whatever is not religious and spiritual exercise, or furthering or
helping unto what is so, out of the excepted cases; much more whatever is
sinful, scandalous or unsuitable on other days, or does divert from, or
indispose for the duties of holiness, and the worship of God on that day, is
inconsistent with this rest, and so prohibited: for, This rest is not primarily
commanded and required for it self, but as conducing and subordinate unto the
performing of holy duties in it; therefore our rest is to be regulated, so as
may best contribute to that scope, and whatever marreth that, though it should
not be work strictly, but idleness, carnalness, or playing* and gaming, and
sporting* yet its a breach of this rest: for 1. That is no religious duty* nor
2. tending as a necessary help to it; nor 3. is rest commanded that we should
pley in it, but that we should sanctify it; and 4. playing or sporting cannot
be called sanctifying the day; otherwise we might have mo Sabbaths then one,
and the prophanest would love them best; 5. playing separateth not the Sabbath
from other days, more then work does; for men play in all: 6. playing is
neither a religious duty, it being amongst the most irreligious and profane;
nor a duty of necessity for easing of weariness, which does not here come by
any bodily toil and labor, but (if there be any) from being exercised in
spiritual duties; which, therefore, change and variety will through Gods
blessing do, so as the person may be born out in them; nor is there any place
for it, except some duty be neglected, therefore its inconsistent with this.

We come to the second way of considering the sanctification required here, and
that is by comparing it with that strictness called for from the Jews, and to
which they were tied.

We speak not here of Ceremonials (for so their whole service might be more
burdensome then ours, and particularly their Sabbath-services, because they
were doubled on that day) but of moral duties; and in that respect we say, that
the tie and obligation unto the sanctification of this day is equal and alike
unto us with them, which is clear in particulars, for 1. It tyeth us now to as
long time, to wit, a natural day of twenty four hours, as it did them then. 2.
It restrains from work and requires holy rest now, as much as then; for
whatever work then struck against the Letter or purpose and scope of the
Command, and marred holy duties, does so still. 3. It requires positive
sanctification by holy duties, as preaching, prayer, meditation, etc. and
allows not idleness, nor indulgeth time to other unnecessary works. 4. It
requires as spiritual a manner and as spiritual a frame in performing of them
now as then.

For 1. If the Command be moral, then is there no change in moral duties, for
it is the same Command to us, that it was to them, save in ceremonial things:
2. If the same things were allowed to them which are allowed to us, and if no
more be allowed to be done by us, then was allowed to be done by them on the
Sabbath, then the observation in its strictness is equal, but the first is
true, for works of piety, mercy and necessity, are allowed to us, and so were
they to them, as by Christ's reasoning against them (as being here
superstitious) may appear: yea, 3. our allowances are taken from the practice
of Christ, and his reasonings with the Pharisees, who in these disputes aimed
not to show that more was lawful by his coming then was before, but to show
what then was lawful, though they ignorantly or wilfully misunderstood the
Command, for even then God allowed mercy rather then sacrifice, etc. which
places most clearly warrant us in our practice. 4. The Service we have now is
as spiritual, and without all doubt the promise of the spirit, for keeping up
in holy duties as large as formerly, and therefore our improving of it should
be no less.

Before we proceed, there are some Scriptures which seem to thwart with, and to
be cross to this, to which we would speak a little for clearing of them; as
namely Exodus 16. 23, 29. and Exodus 35. 3. where it would seem that going out of
the place dressing of meat, and kindling of fire were forbidden, which are
allowed to us: To which we say. 1. That we speak of the meaning of this fourth
Command, if any more was forbidden them by peculiar judicial Laws, that
contradicts not our assertion, these may be abrogated, while this command
stands. But 2, We conceive that as to these things, gathering of sticks,
kindling of fire, dressing meat, etc. no more is allowed unto us then unto
them, that is, all unnecessary labor in, and about, these is unlawful to us
now, and all necessary labor in, and about, them was allowed unto, and lawful
for them; as may be gathered from Christ's practice, and his reasoning with the
Jews, and from the allowance which was to their Beasts. In the third place
then, we say that these Scriptures cannot be literally and universally
understood, for it cannot be thought that they went not out of the place,
kindled no fire, dressed no meat in any case; yea, the allowance for their
necessity, and Christ's going in and partaking, when invited on the Sabbathday,
Luke 14. Its like to somewhat that was prepared that day, with his defending of
his Disciples practice in plucking ears of Corn, and rubbing them, as it is
Luke 6, 1. (which was a sort of preparing and dressing of that meat) insinuate
the contrary; neither can any thing be gathered from that place; Exodus 16. 23.
against dressing of meat simply, but rather the contrary, for the Manna that
remained over what was dressed on the sixth day, was to be laid up till the
seventh day, or the Sabbath, but not till the day after the Sabbath; and will
it not suppose, that they behooved then to dress it on the Sabbath as on other
days by boiling, at least, for as to grinding of it at Mills, or other ways,
there was no necessity for that on the Sabbath out of some extraordinary Case
(or else they had needlessly laid it up) and so behoved to have fires to dress
it with: And therefore that of not dressing meat, of not kindling fire, etc.
must be of what is unnecessary and for servile works, or making gain in men's
ordinary particular callings.

But to the third way, if any should inquire what more holiness is called for,
o^ can be win at, on the Sabbath then a Believer is called unto on other days,
he being called to endeavor to be perfectly holy every day? I Answer, Although
he be called to be perfectly holy, yet not in the holiness of immediate Worship
throughout every day: He is to be perfectly holy on other days, according to
the duties and employments of these days; but on the Lords day he is called to
be holy according to the employments of that day and its duties; The Lords
people of old were indeed called to perfect holiness all the week over, but
singularly to sanctify the Sabbath as a part of their universal holiness. 2.
Though all the parts of every day should be spent holily, yet some parts more
especially, as what parts are spent in Prayer, reading the Scripture, etc. and
somewhat more is required of these* who are called to it on a Fasting day, then
on other days, even so on the Sabbath. 3. There is a difference betwixt a
person living holily in the general, and a person who is holy in sanctifying
the Lords day, though a man should be holy every day, yet is he not to
sanctify every day which is required on this day, whereof we shall now speak.

This days sanctification then, we conceive to consist in these:

1. That there is more abstractedness not only from sinful things, but even
from lawful temporal things* required on that day then on other days, a
spiritual frame of heart* separating and setting apart a man from ordinary
thoughts; Hence we may say, that as the Greek word (...), signifies unclean as
well as common, so a common or every day frame o^ Spirit, will be found unclean
for the Sabbath; there must therefore be another frame of heart, different from
an ilk a day-frame and suited to that day.

2. This day is to be sanctified in respect of the Exercises of it beyond other
days, and that necessarily; whereas on some other days we may be taken up in
some duties of worship arbitrarily* but here necessarily; And men may, and
ought, to be holy on other days, in their plowing, and other works, but there
their Holiness is to be in immediate worship to God, in some thing relating to
that always, such as praying* reading* hearing, conferring, meditating, etc.

3. The sanctification of this day lies in this, that it must be wholly
sanctified, but parts of other days are ordinarily used in religious Service,
but this whole day is to be used so, a man should be this whole day throughout,
as in the time of praying on other days.

4. Duties would be multiplied that day, more secret and private Prayer,
Reading, etc. and more public Worship; even as there were double Sacrifices
that day under the Law, though there were Sacrifices all days.

5. There would be in the duties of this day more intenseness of Spirit, and a
further degree of spiritual affections, then in these duties of other days;
because this day is purposely set apart for that end* and by continuance in
duties we may attain to more of a spiritual frame, and because not only the
Exercises of Worship, praying, reading and hearing* etc. call to Holiness on
this day, as they do on other days, but even the very day it self does call to
it; even as on a solemn day of humiliation men ought to be more affected and
deeply humbled then on other days (though daily they should repent and be
humbled) because that day is solemnly set apart for it; so ought our worship to
be more intense and solemn this day suitable unto it, wherein we are, as it
were, dyeted for insisting and persisting in duties of worship; where as these
duties in this respect, and in comparison, are on other days, but as starts,
worship is here some way the only work of that day.

6. There would be more heavenliness and spiritual sense breathed after that
day in the frame of the heart; it would be near God, and the work of the day
would be delightsome and sweet, the Sabbath would, as it is Isaiah 58. be
called a delight, and we would endeavor as it is Heb. 4. to enter into his
rest, to pass through the outward rest into his, to be within his chambers, yea
even in his arms, as it were, all that day.

7. There would be that day more divineness in our Holiness (to speak so) a
sort of Majesty by ordinary in our walk, looking like the Sabbath, and like the
God of the Sabbath: There would be an exulting in God that day, we would
endeavor to have our hearts in a special manner warm in the Exercise of love
to him, and to be much in praising of him; our Whole worship would more
absolutely and immediately be aimed and levelled at the honor and glory of
God, as the end of it, then on other ordinary days, wherein our prayers and
other pieces of worship may more immediately respect our own Case and need* but
on this day Gods Honor as the end more immediately whatever our own Case be,
and that both in heart within and in the nature of our Exercises without; this
is to call the Sabbath of the Lord honorable, to honor and glorify him,
therein as it is Is, 58. a special Majesty being in that days worship by
levealling it with extraordinary singleness at Gods praise, even as his name is
hallowed or sanctified in Heaven by Angels and perfected Saints. Hence It Is
good to give thanks unto thy Name, etc. begins that Psalm of Praise for the
Sabbath Day, to wit, the 92. These Duties then that further his praise are more
especially for that day.

8. All these reach both words and thoughts, nothing to the hindrance of these
is to be admitted neither; there are none of our words and thoughts that day,
but they would in a special manner be Gods, and in it we should be spent as
his* and endeavor to be within view of Heaven, to make some Essay of glorified
Saints exercise there, and to have the Sabbath as a little preludy of that
everlasting Sabbath and rest in the bosom of God.

The Fourth way of considering this sanctification is positively, to wit, as to
the Duties, wherein the Sabbath is to be spent, which are shortly, all duties
of immediate worship, whether they be inward, as meditation, self-examination,
heart prayer, either ejaculatory or more continued, heart-sorrow for sins, etc.
or outward, as vocal prayer and singing of Psalms, reading the Scriptures and
other pious Books, hearing the word, etc. or whether they secret which may be
both inward and outward, or private in Families, as reading of the word,
conferring on it, repeating Sermons, praying together, etc. or public; as
joining with the Congregation in prayers and praises, hearing the word read,
and the sense given, hearing of Sermons, participating of the Sacraments, when
dispensed, joining in solemn humiliations and thanks*givings, when they fall
necessarily or more conveniently to be on the Sabbath; All which and such like
are proper duties for that day; to which liberal laying up, and giving for the
relief of the poor according to ability, and as God blesses every man would be
added as a suitable dnty of it, though it be no duty of immediate worship.

The fifth way is to consider the sanctification of the Sabbath complexly,
before it come, when it is come, and after it is past.

1. Then the night before (not secluding a suitable remembrance throughout the
week) remember it 1. by timous leaving of worldly business, it is a great
incroachment on the Sabbath, thought too too usual to continue longer at work
the night before, then any other night of the week, as if folks would gain the
day of rest, out of Saturnsdays night and Mondays morning.

2 By not suffering this little times leaving of work, to be idly spent but
being taken up with endeavors, 1. To abstract mind the 2. To from other works
as well as the hand, and to have the heart put in a lively frame* mind the work
of the day which is coming, and to have a suitablenss to it. If ye ask what
suitableness we have to it? Answ. Endeavor 1. to be as if ye were about to
meet God, to tryst, as if it were, visibly with him, and solemnly to treat and
enter in marriage with him. 2. To be like Heaven, and in a special manner in
some sort to imitate God, as if ye were already entered into his rest, and had
rested from your own works. 3. To be as if ye were to dye, and to step into
Eternity, for this resting should mind us of that, and was, and is still*
specially appointed (though yet no Ceremony) to mind us of Gods separating of
us from others for himself, that we may rest eternally with him.

Then 3. for furthering of this, look back on the Week past, and endeavor to
have things clear before the Sabbath come, and all bygone quarrels removed,
that theremay be no standing controversies against you to begin the Sabbath
with.

4. Pray with special solemn seriousness in reference to that day, that ye may
have peace for what is past, that ye may be in a right frame for the day; that
the Minister may be helped to speak as it becomes; that others may be fitted
to hear and join; that the Word and other Ordinances may be richly blessed of
God; and that the mercy of having the Ordinances may be minded, with praise to
the gracious giver of them, and suitably improved.

2. When the morning of that sweet and desirable day comes (after we have
fallen asleep in a special manner, as it were in the Lords arms, the night
before and left our selves there) 1. we would timely begin the work and beware
that either carnal thoughts get in, or the time be idly slepped over, but I say
we would begine the work early; for it is for that end appointed, and sinful
thoughts will not be kept out, but by filling the room otherwise with what is
spiritualy profitably. Show forth Gods loving kindness in the morning, says
the Psam for the Sabbath, to wit, the 92. Let therefore the Meditation of
somewhat of these, or such like, begin with us, even when we are making ready,
1. somewhat of God himself, whose day it is; 2. of heaven, and that happiness
that is there; 3. of the works of God, who gave us and all the world a being,
and who only preserves the same; 4. of Christ's redemption, and as closed and
perfected on this day; which especially should be minded; that so thinking of
our many and great obligations, and of the misery we had been in, had not that
work of Redemption intervened, we may begin the day with a due impression of
Gods greatness and goodness: of our own sinfulness, weakness, and misery; and
of this blessed remedy and out-gate.

2. We would address our selves to solemn prayer in secret, and that at greater
length then on other days* and with persisting in, inwith special petitions
relating to the day, with all the seriousnese may win it.

3* We would take a view of our own hearts, to see how and where we left the
night before, and endeavor to have clearness betwixt the Lord and us as to our
state, and otherwise maintained; and renewed if it was; or attained if it was
not.

4. Too much time would not be spent in adorning of busking or folks bodies, or
in making other provisions for them, but as the whole of it would be taken up
in duties of worship (as we have before showed) so some part of it would be set
apart for secret reading, yea, for secret praising, thanksgiving, and singing,
an exercise not unbecoming that day, as that forecited Psalm for the Sabbath
day, shows.

5. If thou be the Head of a Family, or live in fellowship with others, then
the family is gravely to be brought together, and every particular member is to
join with the rest: And here also prayers and other religious duties are to be
doubled according to the ceremonial doubling of Sacrifices on the
Seventh-day Sabbath under the Law; for in secret, in families, and in public,
there would be more that day then in other days.

6. Care and inspection would be taken so far as men can reach, that by none in
the Society, neither secret nor private duties be neglected, nor public duties
abstained from, but that each may stir up one another, and more especially
those whose places lead them to it, to the suitable sanctification of the day in
all the duties of it, and withal, it would be looked to, that none of the
family be suffered to stay at home unnecessarily from the public worship or to
be absent from the family worship.

7. Timely (that ye be not by haste discomposed) come to publick-modestly
apparrelled (it is a shame to see how gaudily some come to public worship on
the Lords day) grave in your walk wary and circumspect in you words, that they
be spiritually edifying and suitable; watch over your eyes, that carnal or
wordly looks steal you not away, nor distemper your hearts; but especially over
your hearts, that they we are not out of a spiritual frame.

8. When ye come to the place of public worship, if it be a while a beginning,
be still watchful, and the nearer ye come to it the more watchful; for
temptations will be very ready to divert or discompose* there would be a
frequent intermixture of ejaculatory prayers in reference to every thing*
equisite for attaining and intertaining this composedness.

9. When public worship begins, study to be (as Cornelious was, Acts 10)
present to join in prayer, and praise, to hear what God will say, to receive
it, to lay it up in your hearts, to be sutably affected with it, and to resolve
through grace to practice it; (for blessed are they only who hear the word and
do it): and this would be with delight, aming aright at the end of the
Ordinances, whatever they be, whereof we spoke somewhat on the second
Comandment.

10. When the public worship is as to it is first diet closed, let not your
minds turn carnal, but depart reverently from it, chearing your selves in God,
fixing the convictions, exhortations, directions* instructions, etc. in your
mind, as ye have met with them, and be ruminating rather on these, then
beginning to gaze o^ discourse with others on subjects that are not spiritual,
and to edification.

11. As soon as ye can win, go in secret and seek to have these things fastened
and riveted betwixt, God and you, and let that be your first work, and let the
little time that interveneth betwixt the diets of public worship till you
return, be spent sutably to the day and the end of the duties thereof.

12. When all the public worship is ended then ye would do according to the
preceding tenth Direction; ye would withal retire a while in secret, and
reflect on your carriage in public, and also see what good may be gotten of
the day, and if there be any misses, neglects, or failings observed (as if
there be a diligent search there will no doubt be) then be humbled, seek pardon
through Christ, and resolve through grace to help these afterward; consider
what was said, and like the noble Bereans* Acts 17. put it to the trial for
your confirmation, by your considering and examining the Scriptures cited or
spoken of; and endeavor yet more to have your hearts affected in secret with
them.

13. Then call your Families and come together after secret seeking of God, and
1. be inquiring of one another what is remembered, that all being put together,
ye may be helpful by your memories one to another* 2. ye would do this, not as
if it were enough to tell over the words, but that the Doctrines and their Uses
may be fixed, and ye affected with them* Therefore 3. ye would do this with
other duties of reading, singing, and spiritual conference, as the occasion of
it shall offer, with prayer to God before and after, being thus exercised ^ill
ye go again in secret to close the day as ye began.

14 Duties of Charity would be done, contributions made liberally according to
our ability, and relief sent to others as we know their need* which also would
be inquired after.

15. Indeavoure to have the heart in a right frame to close the day with*
reflecting on our carriage throughout it, fearing to lie down with guilt
unpardoned and without some special fruit of the duties of the day; have not to
go to rest sooner that night then on other nights, on design that you may be
sooner at work the nixt day; which smells strong of wearying of the Sabbath,
and of longing to have it at an end, of which the Lord complained of old, Amos
8. 5. study to lie down with thoughts as you arose, leaving your selves in his
arms, with respect to the eternal Sabbath that is coming.

3. When the Sabbath is past, and the next day comes, cast not by all thoughts
of it instantly, but begin your work as having just now ended the Sabbath,
fearing to let the relish of it wear away; and endeavoring in your carriage
through the Week to retain the stamp and impression of it; especially beware to
go to your Callings with a Sabbath days guiltiness on you; O endeavor by all
means to have that removed hand all the Week through have one eye to the
Sabbath past; and another to the Sabbath coming, having still that sounding in
your ears, remember the Sabbath, or the Lord*day, to keep it holy; dieting your
souls, as it were, all along the Week, for a course of communion with God in
the duties of the next Sabbath.

It will be now easy to know when this command is transgressed (which was the
sixth way proposed of considering the sanctification of the Sabbath to wit,
oppositively or negatively) which is done 1* by committing any thing contrary
to the rest or sanctification of it; 2. by omitting any of the things which are
required for the right sanctifying of it; 3. by an unsuitable frame of heart as
to the due manner of performing any of these duties required*

We will find the weight of this command yet more fully, by considering it is
reasons how it'sexplicated and pressed: This is done 1. by laying down the
equity and extent of it. v. 9. 10. 2. by pressing it from God's example.

As to the first, v. 9. Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work: These
words may be looked on 1. As an obliging concession, which is indeed very
liberal; as if the Lord had said, all days are mine, yet I have given thee Six
to do all thy work and labor that thou have to do, therefore give me the
Seventh. It is but a small retribution for Six to return a Seventh. 2* As a
restriction, thou shall do whatever work thou have to do within the Six days,
but none of it on the Seventh. 3. As a command whereby God distributeth our
time, and commands Six for our work, and the Seventh for his: And thus these
words forbid idleness, and command lawful diligence in these Six days; which
we conceive here to be employed.

1 Because God is not carving out what time we may be idle in, but what time we
should employ in our own lawful works as well as in his; for it cannot be
thought that he gives us Six to be idle on; It must therefore be to work on
seeing as our life should be taken up in doing either what more immediately
concerns our selves, or what more immediately concerns God; so the scope of
this command being to proportion our time betwixt these two, what is allowed
for either of them, must imply an improving of it for that very end. 2 The
opposition also will confirm this; These Six days are to be applied to our
work, as the Seventh is to be applied to Gods, which is more then a permission,
and if the negative part be imperative, in it thou shall not work, then the
positive, Six days shall thou work, may well be understood so also. 3. Gods
example will press it for we are to follow it, not only in resting on the
Seventh, but also in working in the Six days as he did. 4. Working these Six
days comes in as a mean to further and fit for the sanctification of the
Seventh, for so a man puts by his business, and has the more freedom for the
rest on the Seventh, whereas idlense often sinful necessitateth to the breach
of it, and to a desire that it may be gone, Amos 8. 5. And thus idleness is
reproved here, and diligence commanded under one consideration, to wit, as the
remove of the former and practice of the later do capacitate us to give God his
due on his own day when it comes: Even as they are also included in the eight
Command, Thou shall not steal; for as idleness becomes a snare and temptation
to a man to steal, and hinders him from works of Charity and suitable
diligence in the works of his lawful Calling* readily preventeth the one, and
capactiateth for the other; So is it here, for it is not unusual that the same
sin and duty may be forbidden and commanded in diverse commands upon diverse
considerations; And this agrees well both with the words and scope of this
command. And 5. according to the holy and wise economy of Gods goodness, our
labor may be commanded to make his rest to be to us the more relishing and
refreshing.

The tenth Verse contains three things for explication, 1. The Lords claim of
the Seventh day, as having reserved that to himself, it is his, it is to him, and
by him and for him separated from other days. 2. Aconsequent flowing from
this* Therefore that day is not to be employed to any of our own works, no not
the least, No manner of work, no word, no thought nor deed of any such sort
under whatsoever pretext beside the excepted cases. 3. It Is extension as to all
relations, so to all ranks, Parent and Child, Master and Servant, etc. yea,
it is thou for thy self, and for all thou have the oversight and charge of,
Sons, Servants, Strangers, yea, and Beasts, not that they are capable of
sanctifying a day more then the Beasts in Nineveh were of religious fasting,
Jonah 3. yet this shows what ought to be the Masters care, it being for his
use that Beasts are put to work; God injoyneth all ways of abstaining from
every thing that is a man's own work on the Sabbath, and will have him solemn in
it: In a word, All within thy gates, looks not only to Masters and all in
their families or within their doors, but to Magistrates and Governors, and
all within their Jurisdiction (Gates being the place of Judgment, and used in
Scripture to show the extent as well as seat of power) that they should see to
their sanctifying of this day; and the falling of any under them is their sin
when they endeavor not to prevent and amend it: And thus Nehemiah understood
this command, Neh. 13. when he put forth his power, not only in contending with
the native Nobles, but even against Strangers, for restraining them from
violating this day.

Hence we gather 1 That idleness is a sin, and that they will hardly give God
his due on the Seventh day; who are not diligent in the duties of some lawful
calling and station for Gods honor and others good through the Six days of
the Week; and indeed this is often seen, that such are lazy, and careless, and
idle on that day, passing it over even as they do other days, without any
difference at all, except it be that they come to Church.

2. We gather that humane, whether Ecclesiastic or Civil appointment of
ordinary fixed days for worship throughout the whole day, beside the Sabbath,
will not agree with this command allowing men six for labor. It Is true, God
might Soveraignly limit men, but where he has given liberty (if it were but by
concession) who can restrain?

Concerning days therefore, we lay down these four: 1. That there can be no
solemn! seeting apart of any day to any creature; thus Saints days are
unlawful: for the Sabbath or day of rest is to the Lord, and to none other, it
being a peculiar piece of worship to him who has divided time betwixt his
worship and our work. And although men should keep the day, and alter the
worship, yet this is a taking of that which was once abused, and never
enjoined, for to apply it to God, and wants not offense; even as the
retaining of other things in worship which have been abused, and are not
necessary, is offensive. 2. No man can institute any day, even to the true God,
as apart of worship, so as to bind consciences to it, or to equal it with this
day: That is apart of Gods royal prerogative, and a thing peculiar to him to
sanctify and bless a day. 3. Even those days which are pretended to be set
apart to and for God, and yet not as apart of worship, cannot be imposed in a
constant and ordinary way (as Anniversary days and feasts are) because by an
ordinary rule God has given to man Six days for work, except in extrordinary
cases he shall please to call for some part of them again. 4. Yet
extrordinarily upon occasions of Humiliation, or of Joy, and Thanksgiving
days, for that time, may be set apart for God, without wronging this
concession, even as in extrordinary times we may work, and not rest on the
Sabbath day, though ordinarily we may not: This proportioning of time therefore
is for the ordinary rule, but yet admits of the exception of extraordinary
cases.

3. We gather that Masters and Parents ought to have a special oversight of
their own Children and Families in the worshipping of God, and that especially
in reference to the sanctifying of this day; and that there is a special
communion in worshipping of God amongst the several relations of a Family.

4. We gather that Magistrates, and all who have power over others, ought to
see to the restraining of Vice, and to the performing of outward duties,
particularly such as relate to the sanctification of the Sabbath (as well as to
abstain from, and to do such and such things themselves in their own persons)
in and by these over whom they have power; and that it is no less scandalous and
sinful for a Magistrate not to see that sin he crushed that the Sabbath be
sanctified, and the Ordinances of Religion be entertained and received and
reverenced in and by those over whom he has charge, then if he committed such
sins himself, then if he discountenanced the Ordinances and break the Sabbath
himself, or sufferred his own family or himself to be without the worship of
God: Why? because these are within his gates, and he is to account for them: He
is to rule for God, and their good which is mainly spiritual; he is to be a
terror to evil doers, as well as to be an encouragement to them that do well;
and men are according to their places and parts to be forthcoming for God and
the good of others. And yet this cannot be called a constraining or forcing of
Consciences, for a Magistrate or Master thus to restrain these who are under
them; it is but the using of that power, which God has committed to them to
make men to do their duty, and to abstain from dishonouring God, and the
punishing of them, if they do other ways; in which respect he bears not the
Sword in vain.

The 2. and main reason follows, v. 11. wherein this command is three ways
pressed also, 1. By Gods example, who during the space of six days wrought
(though he might as easily have made all in one day) and rested the Seventh,
and not before the Seventh, on which he wrought none; even so it becomes men
to do, seeing he intended this for their imitation, and for that end does
propose it here: Gods rest on the Seventh is not absolute and in every respect
(for John 5. 17. he works hitherto, that is, in the works of Providence,
sustaining, preserving, and governing the Creatures made by him, and their
Actions) but all things needful for the perfecting of the world were then made
and finished. (Whence by the way we may gather, that not only all Creatures
were made, Angels even these that since turned Devils, etc. but that they were
made within the Six days of Creation, when Heaven, Earth, Sea, and all that was
in them was made) Therefore all our works that are necessary to be done in the
six working days, would be done and ended, that we may rest on the Sabbath as
he did.

The 2. way is by his blessing of it. God blessed the Sabbath day, which is to
be understood not simply in respect of the day, which is not properly capable
of blessing, but in respect of the true observers of it, he blesses it to them
and he blesses them in it, which may be in these three: 1. That the rest of
that day shall not prejudge them in their weeks work, but that their labor shall
be therefore blessed, so that they shall miss nothing by observing that day, as
the Lord blessed the Seventh year, whereon they rested, and yet notwithstanding
they were as when they labored, Lev. 25. 20. 21. 22. and it is like that if we
will compare such as make Conscience to sanctify the Sabbath with others, who
think and seem to gain by breaking of it, this will be found at the years end
to be verified. 2. That the Lord has set a part that, day for a Spiritual
blessing, and the Communication of it to his people (so the Bread and Wine are
blessed in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be a mean of conveying
Spiritual blessings to the worthy receivers) Isa. 56. and Psalm. 92. 3. That God
will abundantly manifest his gracious presence, and multiply his spiritual
blessings that day upon it is due observers, more then on other days wherein he
is also sought; as there is this day a double worship both in respect of the
Duty, and of the day whereon it is done so there shall be a double blessing
beyond what is on other days; in which respect, even prayers in, and toward,
the Temple (while it stood by divine appointment as a separate place from
others) had a blessing beyond prayers in other places* and thus Christ blessed
the loaves and the few small fishes, John 6. when he made them by
multiplication on the matter to feed far beyond their ordinary
proportionableness; so service on this day grows in it is blessing; hence we
may see an usual connection betwixt Universal thriving in Religion, Grace and
Piety, and suitable obedience to this command, in the tender sanctification of
the Sabbath* and withal a reason, why so few make progress in godliness, even
little keeping holy the Sabbath as they ought.

The 3. way is by his hallowing it, wherefore be hallowed it or sanctified it,
that is per ^odum ^^stinandi, or by way of appointing of it for holy uses, and
separating it from other days (as is said): The inference wherefore as to the
hallowing points at the reason or end wherefore God did it, to wit, that
there might thereby be an excitement left to men, to imitate God; and that men
might not only have Gods command, but his example also to bind this duty on him.

If it be asked here, why God will have a day set apart for holy Exercises
beside other days? It may be answered, 1. It Is meet that God be acknowledged
Lord of our time, by this Tribut being reserved to himself. 2. Because men
having but a finite understanding, beside the now corruption of it, connot be
intensely taken up with spiritual and heavenly things and with temporal and
earthly things, both at once, or at the same instant; for even Adam in
innocence could not do that, therefore the Lord has graciously set apart a day
for man's help in that. 3. It Is to teach man that his chief end is to converse
with God, and to live with him, and that he ought to carry in his own affairs
along the week, and order things so as the Sabbath may be duly sanctified, when
it shall come in that sweet soul reposing converse with him. 4. To show man
wherein his happiness consists, it is even in this, to walk and converse with
God, and to be in his worship; this is his rest. 5. To show the excellency of
Religion, and of the Works of Piety, or of Gods Worship, above men's Employments
in earthly and wordly things: It was a Sabbath to Adam in innocence to be
abstracted from his labor for the worship of God; the one is men's toil, the
other is men's spiritual rest and ease, far contrary to that which men in the
world ordinarily think and judge.

We see now how great and grievous a sin it is to break this command, and with
what care this day should be hallowed.

For 1. It Is a Command of the first Table, and so the breach of it is, in some
respect, more then murder, Adultery, Stealing, etc, it is included in the first
and great Commandment,

2. Amongst all the commands of the first Table, yea all the commands, this
religious observance of the Sabbath, is most forcibly pressed with more
reasons, and with more full and particular explication: Because 1. All the
commands hang some way on this; and obedience is ordinarily given to them with
the same readiness, as this day is employed in Gods Service, 2. It keeps
life, as it were, in all the rest, and when men are cold in this, so are they
in all the rest. 3. This tries men in theirlove to God best; If indeed his
company and service be more delighted in thenthe World* And is a notable
indication of the frame of the soul; it makes proof both of their state and
frame, as men are usually and habitually on the Sabbath, so in effect are they,
as to these.

3. No breach of any command has more aggravations; for 1. It is against
reason and equity, when God has given us so many and so good reasons for it.
2. It Is high Ingratitude, the Sabbath being a Mercy; and a great Mercy indeed
it is to be privileged with access to converse with God a whole day of every
week in duties of worship. 3. It Is against Love, God's Love has instituted it,
and our Love should in a special manner vent it self to him on it. 4. It Is
cruelty against our selves; for the Sabbath kept holy, is backed with the
promise of of a special blessing, and we by this sin prejudge our selves of
that; yea the Sabbath rightly spent is a mean both of holiness and of nearness
to God, of conformity to him and of communion with him, it promoteth both: So
that it is eminently verified here, that these who sin against this command,
sin against, and forsake their own Mercy.

4. No sin does more evidence universal untenderness; and as it is a sin in it
self, so it evidenceth, especially when gross, a very sinful and some way
Atheistical frame and disposition, as may be gathered from Neh. 13.

Yea. 5. It occasioneth and breeds other sins: it habituateth to sinning, and
hardneth against challenges, so that men ordinarily become very gross and loose
and fall in scandalous sins, who neglect the sanctification of the Sabbath,
which is the quickner and fomenter some way of all duties and knitteth the two
Tables of the Law together; hence it comes to pass, that we often hear men
that have turned to be very loose, gross and scandalous (and some of them on
Scaffolds and at Gibbets) cry out of Sabbath breaking, imputing the one to the
other, as a main cause; for by this sin men grow stout against challenges, and
formal in secret duties, and so at length sit quite up.

6 No sin has more sharp challenges for it, and more sad Judgments avenging
it, then sins against this command; have there been any men deeply challenged
for sin, or at death (whether ordinary or violent) brought to express and utter
their challenges, but sins against this command have been main ones? The
slighting of the Lords Sabbath made Jerusalem to be burnt with fire Jer. 17.
last; for this sin they are threatened with terrible plagues; Ezekiel. 20, 21. 24.
not only in temporal things, ^. 23. but with spiritual plagues to which they
are given up, v. 25. 26. You know that a man was stoned for gathering of sticks
on the Sabbath, Number. 15. see also, Exodus 16. 28. and Ezekiel. 22. 8. where the
Lord accounts Sabbathbreaking a refusing to keep his Commandments and Laws,
and a despissing of his holy things; O is it possible, that a man can be well
that breaks the Sabbath, or to whom it is not a delight?

If any should ask here, if indeed the breaches of this command be greater sins
then the breaches of the commands of the second Table? and if so, if God will
be avenged on these severely?

For Answer (premitting this one word, that in comparing breaches of the
commands of the two Tables, we would compare sins of a like nature together,
that is, sins of presumption with sins of presumption, and sins of infirmity
with sins of infirmity) we say, that a presumptuous sin against the fourth
Command, if it were but to go unnecessarily to the door, or to gather sticks,
is a greater sin then a presumptuous murder, because it strikes more
immediately against God: And that a sin of infirmity against the fourth
command, is greater then a sin of Infirmity against the sixth. Yet we grant
that presumptuous Murder is a greater sin then a sin of in firmity against the
fourth command, because presumption and high handedness in the manner of
sinning, in a sin little on the matter comparatively, da^eth God, as it were,
and strikes immediately against him, and so is an additional high aggravation
of it; beside What it is in the nature of it: And though our censures against
presumptuous breaches of the Sabbath* which are now as great sins as formerly
(as is clear from what is just now said) be often more mitigated now under the
Gospel, neither was it as we conceive, ordinary to stone the presumptuous
prophaneners of the Sabbath, even amongst the Jews; yet will this be no good
reasoning; men do not now execute punishments upon Transgressors of the first
Table as on Transgressors of the second, therefore Transgressions of the
second Table are greater sins then Transgressions of the commands of the first;
for so we would be in hazard to postpone all the Laws or Commands of the first
Table to these of the second; but we are to consider that temporal punishments
are heightened or lessened according as the peace and order of civil Societies
may be more or less therein concerned, so that it is not by these measures that
we are to make the estimate of the greatness or smalness of sins in the sight
of God, and in order to his righteous and absolute judgments, and therefore
it`s enough that we enquire what God has done, and will do, and what sinners
may expect from him; however men may overlook and pass them by, yet before God
they are often taken notice of, and plagued even in this life, and will be for
ever hereafter, if they repent not.

We may now therefore in the close, exhort, beseech, obtest and charge you all,
as in the sight of God, who is a severe avenger of them, that ye would be aware
of the sins whereby this command is transgressed: Particularly guard against.

1. Not preparing for it, or not remembering of it; many profane the Sabbath,
ere they come to public, yea, before it come, in some respect.

2 Carnal thoughts and a common frame of heart, yea, even to speak so, a
particular frame that looks but to our own condition or case; As not stirring
it self to be over and above that, to be affected with God and his glorious
works of Creation and Redemption, to give him praise for his mavelous
goodness on that day; there is alas generally little delight and praise in his
worship, even on his own holy day.

3. General unedifying discourses, of the news of the time, of health, and
other things not necessary to that day.

4. Little profiting under the Gospel, and not growing in knowledge and
practice; many a Sabbath is thus profaned, few getting or seeking the blessing
of it, or on it.

5. Going to the fields and visiting of Neighbors to put off a piece of time,
that so much time may be saved on other days of the Week, wherein many men
think they have more to do; and not seeking to edify, or to be edified when
they visit. Certainly by this going abroad and running up and down the streets
unnecessarily, ye indispose your selves, ye offend others, and tempt them to
follow you, ye slight either duties in your families, or in secret, or it may
be both, in a great measure; I suppose that if ye made conscience of these,
there would not be so much time to go abroad; Take some other day for
recreating your selves; If ye say, ye have then somewhat else to do: And have
ye nothing to do this day? Or will ye take more boldly from Gods day, then from
your own? Is Sacrilege less then taking what is your own? What if all did so
gad abroad? (And it may be they have no less reason) What a Sabbath day would
we have? There is a remarkable word, Exodus 16. 29. that on the Sabbath none
might go out of his place, which though it be not to be understood as
restraining exercises of piety, or works of necessity and mercy, as we showed
before; yet it would seem to be the meaning of the words, that on that which we
call taking the air, and on visiting, there was a restraint thereby intended.

6. Men's ^itting upon choice in the Church at such a distance that they can
scarcely hear, and that they may the more securely confer together on common
purposes; so that they do not so much as aim to profit, of whom we may
appositely say (as Christ said of the Priests, that they profaned the Sabbath
and were blameless) That they some way keept it and are guilty; many also sleep
weary and wander in their thoughts, and are as stones and statutes in the
Church.

7. Little ones and boys going and running up and down playing and making a
noise, and servants gadding; all which will be charged on Magistrates,
Ministers, Elders, Masters and Parents, who are not conscionably aming and
endeavoring in the diligent use of all suitable means to amend and prevent such
abuses, and to punish continuance in them: Especially look to it when few plead
or appear against such sins.

8. Much idle loitering over of the Sabbath, doing nothing, and much sleeping
it over. Idleness is a sin any day, much more on this day.

9. Little care of sanctifying the Sabbath when men are from home, or when they
are not in their own Congregations, when they are not in their own Houses, or
have not any to take oversight o^ them: There is much liberty taken this way,
and there are many complaints of it; What my Brethren? Does not the Sabbath
require as strict sanctification abroad as at home?

If any should ask remedies of all these, and such like evils, I know none
better then these that are in the Command it self.

The first is remember, what? 1. Remember bygone failings, and repent of them:
2. Remember coming to Judgment, that ye may be found of it in peace as to this
or any other guilt, and endeavor to prevent it: 3. Remember to be all the Week
over in your worship, and walk, minding it.

A second is, be well employed throughout the Week, and be not given to
idleness or laziness in your particular Callings, nor in spiritual Exercises,
there will be no sanctifying of this day without that; be not therefore
slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11.

3* See that nothing unbecoming the rest of the day be admitted, no manner, not
only of deeds, but of words or thoughts.

4. Let every one take inspection of others, and seriously mind it in your
several places, as ye are called.

5. Follow Gods example in other things, as it is proposed to you for your
Imitation, and ye will do it the better in this.

6. Aim at the blessing as well as at the duty; hang on himself for life and
strength to discharge the duty, and for the blessing, since he is the Author
and Bestowe^ of both, and do the duty delightsomly and with joy, through the
faith of his blessing; and acknowledge his unspeakable goodness in priviledging
you with his day, and the worship thereof, still waiting on him, and trusting
in him for whatever good may come to you in it.

The Fifth Command.
Exodus 20. 12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long
upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
OUR Lord Jesus Christ, Matthew. 22. 37. sumeth up the whole Law in these two
words, which he calls the two great Commandments, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and thy
Neighbor as thy sef, the two legs that Piety in practice walks upon; the
one comprehends our duty to God, which runs through all thee Ten Commands,
but does more eminently exert it self in the first Four, whereof we have
spoken: The other contains our duty to our Neighbor; which is set down more
particularly in the last Six Commands, whereof we are now to speak; and how
eye, many do ignorantly and wickedly look on duty to man as somewhat extrinsick
to Religion, and duty to God, yet both have the same authority, both are put in
ohe sum of the Law, both are written on Tables of Stone with the Lords own
finger* and put within the Ark: And therefore we ought with a proportionable
ear to inquire what God requires of us as duty to others, as well as to
himself: And we should make no less conscience of obedience to the one then to
the other,

Before we come particularly to the fifth Command, we shall speak a little to
these two, 1. Why love to God is called the first and great command* and love
to our Neighbor the second, and only like to the first, Matthew. 22. 38. 2. why
has the Lord carved out men's duty to others as well as to himself.

For the former of these, consider in the first place that the commands of the
second Table are equal to the commands of the first, in respect of the
authority that injoyneth them, he that says, Thou shall have no other Gods
before me, says also, Thou shall not kill, etc. Jam. 2. 11. In which respect
it is said, Matthew. 22. 39. the second is like unto this. 2. If we compare the
two Tables together as to the matter contained in them, and the immediate
object of each duty commanded; the duties of the first Table are greater, and
the duties of the second Table lesser; the one relating more immediately, the
other more mediately to Religion, in which respect they express peculiarly our
love to God, which is called the first and great command; for the first four
commands require that which in its own nature is worship, and is in an
immediate way to be given to God; but the duites required in the other six, are
not properly, formally and immediately called for as parts of worship to God,
though, as they are acknoweledgments of him, they may be consequentially
thereto referred.

As to the 2. Why the Lord has in so short a sum particularly set down our
duty to others, as well as to himself and showed how every one should carry
toward another; We would speak to it the rather, that there are six commands
in the second Table, and but four in the first Table, and the Lords commending
the duties of the second Table has said, the second is like unto the first,
because he would have it in our careful observance, going along with the first;
And the Apostles as well as the Lord, in pressing holiness, do ordainarily
instance in the duties of the second Table, as Luke 10. 26. What is written in
the Law? how read thou? Math. 5. 27* thou shall not commit Adultery, etc.
Romans 13. 8. 9. 10. Jam. 2. 8. 11. etc. And the reasons of it may be these: 1.
To teach his people that it is his will, that they should be holy in all manner
of conversation; therefore there is no piece of duty called for, but it is
comprehended in a command, even the least thing, eating, drinking, and
whatsoever they do, 1 Cor 10. 31. 1 Pet. 1. 15. 16. he would have them careful
to be holy not only in the Church, but also in the Market* in the shop, at
home, abroad, not only in prayer, but at the plough, etc. 2. To hold out the
great extent of holiness, or what holiness he requires in his people; It was a
great mistake in the Pharisees, that they placed the main part of Religion in
the performance of external duties of the first Table* whereas the Lord lays
both Tables together, to tell that they must march up together in our practice,
and that it will not be Holiness in it is self, and in Gods account to perform
the one without the other: 3. Because the Lord would have his Law a perfect
Rule, that the man of God might be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good
word and work. 2 Timothy 3. 17. therefore is the second Table given, that we may
know how to walk toward others as well as toward God, that Masters may know
their duty* Servants theirs, etc. and that none are left to an arbitrariness
therein, but that all are tied to a Rule: 4. Because men are ready to slight
holiness in reference to the second Table; hence there will be some kind of awe
of God on men, in reference to the duties of the first Table, so that they dare
not altogether neglect prayer, hearing the word, etc. and yet they will make
little or no conscience of loving their neighbor, or of showing mercy, as we
see in the Pharisees: 5. Because it is no less necessary for Christians living
together as to their Being and well*being and mutual thriving, that they do
duty one of them to another with respect to the command, then that they all do
their duty to him; how else can folks live well together in a Family or other
Societies, if each therein do not duty to another? the neglect of this makes
them as a house divided against it self, which cannot stand; 6. That the Lord
may have the more clear and convincing ground of challenge against such as
slight these commands, and live in envy, malice, oppression, etc. for none can
say he knew not these to be sins, Mic. 6. 7. The Lord has showed thee, O man,
what is good, that thou do Justice, and love Mercy, etc. and he begins at
the Duties of the second Table, the more to stop their mouths* If they should
say, they knew not that they should be holy, or how to be holy in these* he had
it to say, that he had told them: For these, and such like reasons, the Lord
has been so particular in, and has added his Authority unto, the commands of
the second Table as well as to these of the first, that we may lay the greater
weight on them.

From the Connection of the two Tables, we may observe these three generals,
first, That there is no part of a man's conversation in reference to his walk
with others as well as God, what ever be his Calling or Station, but he ought
to be Religious and holy in it; God has directed men how to carry in all
things. 2. That it is a necessary part of Religion in respect of the command of
God enjoining it, and in order to our thriving in holiness, to be conscientious
in duties to others, as well as in immediate duties to God, who in his Law
requires both. 3. That where kindly and true Obedience is given to the first
Table, Obedience will be given to the second also, where Conscience puts to
pray and keep the Sabbath, it will also put to do duty to our Neighbor; he
purposely puts these together in the Gospel, when the Pharisees would
separate them, and what God has conjoined let no man put asunder.

It may be here inquired: what it is to be religious in these common duties we
owe to others? Answ. Though we cannot instance in any thing, wherein Religion
has not it`s place; yet we shall pitch on a few things, that it more especially
implies: And 1. It is necessary that the matter of the duty be commanded, and
2. That respect be had to the command in the doing of it, a man must not only
provide for his Family, but he must do it religiously, a Master must not use
his Servants, as he pleases, the Servant must not abuse the Masters
simplicity, but obey in fear and trembling, etc. Ephesians. 6. 5. Col. 3. 22. in
which places the Apostle presses Servants to look to these things, while many
of them had Heathen Masters (and what is spoken to them may be applied to all,
in all Callings and Stations, and serve to direct how to be religious in common
duties). And 1. As to the end, it is required, that they serve not men only,
but the Lord, and so eye his glory, the adornning of the Gospel, the
edification of others, there being nothing we do, wherein we ought not to have
an higher end then our selves or men. 2. That they have a religious Motive in
their Service, employed in these words, not with eye Service, as men pleasers,
but as doing Service to the Lord in obedience to him, and not to men; not so
much because their Masters command, as because God commands; not for the
fashion nor merely for profit, but because commanded of God. 3. That for the
manner it be in singleness of heart cheerfully and readily. 4. That respect be
had to the promise as well as to the command, for their through bearing in
their Service, and for their Encouragement in the Faith of their being accepted
through Christ as it is Ephesians. 6. 8. Coll. 3. 24. else it were a sad thing for
a Christian servant to be in hard Service, and have no more to expect but a but
of meat and a penny-hire from men, but Christian servants may eye the heavenly
reward in sweeping the house, as well as in the religious duties of Gods
immediate worship.

For helps to understand the commands of the second Table, we may consider
these four Scriptures, which will hold out so many rules for that end: The 1.
and principal one is Mat. 22. 39. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self,
which shows that there should be a warmness of affection in us to our
neighbor, opposite to hatred (Levit. 19. 17. 18.) revenge, malice, inward
grudging; and no doubt this warmness of love, making a man measure his duty to
others by the love he has to himself, will notably help to understand and
observe all the duties of the second Table. The 2. is Mat. 7. 12. Therefore all
things, whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them,
which is a rule of general equity, and is opposite to partiality and self-love,
which undermineth all the duties of the second Table; and this is of a general
and universal extent, to all persons and things, such as buying and selling, to
duties betwixt man and wife, neighbor and neighbor, Master and Servant, etc.
The 3. is Philip. 2. 4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man
also on the things of others, a notable effect of love, not only to wish well
to our neighbors, but to seek and procure their good, and it is opposite to
selfishness and regardlesness of the good of others, if we be well our selves.
The 4. is Romans 12. 10. Be kindly affectionate one to another with brotherly
love in honor preferring one another, be kindly to, and manifest your esteem
of, your Neighbor, not in a complementing way, but really and heartily, which
by James is called the fulfilling of the Law, and by the Apostle John the old
and new commandment, wherein there is more Religion then many are aware of,
more then in knowledge, speculations and empty notions: but oh! How short are we
in these more common duties, that lie, as it were, among our feet? We come now
to the Fifth command, which is the first of the second Table, and it contains
1. a precept. 2. a Promise, and so it is called by the Apostle Ephesians. 6. 2. the
first Command with promise, which must be upon one of these grounds, either 1*
because it is the first command that has a particular promise, that promise in
the Second command being general and applicable (as it is actually applied
there) to all the commands, or 2. because this is the first command of the
second Table; and often in the new Testament the commands are recknoned and
instanced by that Table, especially when duties betwixt man and man are
pressed: And if it be said, that it is the only command of the second Table,
that has a promise, it is answered, it is the only command that has an
express promise: Beside it is not absurd to read it thus, it is the first
command (i. e.) of the second Table; and to press it the more, the promise
added to it is mentioned; so that to ur^e obedience to it the more strongly, it
is not only the first Command, says the Apostle of the second Table, but it
has a promise also added to it: And this certainly is the Apostles scope to
press its observation.

In the precept we are 1, To consider the Object, Father and Mother: 2. The
Duty, honor. 1. Again, concerning the first, it is to be considered that this
Command in its scope respects the duty that we owe to all Relations, whether
they be above us, inferior to us, or equal with us: This is clear from Christ's
summing all the second Table, and consequently this command with the rest, in
that comprehensive general, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; and
therefore our Neighbor in general must be the object of this Command, as well
as of the rest, and so it takes in all the duties of honor that every one
owes to another, whatever be their place; there is a duty of honor and
respect called for from every one to every one: And so Ephesians. 5. 22. it is
pressed upon Wives toward their Husbands; and 1 Pet. 3. 7. upon Husbands
toward their Wives, which must be comprehended here: Thus Father and Mother
are hear to be largely and synecdochically understood, one sort of Relations
being in a figurative manner put for all the rest. 2. Under them are
comprehended all Superiors for place, in Church or Commonwealth, who in
Scripture get the Title of Fathers, as Magistrates, Supreme and Subltern,
Ministers and all Church Officers, Teachers, Overseers, and all in the place of
Fathers, 1 Cor. 4. 15. yea, they who are to be esteemed, as such for gifts of
Learning, Wisdom, Grace and Piety, Acts 7. 2. or for their worldly means and
outward estate, as Josepb was, Genesis 45, 8. or for their age, and the reverence
due to them on that account, 2 Kings 2. 12. in a word, any sort of emenencie
puts one in that roll of Fathers largely taken, though they be not properly
such. 3. We are called in the first place to look to the duties of this
relation, as it is domestic, such as of a Master over the Servant, of a
Husband over the Wife, etc. and then comes the carriage of one toward another
in general, and though most properly the duties of Parents, mediate or
immediate, over their Children or Nephews, be here pointed at, which is most
literal, yet the former also is included, all particulars of that kind being by
a figure comprehended under one.

If it be asked here, Why the mother is added? Answ. 1. Because although the
mother be not so qualified for the rule and government of the Children* yet she
is no less entitled to their acknowledgment and this parental honor by the
labor, toil, and tenderness of their birth and education, and in this, as well
as in the disposition of the members of the body mentioned 1. Cor. 12. v. 22.
23, and 24. the excellent attemperation of God, wisdom is very conspicuous, by
ballancing the greater authority of the Father with the greater pains and care
of the Mother, that the Childrens duty of love, honor, and gratitude* may
return to both with a suitable equality. 2. She is added to show that it is not
only the most eminent Superior or Neighbor to whom honor is due, but even
these who have more weakness, and especially the Mother: Hence it is that
always almost in the Proverbs, where duty to the Father is pressed, the Mother
is also named with him, to show that Children should not think that less
respect is due to the Mother then to the Father; yea, sometimes the Mother is
prefixed to the Father, as Lev. 19. 3. Ye shall fear every man his Mother and
his Father, which is done to meet with the humor of many who are ready to
lessen their duty to their Mother, and therefore we are called to it even in
her old age, Prove 23* 22. and to guard against despising of her then, which is
too readily and frequently incident. Thus does the Lord provide in his word
against our corruption, which is ready to take advantage of debording and
outbreaking at the weakest part.

If it be further asked, Why all Superiors, yea all Neighbors, are spoken of
as Fathers and Mothers? Answ. These reasons are obvious from the scope: I^ is
1. to show that the duties of this Command are mutual amongst all relations* it
gives Superiors their due, yet so as that it teaches them also how to carry
toward their Inferiors, that is, to be Fathers to them; and that the relation
necessarily implies a mutual tie; therefore this Command does not only direct
inferiors in their duty toward Superiors, but also Superiors in their duty
to their Inferiors. 2. They get this name to make their subjection to each
other, and their mutual relations and duties the more sweet and kindly, when
the subjection is to be given as by a Son to a Father, and when it is exacted
and expected as by a Father from a Son; which consideration should be a kindly
motive to all mutual duties, and also an inducement to hide infirmities; and to
construct tenderly of failings. And thus the denomination of the natural
relation seems to be borrowed, to establish and strengthen the positive
Relation, which of its self is no^ so binding of the Conscience by Nature's
light. So much for the Object of thus Duty.

The Duty it self here called for, is honor, which is also largely to be
understood, both as it takes in the inward esteem of others in our heart, and
also the evidencing of this in outward expresions in our conversation: For by
this Command it appears that there is, 1. Some eminency in every man; 2.
That every one should observe that and honor it in another; What is it then to
honor them? It is not to complement them, and only seemingly to reverence
them, but* it consists especially in these, 1. In observing and acknowledging
what is eminent in any for nature, grace, station, or other* accidental things,
and if there appear no more in a man, yet as he bears any thing of Gods
Image, or is a Christian and Member of Christ's Church, he is thus to be
honored. 2. There ought to be an esteem of him, and we should really have an
honorable account of him, and that in some respect beyond our selves in some
one thing or other. 3. It lies much in love, and kindly or affectionate
reverence, as is hinted Romans 12. 10. 4. It takes in obedience according to our
stations* flowing from a disposition of heart to obey, Heb. 13* 17. 5. It
reaches both to the thought of the heart, and to our secret carriage, there
should not be in our secret chamber any despising or wishing ill to him,
Eccles. 10* 20. 6. It comprehends a holy fear and aw that should be joined
with it, Lev. 19. 3.

Honor being thus fixed in the heart, it is to be expressed, 1. In words, by
respective and reverent speaking and giving answers, or making suits; Sarah
called her Husband Lord, 1. Pet* 3. 6. 2. It is expressed in gestures by bowing
rising up, keeping silence sometimes before others. Job. 29. not answering
again, Tit. 2. 9. saluting, etc. Col. 4. 15. 3. In deeds, by obedience and
testifying respect that way which is generally called gratitude, therefore
obedience to Parents, Ephesians. 6. 1. is drawn from this Command, which presses
obedience upon men according to their relations 4. In our means, communicating
thereof when it is called for; so tribute to whom tribute is due, Romans 13. 7.
and double honor to the Elders that rule well, 1 Timothy 5. 17. acording to the
acceptance of honor used in that precept, Honor the Lord with thy substance,
Prove. 3. 9. 5. In our prayers for them 2 Timothy 2. 1. 6. In covering their
infirmities, Genesis 9. 21. 22.

As the breaches of this Command may be easily gathered hence* as being
opposite to these, so this rule is always to be carried along in practice,
that this honor and obedience must be still in the Lord; that is, there must
be a reserving to the Lord his due, for God is the supreme Father, and all our
respect to under-fathers of the flesh is to be subordinate to the Father of
Spirits, Heb. 12. 9. so as he may have the first place for whose cause we give
reverence to them, and so that word is still true, Acts* 4* 19. It is better to
obey God then man; man is only to be obeyed in the Lord* Ephesians. 6. 1. And thus
refusing to comply with unjust commands, is not disobedience to Parents, but
high obedience to God, the refusal being conveyed respectfully and after the
due manner.

Again the branches of this Command are exceeding large; two things by it are
especially called for, 1. Love, 2 Honor, and whatever is opposite to and
inconsistent with these, is a breach of this Command* wherein we are to
observe, 1. The object of our love and respect, it is all men, 1 Pet. 2. 17.
Honor all men; love the Brotherhood; our Neighbor here in the largest sense
comprehending all men; 2. Consider that the act of love and honor that is
required is most intense. we must love onr Neighbor as our self, and this
reaches far. 3. Consider that it takes in all that is our Neighbors* his
name, fame, credit, and estate, etc. but especially love to his salvation*
because in this mostly does his concernment lie* 4. It takes in all midses or
means that are for his true honoring* ^r the vindicating of of his name when
he is defamed; hence Psalm 15. it is the property of an accurate walker, not to
tak^ up an evil report against his Neighbor, even when it is brought to him
and laid before him. 5. Yet there is a difference to be observed in the putting
forth of our love and testifying of our respect; for we should love him as our
selves, but in giving respect and honor, we are to prefer others to our
selves: to love our Neighbors as our selves, imports the kind and reality of
our love, we are to love him no less truly then our selves (for we also come in
here as the objects of our own love) but we are some way to honor him beyond
our selves.

If it be asked, How can that be? 1. That one should love all men? Should we
love them all alike and equally? And 2. ought we to prefer every man to our
selves?

To the former we say. 1. This Command requires, as to the object, that we
love all men, excluding none from our love good or bad (while they are within
the roll of men, capable to be prayed for) friend or enemy, for we should love
them that hate us, and bless them that curse us. 2. As to the main things
destred, or the subject matter of our wishes for them, our love should be alike
toward all; our love being a willing of good to others, we should desire the
greatest good to all men, that is* peace with God, Christ, Heaven,
Sanctification, Repentance, etc. that lead to it, there is here no inequality,
nor two Heavens, a greater and a lesser to be the subject matter of our wishes
and desires. 3. If we consider our love as to the act of loving in the kind of
it, it is equal, we being called to love sincerely cordialy, and with the whole
heart, perfectly; every man.

If ye ask then, Wherein is there any difference allowed? Answ. If we consider
1. The effects of this Love, they may and ought to be more manifested toward
one then another; we are to pray more for one then another; to communicate and
to distribute more to one then to another, according to the opportunities we
have, and according to the particulare relations and callings that God puts
us in; for beside our general relation to all men, we have particular relations
to some beyond others; hence may a man do more for his Children, and these of
his own house, then for others; so may we pray for some men more and oftener, as
their necessity is concerned, and as they may be more useful. 2. In respect of
frequencie, our Love may and ought to vent it self more frequently toward some
then others, and so it differs from that general Love we owe to all. 3. In
respect of sympathy, we are to be more touched with the hurt and hazard of some
and more sensibly desirous of their good then of that of others, and so our
love ought to affect us more, and stir more sensibly in reference to some then
others, as in the case of a woman toward her Child, and of one dear friend to
another; such was the sympathy between Jonathan and David, who thought they
loved many others, yet was there a more peculiar sympathy betwixt themselves as
to all things that concerned them, good and evil; thus may arise from natural
relalions* particular obligations, mutual familiarity, and others special
grounds. 4 According to the diversity of concurrent circumstances, we may
sometimes wish temporal good to one, and sometimes temporal rods to another;
providing always it be out of a true desire of, and respect to their spiritual
good. 5* In respect of complacencie and delight accompanying the Act of loving
there may be a difference* for there may be much more delight and satisfaction
in loving one then another, as there appears more of holiness in one then
another; so godly men love even natural men if of good parts, civil and
friendly, more then others that are destitute of such qualifications; but it
men be also gracious, they not only love them the more, but also acquiesce the
more and have the greater complacencie in them on that account.

If it be asked from whence these differences, as to the effects of our love do
flow? Answ. They may arise 1. From natural relations; 2. From the difference
that is among men in their carriages, humors, and such like, as they are less
or more engaging; 3. From external circumstances, of acquaintance, familiarity,
or particular engagements; 4. From favors, so men may love their benefactors
more (in the forementioned sense) then others* 5. From civil relations and
intrests; 6 They may arise from a religious and christian interest and
relation, so we are to love the godly, not only more then other men in the
world, but also we are to love them 1. on another account than we love others,
to wit, because they are such, because they are true members of the same body,
are loved of God, and have his Image shining in them* 2. With more delight and
acquieseing complacencie, as David does, Psalm. 16. 3. 3. There should be
another way of venting our love to them then to others, both in spiritual and
temporal things, thus loving the Brotherhood is distinguished, 1 Pet. 2. 17.
from loving or honoring all men* so also the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10, is
especially to be considered in our love.

If it be asked then, How differs love to the godly from common love? Answ.
That there is a difference, is clear from the forcited Scriptures, Psalm. 16. 3.
1 Pet, 2. 17. and from 2 Pet. 1. 7. where brotherly kindness is distinguished
from charity: In a word then, it differs 1. In it is acquiescing complacencie,
though there may be some sort of complacencie comparatively in others, yet
simply and properly it is to be exercised toward the godly. 2. It is on another
account as is said, to wit, as they are loved of God, love to them runs in
another channel, and has another spring and rise, Matthew. 10, ult. 3. It should
be in a more high and intense degree, as to its exercise, because God is more
concerned in them; and though good should be done to all, yet especially to
this household of Faith. And the manifestation of our love even toward the
godly may be less or more, according as less or more of God appears in them,
or in their way.

If it be further asked? How we can love wicked men, and if their being such
should not mar our love to them? Answ. We speak not here of such as are
debarred from the prayers of the people of God, and who are known to have
sinned the sin which is against the Holy Ghost; nor do we speak indefinitely of
final enemies, these (according to all) being excluded from our love: But we
say that other particular wicked men, as to their persons (whatever hatred we
may bear to their evil deeds) are to be loved in the forementioned sense, yet
their wickedness may 1. mar complacencie in them, that they cannot, nor ought
not to be delighted in, nor with pleasure conversed with. 2. It may mar the
effects of love in the evidences and manifestations of them, for that
Christians may, yea, and sometimes should keep up all or most testimonies of it
from some, is clear from the Apostles direction enjoining the noticing of some,
that they may be ashamed, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. 3. It may mar love in ordering its
exercises, yea, and occasion the seemingly contrary effects, as their wishing
for, and doing of some things temporally adverse and cross to them, for their
greater shame and humiliation, as is evident in the Psalmists prayer, Psalm 83.
16. Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name, O Lord: so some
out of love are to be corrected, ye punished temporally, yet with a desire of,
and respect to their eternal wealfare.

If it be yet asked, If, and how, one is to love himself? Answ. Self-love is so
connatural to us, that in effect it is the mediate result of our sense of life,
and consequently the very relish and endearment of all enjoyments, the spring
of self*preservation and the best measure pointed out by our Lord himself, of
the love and duty that we owe to others, which as it is the mean whereby we
taste and see that God is good* and how great his goodness is to us* so it
ought principally to refer it self, and all its pleasing objects, to him as the
fountain of all, who is indeed Love; but yet it is that wherein ordinarily men
do much exceed, as especially these following ways.

1. They exceed in it when themselves are proposed as the end of their own
actions, as it is ^. Tim. 3. 2. when their own things sway more with them, and
are sought more by them then 1. the things of God, to which the first place is
always due; and 2. then public things, and the things of others, even in the
cases wherein these do require the preference.

2. When it is terminated on the wrong object, as when they run out in the
immoderate pursuit of bodily and temporal things, caring more, if not only, for
the body neglecting the better part.

3. When it is laid out for the pleasing of corrupt self and the making of
provision for the Flesh to fulfill its Lusts, Romans 13. 14. Self love under these
considerations is corrupt, and to be guarded against.

Answ. 2. Self love, or love to our self, is allowable when qualified with the
following properties. 1. When it is subservient and subordinate to higher ends,
and can hazard it self, and deny it self for Gods honor, for a public good
yea, and in some cases, out of respect to the good of others also, so a
righteous man should, and when at himself, will do much* though with his own
hazard, for a Christian friend, for the safety or edification of the Godly, or
in defense of the inte*rest of Christ. 2. When it is drawn out after spiritual
things, and it is on these mostly that pains are taken, as how to grow in grace,
to have a good conscience, to have the soul saved, sin mortified, etc. 3. when
outward things are desired for the former ends, as when we pray, Give us this
day our daily bread, that we may promove these ends, being willing to want them
when they may not stand with these ends, and desiring life, means, etc. in so
far only as they may be useful for the attainment of them. As the first
self-love marreth duties to God, and thwarteth with them; so the second
advances them and sweyeth strongly, yet sweetly to them.

Again, This Command is the first in order of the second Table, and is
peculiarly backed with a promise, to show the concernment of the duty called
for, the scope of it being to regulate that respect which each on owes to
another, that they may give each other due honor as the first effect of love*
and the great band of all the other commands and enjoined duties of the second
Table, God being pleased to provide for that respect and honor that is due
from one man to another, as well as for the security of their persons and
estates, yea in some respect he prefers this Command, to wit, that one hurt
not another in their honor and estimation to these other relating to their
persons and estates, and therefore he requires honor in the first place, and
afterward injoyneth the duties of not killing, not stealing, etc.

And although every man does love respect and estimation among others, yet
there is nothing wherein more liberally and even prodigally men incroach upon
one another, then by the neglect and denial of this duty, and by the contrary
sin, though it be most directly op posite to love, and that general equity
commanded whereby we should Do to others as we would have them to do to us,
Therefore we conceive the Lord has preferred this to the other five Commands,
and has so backed it with a promise, and also set it down positively, Honor
thy Father, etc. for this end, that we may know it is not enough not to despise
them, if they be not also positively honored by us, even as it is not enough,
not to profane the Lords day by common and unnecessary works, if we do not
positively sanctify it: And it is not for naught that this duty is so much
pressed, being a main bond of Christian and Civil Fellowship, keeping folks
within the just bounds and limits which God has set unto them.

If it be asked, What this duty of honoring our Neighbor does include? Answ.
It does include these five things* 1. Respect to our Neighbors person; 2. to
his place: 3. to his qualifications, either as he is furnished with natural or
moral abilities, or as he is gracious; 4. to his accidental furniture in
externals, a riches, credit with others etc. so David honored Nabal; 5. in
respect of men's actions as they deserve, or as they have done, or achieved any
thing where by good comes, or may come to the Church or Commonwealth, Honor
includes the giving respect to onr Neighbor in all these.

If it be asked, If and how honor differs from love? Answ. It differs from
love* in that love properly considers men more generally, as they are
capable, of good, which we wish unto them: but this considers them more
particularly, as so and so qualified, and having such and such things in them
deserving respect; for honor being bearing of testimony to something worthy of
respect in such a one, it does first consider what is worthy of honor in the
person, that so it may bear a testimony truly, according as it finds ground.

If it be asked, Whether ontward expressive evidences of honor are always to
be given to the persons honored? Answ. Although indeed in honoring of God
there needs not always an external expressive evidence of it; as for
instance, a man may in the crowd of Company honor God by ejaculatory Prayer
without such external expression, as Nehemiah did in the presence of the King
and Queen, cap. 2. v. 4. yet honor given to others must not only have the
acknowledging of something worthy of estimation within, that it degenerate not
into dissimulation, as the ordinary complementing strain does, but must also
have expressions without, to bear witness unto that which is within, in
gesture, words, or other ways, as men are called to the giving of them.

If it be asked, What honor does import, and what may be comprehended under
it? Answ. Under honor are comprehended, 1, Charitable constructions of men's
actions, whereby what is doubtful is exponed to the best: It will not, nor
ought not, I grant, determine a man to esteem every man gracious whom he knows
not to be profane, nor every thing to be truth spoken by him which he knows
not to be false: But 1. it will keep a man from running into the extreme of
contrary judging of him as wicked, false, carnal, natural, graceless (a
lamentable ill amongst even good people, too ready often to give such
designations and epithes to their Neighbors, whether inferior or superior to
them, on very little ground, and sometimes to persons who, without breach of
charity, may be supposed for true Religion, not to be much, if any thing at
all, short of themselves) or such an one as some may call him, even though he
know nothing of his goodness, yet because he knows not his evil, he
forbeareth to conclude so harshly of him. 2. It will make him live with him as
(to him at least) negatively gracious, and accept of what he says for truth*
not knowing any thing to the contrary, in so far as Christian prudence will
permit him; and thus far a charitable construction will lead us in reference to
our Neighbor, for we are not bound positively without ground to determine a
thing to be right or wrong, or a man gracious or wicked when we have not
certain knowledge, and so may be deceived; but we ought to walk with men whose
bypocrisie and dishonesty we know not, as with good and honest men, yea, even
where some slips or escapes are to be found. 2. Honor comprehends and takes
in humility so far as it respects and relates to a humble carriage amongst
men, which is a grace moderating a man so, that he prefers not himself
inordinately to others, either in respect of place or parts, or other such like
grounds* which Christ commends in the Gospel; and enjoyneth that men should
not love the uppermost rooms, or first salutations, but seek to prefer others,
and be to their own honor as weaned children* or new born babes, Matt. 18. 3.
readier to serve and give honor to others, then desirous of service and honor
from them, and this not in complement, but in reality. 3. It takes in esteem
of others, and vindicating of their name and ^ame, that they may be accounted
of, and be in good repute with others* endeavoring their vindication then most
when they are wronged* seeing a good name is so essential a part of honor,
Eccles 7. 1. 4. It takes in praise which is the commendation of a fact praise
worthy, or of such and such laudable things, bestowed on the person by God. 5.
Gratulation and rejoicing at another good, as if it were our own, 6. I^ takes
in mercy and communication by way of charity to others.

Now all these effects of honor are to be drawn forth according to the
stations we are in, and the relations we sustain, and as we stand in reference
to others according to their stations and relations, of husband, wife, servant,
master, son, father, friend, etc. And no doubt more even of this owtward
respect would contribute not alttle to our hearty and comfortable living
together.

These being some of the commanded duties the contrary vices are prohibited* as
1. Rash judging, taking up a prejudice upon unsure grounds that will not bear
such a thing* and this may be either a weakness proceeding from ignorance; or a
prejudice flowing from malice at the man's person, which is more readily
inclined to construe so and so of such a man and his Actions then of another:
The first may be removed, and the person faulty in it will be desirous to have
it removed, and will esteem more of the person mistaken, when it is removed, as
Eli did for Hannah 17. 1 Samuel 1. 17. The second is hardly removed and admits
not of the mean which may remove it, leaving no room for information, Apology,
Vindication, etc. 2. Pride and Presumption are condemned here, Pride whereby
one with Diotrephes affects the preheminency, a higher office or precedence
in the same office, the first salutation, the highest room at Table, etc.
Presumption, whereby a man is ready to undertake something above his ability,
as if he were more fit and able for it then indeed he is; even as on the
contrary Pusillanimity is a scarring to reach to, and adventure upon, what a
man is able for, and called to. 3. Vanity or vain Glory, much blazing abroad
our own good actions, or delighting to have them known to others, that they may
blaze them. 4 Ostentation making show of what good is in us, and following what
is good for that end, and in such a way as it may be taken notice of by men, as
the Pharisees, who only sought their own glory in their prayers and alms. 5.
Envy, which is a grief and sadness for the honor of another, that such a good
Turn should fall in his hand, or that he should be honored, followed or
respected, as if his being honored and preferred did detract from their own
credit and honor; it differs from fear, which is a sadness that an Enemy is
preferred, because they may suffer and be in hazard from him; this Envy flows
principally from pride, whereby folks would monopolize all honor, and what is
honorable unto themselves, and are grieved when it is not so, a manifest fruit
of the flesh, Gal. 5. 21. and a prime and most destructive enemy to Graces, and
yet very rife in this hypocritical age, and much incident to religious folks,
especially to Ministers and persons of gifts; an ambitious humor, coveting to
excel and darken all that are about them, when as it were much more Christian
and congruous for a man to whom God may have given more then he has done to
others, self denyedly to vail, and studiously to obscure himself in some Cases,
least he sadden or Eclipse others or draw more Observation to himself. 6.
Emulation, which is a seeking to go beyond another in esteem, not from any love
of virtue, but only out of an envious desire of having the prehemience of such
a person, of out stripping him, and of bearing him down in his reputation; it
follows on the former. 7. Detraction, a vice whereby men understand whisper
what may be to the dishonor of another, even though it be a truth, using
insinuations, and such a manner of seeming respect to the detracted, as may
make the blot and infamy to stick as when many commendations are given a man,
not out of any respect to him, but to make some reproach cast upon him go down
the better, and be the more easily believed, as coming from such a one who
respects and loves the man; as, he is discreet, of great parts, etc. but by
which but all is overturned. 8, Contention and Strief are also opposite to this
command, and any thing whereby, directly or indirectly, mediately or
immediately, the fame of our Brother, and his estimation is reflected upon,
which are of a large extent. 9. Mocking, disdaining, taunting, and such like
are plainly against this command and forbidden in it.

There are some Questions that do arise from what is said:

1. Quest If all men should be honored? Yea, if even wicked men also?

Answ. 1. Wicked men known to be such cannot be honored, as if they were
gracious; neither can any place or dignity, merely as such, have what is due
and proper to grace attributed to it without guilt, the doing whereof we
conceive is that sin reproved by James chap. 2. 1. to wit, the accounting of
rich men, that were wicked to be more religious then others not so rich, and
possibly there may be much guilt of this sin in Titles and Dedications of
Books* where the most religious pious, etc. are often unwarrantably put among
the Styles.

2. Yet there is a civil honor, which they may get, and we are called to give
them upon several accounts as 1. on the account of their place, if Magistrates,
honor to whom honor is due, is in that respect enjoined, Romans 13. 7. 2. Of
their relation, if they be Fathers, Mothers, etc. as it is 1 Timothy 6. 2. 1 Pet.
2. 3 3. Of their other Qualifications and parts, or on other accounts, yea even
on this general account, that they are men having immortal fouls, capable of
grace, and of being restored to Gods Image, our evidencing of honor to them is
called for,

2. Quest. If rich men should be honored? Answ. Riches of themselves, and for
themselves, are not honorable, neither can they make the Possessor such: But
Riches may make one capable of doing more good, and of being more useful in
Church and Commonwealth, and consequently of being deservedly honored; and no
doubt a rich man is to be respected, as a steward entrusted with some thing to
be employed for the honor of God, and for the good of others* and riches, when
well improved to these ends, they become useful* and therefore in that Case the
Professors of them are to be honored; but when abused, the person is more
vile, so David, at first, honored Nabal as a Father, and called himself his
Son, but after that his churlishness appeared and discovered it self so grossly,
there was on such honor due to him, nor given him.

As to what the Apostle James discourses chap. 2. 1. 2. certainly he does not
there simply condemn all reverencing of rich men, but the doing of it, 1. On a
religious account, and in religious things, 2. When there was only care taken
for accommodating them in Assemblies, and no care all for accommodating poor
ones, as if because they were not rich they had been without all interest in
the Gospel; the honoring of the one and that joynetly with the contempt of the
other made the fruit. 3. It was condemned by him, because done for an evil end*
viz. for slattering of rich men, these reprove by bhim for doing it, not being
single, but selfish in what they did, seeking only their own advantage. 4 The
preferring of rich men as* and because, they are such, as more religious then
poor ones, who it may be have much more religion then they, is the acceptance
of persons condemned here by the Apostle James, to wit, when a rich man is
preferred as more godly, and only because more rich; before a poor man alike
godly or more godly then he.

Quest. 3. Wherein consists the difference that is betwixt the respect, which
is to be given to a good man, and that which is to be given to another, when
both are alike in outward things.

Answ. 1. It may be that in outward signs and evidences of respect there be no
difference, the one may get as low courtesy as the other. But 2. There is a
heart Testimony and respect such as Paul had in the consciences generally of
all, but especially of his gracious ^earers, that is, an Approbation that he is
worthy of honor, not only for the outward capacity he is in to do good, but
for actual improving of it to that end, which is a far other thing then outward
Civility.

2. In this there is a difference betwixt the respect given to the one, and
that which is given to the other; in that something of gracious conformity to
the Image of God, beside other common commendable Qualifications, being
discovered in the good man, he is (at least ought to be) with more complacency
delighted in, then the natural man, though as to outward things in the same
Station with him.

3. Honor flows more natively to the Godly, the object drawing it unto it in
a native way.

If it be asked, whither or not a man may seek his own honor and fame, and
how? Answ. A man ought not to seek it, as men of the world do, to satisfy the
lust of the pride of life: nor inordinately beyond his line, nor even in
externals-no^ ever as his last end, and as the chief thing; for honor being the
Testimony of excellency, and a good name, a Testimony of that virtue which is
in a man, he is first to study virtue as the solid good, whereof the other is
but the luster, virtue being indeed the main thing to be sought after, whether
a good name (as to men) be separate from it or not. 2. Yet may it be sought as
a thing that is desirable and good (it being sought in a right manner and by
way of concomitance) a good name being above great riches, Prove. 22. 1. 3. It
is ever to be sought in the way of virtue and welldoing; flattery and crooked
dealing being never warrantable, and in the following of Good, men are to walk
through ill report as well as good report. 4. It is to be sought in things
relating to Godliness, not in riches, or honor, or eloquence, or great
learning, but honesty, faithfulness, holiness; thus Paul disclaimeth, seeking
the applause of being a learned, or eloquent or wise man, he disdained these;
seeking it only in the faithful, single and zealous discharge of his Ministry
among the Corinthians: 5. This Testimony or Respect is to be sought after even
with a piece of holy ambition in the Consciences of others, but not so much in
the outward evidences and testifications of it: To be commended and approved in
the consciences of these we live among is desirable, and that which also Paul,
himself aimed at. 6. This respect would be a step for an higher end, that so
all our respect may be improved and made use of for the honor of God.

5 Quest. If it be asked how, and in what manner, are we to pursue or seek our
own honor? Answ. See what the Scripture says, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Them that honor
me I will honor: And first the honoring of God is praiseworthy and
honorable in it self; Gold has not more its luster, a Rubie or Diamond its
beauty, nor the sun its light and glory, then godliness and virtue, whereby God
is honored, are radiant to their own praise. 2. If after by reason of human
infirmity, and other disadvantages, this radiancy be obscured, or through men's
ignorance, folly or malignity, this worthiness not observed or not esteemed,
the Lord undertakes for the former, and vindicates from the latter, telling us
plainly, them that honor me, I will honor, and hence it is, that we so often
find in Scripture, honor attributed to those things that are so low and mean
in the eyes of men, as 1. To taking with Instruction, Prove. 3. 16. 2. To
yielding to Correction, even when unjust, 1 Pet. 2. 20. 3. To Submission to
parents, as in this command. 4. To humility and to passing of wrongs, and
ceasing from strife, Prove. 20, 3. In a word therefore the high-path way to
honor, is by humility, the fear of the Lord, obedience, submission and
selfdenyedness: Whereby the Lord, as it were, to make honor the more honorable
will have it rather to be his pure gift, then either our study or purchase*

Quest. 6. If it be asked, how one can fulfill that part of the command,
enjoining us to prefer another to our selves? Answ. 1. This is not to be
universally and simply: understood, as if we were called in every thing to do
so, and to every person, for we may know that some are more ignorant and more
profane than we are in many practices, guilty of things we may be free of, and
so we are not obliged to judge contrary to truth: Yet 2. in some one respect or
other we may prefer them, as 1. In that they may have something beyond us, they
are possibly more humble, more single, zealous, diligent, etc. though inferior
to us in other things. 2. They may have much good we know not. 3. We certainly
know, or at least may know, more evil in our selves than in them, and therefore
are to prefere them to our selves. 4. We know more aggravations of our own
evils then of theirs; and therefore simply we may without hypocrisy prefer men
generally to our selves, though we in particulars could not do so, nor give
unto every one in every thing the precedence.

We come now to speak a little of the promise, which is added to stir up to the
more serious Observation of this command, and as for the nature of it, it is a
temporal one, peculiarly applied to Israel here, yet generally agreeing to all
and so applied as to the substance of it by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6 2. 3. where
he puts earth for land, whereby he insinuates that it is to be understood
of any land wherein God shall please to cast a man's Lot to reside or inhabit as
well as of Jude^, so then.

If it be asked, whether or not this promise is to be simply understood; and
the accomplishment of it without any restriction expected or looked for? Answ.
Although this promise seems to have a peculiar respect unto that Dispensation,
wherein not only the Saints everlasting rest was prefigured by that temporal
rest in the land of Canaan, but also the more obscure manifestations of the
life and immortality brought to light by the Gospel, supplied as it were by
more full and assuring promises of earthly blessings* yet seeing the Apostle,
as we have touched, does in the pressing of this command also accommodate to us
it is promise, we think it holds out that such, who through Grace are enabled to
give obedience to the command, may by virtue of the promise annexed, expect
from God even outward things, in so far as the having of them, shall be for
their good and spiritual advantage. And 2. They may with confidence promise
themselves, that whatever they have in the world, or* how many or few days*
soever they may have in it, yet all shall be with Gods blessing and peace: And
3. That their death shall never be untimely: And 4. What seeming defect soever
may be in the performance as to length of days* here shall be abundantly made up
by eternity hereafter in Heaven; what then will or can be the prejudice of few
days on Earth?

From the annexing of this promise to the command, these two things clearly
follow* 1. That there are temporal promises made to Godliness. 2. That a Godly
man has that right which none other has to inherit the earth.

If it be asked here, whether or not a wicked man has a right to any thing in
the world? Answ. 1. There is a threefold right* the first is, a creature-right,
whereby any of Gods creatures have a right to any thing in his creation that is
useful for them, when it is simply necessary, and not occupied by another under
the like need; and after the similitude of this right, Crows, and so other
living creatures* may take their meat one the field of any man* thus a man
starving, may for himself, or his brother (if in the like condition) when the
proper owner of any Corn cannot be gotten, put to his hand and tak of them for
preventing of death by hunger and so likewayes it may be in other things all
things being made for the use of man at the first, and committed to him; and
the orderly dividing of men's lots and portions, having been but the better to
further that end, and not to mar it, is not to take place when it thwarteth
with it; thus the Disciples did pluck and eat the ears of Corn when they were
an hungered, though the corn was not their own: God also, who has the absolute
dominion, has so given to man a property, that he has reserved a right to
himself to make use of it (when need requires) for the good of other
creatures* thus he provideth for Crows Ravens, etc. out of one man's stock or
other. 2. There is a positive or Civil right amongst men, so that one man has
right to such a piece of Land, another not; both these rights a wicked man may
have, and both Land and such right to it good men may often want in particular
cases* So that if there were a civil contest betwixt a good man and a wicked
for some Land or other such thing, the qualifications of the persons would
neither make the right of the one better, or more valid, nor of the, other,
worse or less valid, as we may see Lev. 19. 15. 3. There is a right by grace
which sanctifies the former rights, and puts a man in case not only
warrantably before men, but also before God, to make use of the creatures, so
that he may see and visit his Tabernacle, and take the moderate use of any
lawful refreshment, and not sin, Job 5. 24. The man has not only his daily
bread, but has it by Gods promise, and upon this ground we pray, Give us this
day our daily bread; this right his peculiar to a Believer and godly man, which
none other, possess what they will, can lay claim unto, for godliness and no
other thing, Has the promise both of this life and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4 8. therefore we may upon good ground say, that Godliness is great gain.

If it be yet further asked, But what advantage have godly men by these
temporal promises? Answ. This is not their advantage to be always abounding in
these owtward things; that is neither so de facto and eventually, nor were it
meet it should be so; but 1. they have a promise of what is needful and useful,
simply even of temporal things which no wicked man has, they shall, Psalm. 84.
want no good thing, yea, though lions suffer hunger, Psalm. 34* 10. yet they
that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. 2 They may pray for these
things so far as they are needful, and may confidently expect them and go to
God for them by virtue of that right* ere they get them so, Matthew 6. 11. It is
our daily bread by allowance and promised before we get it. 3 If a natural man
abound, he cannot promise himself the continuance of meat till the end of his
life; no, not so much as his dinner to morrow, nor life till then* but if a
Believer live, he may expect the continuance of as much food as shall be
necessary for him; if he have nothing, he may confidently promise himself both
life and food to morrow, if either or both of them be needful more nor a wicked
man that has more wealth, health, and outward protection can do. 4 He may
promise himself the blessing and the sanctified use of what he enjoys, which
another cannot. 5. He may have peace, whether he have or want, in the enjoyment
of creaturs, or in their scarcity because he has a right to them, for it is
not from want of right to creature comforts that scarcity of them comes, but
God, like a wise and skilful Physician keeps back meat for health where there
is abundance in the right, and to be given also when needful; so that comparing
him with a wicked man, whether he have or want, whether he enjoy more
plentifully, or be in scarcity, he has still the better of him by fare; which
should make us all love godliness the more, which has so great an advantage as
this attending it.

Thus much in short of the promise annexed to this Command. To descend to speak
particularly of all the several relations comprehended under it, as of
Magistrates and Subjects: Church Officers, Pastors, Guids and Rulers, and
ordinary Church members; Husbands and Wives; Parents and Children; Masters and
Servants, etc. and of their respective duties, would be a large task, and draw
us forth a great length beyond our design in this undertaking; and somewhat to
this purpose being already spoken from the third and fourth Chapters of the
Epistle to the Colossians which the blessed Author was then in his Sabbath
afternoon-Sermons opening up to the same Congregation that heard him lecture on
the Commands) and all of them being, too many at least, more known, then alas
they are practiced (thought indeed we know no more in Gods account then we
singly desire, design, and endeavor through grace to practice, and they all,
and they only having a good understanding that keep his Commandments, John 13.
17. Psalm. 111. 10.) and since withal, if the generals we have hinted at in the
exposition of this Command be well understood, seriously pondered, and
consciensciously in the Lords strength, practically improved; they will not a
little, through his blessing, contribute for helping us, sutably to acquit our
selves in the discharge of all the particular duties of these several
relations; we shall now forbear to be particular; and shall only say in the
general of these station and relation duties, that as, if a serious Christ an
and truly goodly man be sought after, he is in a special manner to be found in
them, so, when sanctifiedly, sutably and seasonably performed, they in a
special manner ado^n the Doctrine of God, and keep it from being blasphemed,
and bear a very real and evident testimony to the truth and reality of Religion
in the Professors of it, and withal are a notable mean of convincing men, and
even of winning and gaining them who obey not the Word, as man be clearly
gathered from Luke 3. 10* 11. 12. 13. 14. Tit. 2. ^. 5. and 10. 1 Timothy 5. v.
14. and 6. v. 1. 1. Pet. 2. v. 13. 14. 15. and 3. v. 1. 2. compared together.

Before we proceed further amongst many Questions that might arise here, one
word to these two.

1. Whether ought a Father to love his Son, or a Son to love his Father most?
Answ. The Son ought to love his Father most, as representing most of God; and
the Father ought to love his Son most, as comprehending most of himself; such
mutual respects may exceed one another on different accounts.

2. Quest. Whether is the Father or Magist are most to be obeyed, if they
command contrarily? Answ. If that which is commanded be a thing belonging to
the Magistrates place to command in, as where such a one should live, what
charge or office he should bear in the Commonwealth, and such like; caeteris
paribus, the Magistrate is to be obeved, for these things are sought by the
Magistrate from him not as a Son, but as a member of the Commonwealth, whose
good principally should be eyed, and had respect to: but if it be a thing that
belongs to the Father, and not to the Magistrate to command in, as what
Husband or Wife a Child should marry, and such like, that belongs to the
Father as a Father, and so is to be obeyed, notwithstanding of the contrary
command of the other.

The scope of this Command being to moderate men in their excessive desires
after honor, and to direct and regulate them in giving respect to others; and
in seeking of it to themselves, and to inform us, that by no means we should
wrong the estimat on of others more then their persons and estates; ere we lay
aside speaking of it, it will be meet to speak a little of humility, and the
contraries and opposits thereof.

That humility relates to this Command, and is comprehended under it,
appears from Romans 12. 10. Phil. 2. 3. And is a grace so necessary and useful
to Christians, that it ought especially to be headed and taken notice of. It
may be considered in a threefold respect, 1. In respect of God, this humility
ought to be in reasonable creatures to God as their Creator, they being
nothing, and less then nothing before him, and useful or gainful for nothing to
him. 2. It may be considered as it respects others, and that not in a
complementing manner, but as it comprehends our humbling of our selves in our
carriage toward them, and from the sense of our shortcomming of them, and
being inferior to them in some things wherein we prefer them to our selves,
Phil. 2. 3. 3. It may be considered not only as it moderateth us in our common
carriage toward God, or toward our Neighbor, but also as it concerns our
selves, for by it we are kept within bonds, as to our thoughts of our selves,
and what is ours, or in us, upon the discovery of many infirmities we are
encompassed with, see Romans 12. 3.

Humility considered the first way, is not properly contained under this
Command, but comes in under the first Command of the first Table, but humility
in the two last respects, as it moderateth our thoughts and esteem of our
selves, and f^ameth our actions sutably, and according to ^ight reason in
reference to others or our selves, comes in here, and is enjoined in this
command; and concerning it these following things are to be observed.

1. Thus Humility of one man toward another differs from Humility toward
God, because of the great disp^oportion that is between God and Creatures,
infinitely more then any that is amongst Creatures themselves, there is in
nothing comparison to be made with God, neither is there any possibility of
profiting him, Job 25. 7. but there may be comparing and usefulness too,
amongst Creatures which this humility takes not away, see Job 29. throughout
the Chapter.

2. This Humility is not opposite to magnanimity, boldness and zeal, but is
well consistent with these, as is clear in Christ, the Apostles and others of
the Saints; for boldness and magnanimity is an adventuring in Christ's strength
upon what one is called to according to warrantable grounds; and humility,
although it leads us to entertain due thoughts of our own infirmities, yet it
moderateth us in that also according to right reason, so that the exercise of
both being to be ordered according to this rule of reason, as the call,
occasion, object, and particular circumstances shall require; It is evident
that there is no inconsistencie betwixt the two, but that they may very well be
in one and the same person and at one and the same time.

3. From this we may see, That Humility differs from, as is somewhat else
then fainting and despondencie of spirit or pensive pusillanimity, in not
daring to fo^low a call in reference to some seemingly difficult action; now
humility being the virtue acting according to reason, this is the excess
without and against reason; and therefore as humility and zeal are commended,
so this want of valiantness for truth, when called for, or baseness of spirit,
is complained of as a sin, Jer. 9. 3. and Moses, Exodus 4. 10, 14, and Jeremiah
chap. 1. 6. are reproved for some degree of it: for in every difficult good
which men would aim at (and the most desirable good things amongst men are
often most difficult) there are two things considerable, 1. There is a bon^m,
or a good thing which is desirable; as for example, to do some exploit, to
undergo some change, etc. now men being bent to be ambitious, covetons, rash,
etc. to attain such a good, humility moderating their desires and designs
according to their capacity and abilities, and bridling that excess upon the
one hand, is of great advantage. There is again in the second place, in
attaining such things, a difficulty, by which we are in hazard to be scared
from, and fainted in following of duty, and zeal and magnanimity guard against
this, sustaining the man, and keeping him from falling into discouragement, or
pusillanimous pensiveness, which is the defect upon the other hand.

4. This humility, as a grace, differs from civility and outward yielding to
another, because. 1. It proceeds from a principle of conscience, and upon a
conscientious account, viz. the inward sense and feeling of the defect of grace
in our selves, and the impression of our Neighbors worth. 2. It is single,
without any approved design of pleasing men, or any other consideration, but
purely upon the forementioned account.

This is the grace of humility, with which the best Moralists among the
Heathen, were nothing acquainted; they had indeed their moral virtues, as
remaining sparks of natures light, and dark resemblances of some Gospel graces,
which nevetheless, wanting the principle of Faith, without which it is
impossible to please God, and not being directed to the right end, the glory of
God, could not be acceptable to him. But besides this imperfection and
defectiveness in their wisdom and way, the Gospel having a far more high and
noble design, then they could propose, has also graces, that are wholly
peculiar to it: The work and end of moral Philosophy, could be no other, then
to moderate passions, and regulate manners, in such a conformity to reason, as
might give unto a man, void of all sense of his distance and alienation from
God, an in ward lying tranquillity, and outward transient peace, whereas, the
project and scope of the Gospel, is quite another thing, vez to reconcile, and
savel ost sinners, through faith in Christ, and in him, to make them partakers
of holiness here, and glory and happiness hereafter: Hence it is, that as the
Gospel does, by renewing and sanctifying, wholly change the old appearances of
virtues into solid graces, flowing from Christ the fountain, and referred to
God as their true end; so does it also require and bestow its proper graces,
such as Repentance. Faith, Humility, and many other, unto which these Moralists
were altogether strangers And as to this humility, it is certain, that the
Gospel, by discovering unto us, the lost and wretched condition, whereinto sin
had ruined us, and the free and wonderful love, whereby we are delivered out of
it, does agreeably to this command, teach us a lowliness and self-denial, so
unlike to any thing in the doctrine of these old Moralists, that it is not more
proper to the spirit of the Gospel, then it is contrary pride, may be called
their Characteristick, in as much as it is evident, that these self improvers
of self, became also self*magnifiers, to that pitch of arrogancy, that
Lucretius and Seneca, in the name of their most famous Sects, endeavored by
argument to extol their virtuous man, even above their Gods; and the best of
them would have accounted Christian humility an unworthy and base abjection of
spirit; but neither are these the only men tainted with this evil; the sin of
pride is so plainly the ruin of all that are without God, and the neck*break of
all that seek after righteousness, otherwise then by Faith, that we may well
affirm. Humility to be Faiths inseparable companion; Nowonder then that there
is no grace more commended to Christians, and more necessary; which might
appear by considering, 1. The commands whereby it is pressed in Scripture; 2.
The weightiness of the expressions in which it is holden forth, 1. Pet. 5. 6.
Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time. Romans 12. 3. For I say^, through the grace given unto me, to
every man that is among you not to think of himself more highly then he ought
to think, but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of faith. Philip. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through strife or vain
glory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better then themselves.
James 4. 6 10. But he gives more grace: wherefore he says, God resists the
proud; but gives grace unto the humble. Humble your selves in the sight of the
Lord, and he shall lift you up, 3. The many commendations of it, it makes us, 1
like Christ, Matthew. 11. 29. John 13. from v. 4. to 18. and is particularly
taught by him; 2. It is an ornament which we ought to be clothed with, 1. Pet.
5. 5. 3. It fitteth for suitable discharge of duties, Micah 6. 8 4. It procures
the increase of Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 5. 5. It is more then to command a City, for
it makes a man master of himself, Prove. 16. 17. 18. 19. 6. It has many
promises of exal^ation throughout the Scripture, and of riches, honor, and
long life, Prove. 22 4 Psalm. 112. 3. Lastly, it preventeth many evils and vices
that are incident even to Christians, and leads to the contrary virtues. 1
Humility moderateth a man's design, in pressing for honor, so it preventeth
Ambition; 2. His pursuing inordinately after riches, and so it suppresseth
Covetousness: 3. Inordinate seeking after knowledge, and so it guardeth against
Curiosity: 4. It moderateth in reference to a man's esteem of himself, and so it
shoots ou^ Self-confidence.

And then if ye consider it with reference to a man of eminent parts or station
it preventeth, 1. Disdain in him of others inferior to him; 2. It preventeth
despising of others counsel, and his trusting to his own understanding; 3. It
preventeth leaning to estate and riches, and so he prefers not himself, as
being the better, because of these.

And in the last place, there is a pride whereby men having done any remarkable
thing, are inclined either to seek applause, esteeming highly of what they have
done, and seeking out their own glory, which Solomon faith is no glory, but is
rather as, if a man should eat too much honey, and so turns rather to their
shame; or to receive it inordinately, which Paul would have done, had he
suffered them of Lystra, Acts 14 to have sacrificed to him, which pride, with
all its vi^ious attendants, this humility preventeth and suppresseth. For 1. it
minds not high things, Romans 12. 3. Neither 2. vaunteth it self when it
passes by wrongs, and forgiveth them, or when it does and suffers any other
thing commendable, it thinks not of it self above what is meet, but soberly,
Romans 12. 3. 3. After acts of charity, the right hand knows not, as it were,
what the left hand has given, it forgets good works, as to any self esteem
of them (which pride remembers and keeps as it were a register of) but
ascribes all to Grace, Not I, but grace in me, says the humble man with Paul,
2 Cor, 3. 5. and 1 Cor. 15. 10.

In a word, this humility is extensive to every thing in a man's deportement as
a man, and to all duties which concern him as a Christian, whether in reference
to the worship of God, or the doing duty to men, even as on the contrary,
pride, self-conceit, and presumption are very extensive, and immix themselves
in all that a man does, and are as the dead flies that make all to stink.

And as it is commendable, likewise it is very necessary as to many things* as
1. In external things, that relate to our conversing with others, it is
necessary as to a man's credit and just reputation; the proud man is often in
Gods righteous Judgment despised; Then it is necessary for things relating to
our selves, as for our entertaining peace with God, for keeping us within
bonds, for guarding against snairs, for keeping up communion with God, and for
fitting to the suitable discharge of all duties called for; It would make us
preach, and you hear more profitably; it would settle and establish against the
reelings that are in this time, that put many into a distemper, and a sort of
spititual distraction and madness, it is the humble that God gives grace to,
to whom he reveals his secret, who have largest promises and commendations,
etc. Let us therefore learn to be humble and sober, without affecting to be
wise above what is meet, this grace of humility in the lively exercise of it,
is in a special manner called for by the Lord at this time, of the reeling and
falling of many, the want whereof uses to precede and predispose for a fall.

To close this we shall only add, That wherever there may be a pride, there is
also an humility opposite to it. Man may be proud in respect of outward things,
as of estate, riches, descent, employment, etc. And also in respect of things
of the mind, yea even of spiritual things: As, 1. of parts and gifts, as
knowledge, quickness of wit, fruitfulness of invention, etc. 2. Of Graces and
holiness. 3. Of experience, eminent manifestations, spiritual exercises, etc.
wherewith God may make some to shine very far above and beyond others. 3. A man
may be proud of some good deeds done by him, wherein possibly* God has made
him somewhat more then ordinarily instrumental. 4. There is a proud curiosity
leading to seek after the knowledge of secret things, or of things too high for
us, or of things revealed and competent for us to know in another way then God
has allowed, or leading men to adventure and step further then they are
called, which is condemned by the Lord, Exodus 19. 21. where he forbids the
people to break through and gaze: Now there is to pride, in all these respects,
an opposite humility, which makes a man walk softly, and esteem soberly of
himself, notwithstanding of any difference God has made betwixt him and others
in what thing soever, and to wait till his mind and will be made known in his
own way, and by instruments made choice of by himself, and puteth on to serious
endeavors of practicing it when known; which pride does not. Thus we see both
how extensive and how necessary to Christians* in whatsoever stat on they are,
this excellent grace of humility is, which is a special ornament of Christians,
and a notable piece of beautiful conformity to meek and lowly Jesus.

The Sixth Commandment.
Exodus 20. verse. 13. Thou shall not Kill.
IN the fifth Command the Lord generally prescribed humility, and that respect
which is to be shown by every one to another in their several stations and
relations; he proceeds now more particularly to give directions in these
things that are most dear and necessary to men, first in the matter of life*
command sixth: 2. In the matter of chastity* and temp^^^nce, Com. 7. 3. In what
concerns their Estate, Com. 8. 4. In what concerns truth, and more
especially our neighbors name. Com. 9. Lastly, in what concerns the inward
frame of our hearts toward our own estate, and the estate of others. Com. 10.

For understanding this Command, Thou shall not kill; we may consider 1. It Is
Object: 2, It Is act, to kill? 3. It Is subject (to speak so) Thou.

As for the first, this Command cannot be considered, as relating to Beasts; as
if they were not to be killed, because God gave man all the Beasts for his use
to feed on them, Genesis 9. 3. and we are to eat of whatever is sold in the
shambles, by his allowance, who^e is the earth and the ^u^ness thereof, 1 Cor.
10. 25. Beside man in all these Commands is properly directed in reference to
his Neighbor, and not to beasts: Yet I grant by striking a beast a man may
offend, as 1. when that stroke wrongeth his Neighbor; to whom that beast
belongs. 2. when in our striking there is 1. unreasonableness, as i^ we would
require that capacity in a beast, that is in reasonable creatures, and so are
ready to offend when they answer not our expectation. 2. when there is a
breaking out into anger and passion at brutes, as when a horse rydeth not well,
a Dog runs not well, a hawk flies not well, etc. which speaks an
impotency in us, who are so easily mastered by irrational passions, which will
sometimes also seize upon us even in reference to senseless and lifeless
Creatures, when they do not accommodate us to our minds. 3. when there is
bitterness and cruelty in striking Something of this the Lord reproves by
making Balaams Ass speak and rebuke the madness of that Prophet who
unreasonably smo^e the Ass, and wish*d he had had a Sword to kill her Numb. 22.
29. whereas a just man pitieth his beast, and regards the life thereof, Prove.
12. 10

But for the better Understanding of the Object of the Command, we shall
proceed to speak to it, and the act of killing (which is the second thing)
complexedly, and if we consider killing in reference to a man's self, it is
certainly understood here; for that being the sum of all the commands of the
second Table, thou shall love thy Neighbor* as thy self, it must be*
understood as repeated in each of them; as here, thou shall not kill thy
Neighbor more than thy self, or shall preserve him as thy self, which
supposes that it is not free for a man to wrong himself more than to wrong
others; and generally these reasons whereby the Lord restrains us from
killing others, will also hold in restraining us from killing and other ways
wronging our selves; therefore there is no question, if it be a sin to wrong,
hurt or torture others, whether in body or in their soul, as to the
tranquillity and quiet frame thereof, and any ways to procure or further their
death, it will be no less so to do thus to our selves; because love to our
selves is the pattern that we ought to walk by in lovi ng others.

We may be guilty of the breach of this Command in reference to our selves by
omissions as well as by commission as when things needful for entertainment and
health of the body are, either designedly, or with an excessive misregard to
health and life, omitted*

We may further fall into the breach of this Command in reference to our
selves, either directly, as purposing and intending hurt to our own body, or
indirectly, by casting our selves in unnecessary seen dangers, by wilful or
careless using of known unwholesome food, by excesive and immoderate toil, by
spending and wasting the body with unchastness, by drunkenness and gluttony
(whereby many more are destroyed then with the Sword, according to the common
saying* plures*gula quam glaaio pereunt) and many other ways.

If we consider this command with respect to others, we may conceive it in
reference to a threefold life, which we should endeavor to preserve and
promote in them, in any one of which a commission or omission will make a
breach thereof.

1. There is a life of the body; and whatever comes from us that wrongeth
that, either directly, as strokes, challenges or appeals, etc. or indirectly,
if it were but by keeping back something that is in our power to give which
might be useful to our neighbor in his need, that no doubt makes guilty of
this sin of killing in respect of this bodily life. I have mentioned appeals to
Duels under the former branch, because albeit that in the matter of private
duels the pride and corruption of men do ordinarily either commend a vain
bravery and gallantry; or pretend the excuses of a seeming Obligation in the
point of honor or necessary defense: Yet we are sure that the judgment of God,
which is according to truth, by pointing out on the part as well of the
accepter as of the appealer; these ensuing irregularities, do condemn the thing
as exceeding sinful. As 1 Impotency of mind and excess of Passion, which if
sooner in the accepter, does only add deliberation to his other guilt. 2,
Contempt of the public Laws and civil order 3. An Usurpation of the
Magistrates sword, which is given to him, both for punishing and protecting;
And 4. An invasion of Gods right of vengeance, which he has so expressly
reserved to himself, and from this the accepter observing ordinarily no more
moderament in his defense, than there was necessity for the engagement, has no
excuse more then the challenger, so that in effect although the mediate rise
may be thought to be on the appealers part, yet the sin is common, and is in a
word a plain complication of hatred against our neighbor, contempt against the
Laws and Powers and God, who has appointed them and a bold and desperate
despising and rashing upon Death, Judgment and Eternity, which do so
imminently attend all such rencounters: O how much more heroic and noble, were
it for men to approve the wise and great King choice, he that is slow to anger
is better than the mighty, and he that rules his spirit then he that takes a
City, to hear him, who is higher than the Princes of the earth, who commands
us, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and confirmed all by his own
most perfect example: And lastly, the study of that divine goodness, which
embraces both good and evil, just and unjust, to aspire to that height of all
felicity and glory in being perfect as our Father, which is in heaven is
perfect: But to proceed.

2. There is a spiritual and eternal life of the soul, thus sin deadneth and
kills men, and in this respect all who are unfaithful to others in the matter
of their souls or who cause them to sin, or sinfully give them occasion of sin,
become guilty of soul-murther, so Ezekiel. 3. 18. and 33. 6. his blood will I
require at thy hands, says the Lord to the Prophet.

Men become guilty of this not only 1. By commanding; as Saul did Doeg to kill
the Lords Priests, and David did Joab to cause Uria^ to be slain, 2. By
counselling and advising, as Jonadab did Amnon in reference to his sister
Thamar 3. By alluring and down right tempting as Thamar did Juda; 4. By
consenting to the sin of others, or any wise assisting, countenancing or
encouraging them in it, as Saul was consenting to the death of Stphen and was
standing by keeping the clothes of them that stoned him, and as men may be in
reference to false Teachers 2 Epist. of John 10, 11. 5. By giving high
Provocations to others, and thereby stirring them up to sin such as are
reproaches, opprobrious speeches, chartallings and challenges to fight, etc.
but also 6. By evil example, as David was accessory to the sin of the
Adversaries blasphemous reproaching, by what he did, and the Apostle often
insinuates Christians may be thus guilty by their insutable deportment in the
several relations they sustain and stand under, this may also be by doing what
has the appearance of evil, yea even by doing of things in themselves lawful
but inexpedient, because unseasonable and with offense. Thus one Christian may
be accessory to another stumbling, and may sinfully hazard the destroying of
these for whom Christ dyed, as the Apostle discourses concerning offenses even
in things not sinful in themselves: 7. By not warning faithfully before sin be
committed, as is clear, Ezekiel. 3. 18. 8. By not reproving after the sin is
committed, but suffering it to lie on our brother, Lev. 19. 6. 9. By not
suiting and proportioning the reproof to the greatness of the sin, but making
it too soft and gentle, not showing just indignation against it, which was Eli
his guilt, who though he did not altogether neglect or omit to reprove the
prophanity and gross wickedness of his Sons, yet did not reprove at that rate
of holy severity, called for, and answerable to, their atrocious and villainous
wickedness, he frowned not on them and dealt not roughly with them, as he
should have done, as is clear by comparing 1 Samuel 2. 22. 23. 24. 25. with 1 Samuel 3. 13. 10. By rash putting men in Offices for which they are not all, or
not competently qualified, and so cannot but in all probability sin much in
them, especially in the Office of the Ministry, 1 Timothy 5. 22, 11. By not
endeavoring by all suitable and lawful means within the compass of our power
and calling to prevent the sin of others, and to restrain them from it, as Eli
is on this account challenged by the Lord, 1 Samuel 3. 13. 12. By broaching,
venting, teaching and spreading heresies and false doctrine; thus Antichrist is
notoriously and primely guilty of this sin of soulmurther; as all false
teachers and seducers are less or more according to the nature of the doctrine
taught by them and their industry in propagating the same; and likewise all
that tolerate and do not restrain them, whose Office obliges them to it
according to their power: All these and other ways may men be accessory to
other men's sins, and so make themselves guilty of this great and cruel sin of
Soulmurther.

This sort of murder abounds and is very rife, and yet is in an especial
manner forbidden by this command, and the prevention of it accordingly called
for, it being a greater evidence of love to our neighbor to be careful of his
soul then of his body, the one being more precious then the other; and however
false Prophets, teachers and seducers, seem ordinarily to be most tender of
men's persons, and most desirous to please them, yet are they in this sort
horridly guilty of their murder.

3. There is a life of contentment, consisting in the tranquillity of the mind,
and the calm frame of a quiet spirit with comfort, joy and cheerfulness; to
this purpose says Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 8. I live if ye stand fast in the Lord,
and it is said of Jacob Genesis 45. 27. when he heard that Joseph lived, his
spirit revived, as if it had been dead before, because of his great heaviness,
arising from the supposed death of his Son; thus we become guilty of this Sin
of killing, when we obstruct or interrupt the spiritual comfort and joy, or the
inward contentment of our neighbor by fear, heaviness, disquietness,
discouragement, etc. whereby his life is made bitter, and his tranquillity
impaired, and so his hurt procured or furthered: As Joseph's brethren did not
only become guilty of his blood, but of weighting their Father, and deadning,
as it were, his spirit, which afterward at the news of Josepths being alive
revived, so people may be guilty against their Ministers, when they make them
do their work not with joy but grief, as it is Heb. 13. 17.

Again Murder, as it respects the bodily life of our Neighbor, is either
immediate, as Cains was of Abel, Joahs of Abner and Amasa. or mediate, as Saul's
was of the Lords Priests, David's of Uriah, and Achabs of Naboth.

Again, killing may be considered either as purposed, such as Cain's was of
Abel, and Joab's of Abner and Amasa, or not purposed; which again is twofold:
1. Innocent, which is even by the Law of God every way so, and is indeed no
breach of this Command: as when a man, following his duty, does that which
beside, and contrary to his intention, and without any previous neglect or
oversight in him, proves the hurt and death of another. 2. Culpable, bcause
although it do proceed beyond the purpose of the person, yet it is occasioned
and caused by a culpable negligence: As suppose one were hewing with an Ax,
which he either knew, or might have known to be loose, and the head not well
fastened to the helve, did not advertise those about him of it, if by flying
off, it happend to wound or kill any person, he were not innocent, but if
without any inadvertencie, he either knew not that it were loose, or that any
were about him, if then it should fall off and kill his Neighbor, in this case
he is guiltless: So when the Lord commanded those who built houses to build
battlements about the roofs of them if any person fell where the battlements
were, the Master was free; if the battlements were not he was guilty.

Murder is also either to be considered, as committed after provocation, or
without all provocation, which is a great aggravation of the sin, though the
provocation makes it not cease to be a sin. Further, it may be considered, as
it is the murder of evil and wicked men, or of good and religious men, and
that on the account of their Religion, which is a most horrid aggravation of
the murder.

Lastly, this murder, is either ordinary, as of mere equals, or inferiors; or
extraordinarly, aggredged by the quality of the person murdered, whether he be
a supperiour, as a Magistrate, a Parent; or whether he be of a near Relation,
as a Brother, or Kinsman, etc.

We come a little more particularly to consider the extent and nature of the
sin forbidden here (which is not certainly to be understood of taking the life
by public Justice, or in a lawful or just War, or in necessary and pure
self-defence that we may the better understand the contrary duty commanded: It
implies then a hurting, which we may consider, 1. as in the heart, 2. as in
the mouth or words, 3. as in gestures, 4. as in deeds; for we take it for
granted that it reaches further then the gross outward act, as by Christ's
exposition of it in Matthew. 5. is incontrovertibly clear.

The heart is the fountain, spring, and treasure of all evil, in it breeds
all evil, and from it proceeds this murder, Matthew. 15. 19. he that in heart
hates his brother is a murderer. 1 John 3 15. In a word, whatever is opposite
to love in the heart is a breach of this Command: As 1. hatred which is
malicious, and simply wishes ill to our Neighbor, and only because we love
him not, with out any other reason, as one wickedly said.

No amo te Zabidi* nec possum dicere quart,
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te.
So Cain hated his Brother without cause. 2. Anger, that supponeth a pretended
wrong, and is desirous of revenge, because of ingratitude, pretended in
justice, etc. 3. Envy, whereby we are grieved with the good of another,
supposing, though groundlesly, that it obstructeth ours, and therefore we seek
to overturn it: Anger is cruel* and wrath outrageous, but who can stand before
Envy, says Solomon There is often secret hatred on this ground more
irreconcilable, then where many and grave reasons can be given. 4. Rage, which
presses reveng beyond what is condign, though it follow it lawfully as to
outward means. 5. S^vitia, or Cruelty, that delights in the hurt and
prejudice of another, all these and others of this kind go generally under the
name of Hatred and Anger

If any ask here, Is there no anger lawful? Answ. Yes* for there is somewhat of
it natural, yea, and sometimes it lawfully immixeth it self in duty; as in
zeal, when God is dishonored*, which was in Moses, Exodus 32. And no doubt,
Indignation at wicked men, in some cases, is lawful^, and also required. But
carnal Anger is forbidden* which, 1. Is a desire of reveng where there has no
wrong been done to us: 2. When the revenge desired is disproportioned to, and
greater then the wrong: 3. When it is preposterousty desired, without
intervening Justice: 4. When it is not desired for the right end, to wit, the
man's gaining but only for the satisfying of our carnal humor: 5 When it is
immoderate and corrupt in the manner of it* so as the name of God is
dishonored by it. This unlawful Anger, when it is 1. against a Superior, it
is called grudge; 2, when against an Equal. rancour; 3. when against an
Inferior, disdain and contempt; these two last follow ordinarily upon the
first,

2. This Command is broken by injurious words, as in that fifth Chaper of
Matthew* He that shall say to his brother, thou fool; is guilty: O what guilt
will there be found to have been in imprecations, cursings, wrathful wishes,
disdainful and passionate speeches, when Christ will call men to an account for
the breach of this Command?

3. It is broken in gestures, such as high looks, fierce looks, gnashing with
the teeth, Acts 7. 54. foaming with the mouth, and such like, wherewith even
our blessed Lord and his Servants have been followed; and as there may be
Adultery in looks, so there is also murder in them; such looks had Cain Genesis
4. 5.

4. It is broken in deeds, even when death follows, not as in wounding,
smiting, oppressing, cruel withdrawing of the means of life, extortion,
exaction, biting, usurie, litigious wrangling, violent compulsion, raising and
racking of Land or House-rents beyond the just valve, and squeezing and
exacting upon poor Laborers and Tenants, without any due regard to them or
their labors which last is a frequent sin* but little regarded, a crying sin*
but little cared for; next it is broken by witholding what might be useful and
refreshful, as by neglecting the sick and distressed, want of hospitality,
specially to the poor: All these are sinful breaches* whether directly or
indirectly incurred* neither is it sufficient that we simply abstain from
committing some of these, but we must also make conscience to practice all
contrary duties.

The last thing proposed to be spoken to, was the person thou; where, in a
word, we are to distinguish private men from publickemen, who are Magistrates
and bear the Sword, whom this Command does not restrain from executing of
Justice; yet these may also sin in their passions, and unjustly put forth their
authority, and be carnal in punishing and passing sentence, even when there is
ground in Justice; and thus Magistrates may become guilty; though in the
executing of Justice, not simply, but by reason of other concurring
circumstances. Thus must shortly on this Command.

The Seventh Commandment.
Exodus 20. 14. Thou shall not commit Adultery.
THE Lord having spoken of such sins as do more respect man's being simply in
the former Command, he comes now to direct in those things that concern a man
in his life, in the ordering of his conversation; and as it will be found one
way or other, that by our passion, hatred, and anger, in one degree or other,
the former Command isi broken often, so this sin (that in the very name of it
is abominable) is not so unfrequent, even amongst Christians, as might in all
reason be supposed and expected.

The vile sin of inordinate Concupiscence and Lust entered into Mankind
exceeding early after Adam's fall, and in nothing the bitter fruit of Original
sin, and that pravity of our nature sooner kyeths, and did kyth, then in it:
Hence is it that Adams and Evahs nakedness, and their being ashamed, is spoken
of in Scripture, which implies a sinfulness and inordinateness in them, which
formerly they were not tainted with; as also a shame or plague following upon
it: and this corrupt nature being still in man, it is hard to speak of, or to
hear these things holily; and therefore there is a necessity both of holiness
and wisdom here, lest we break this Command, even when speaking of it, and
hearing it spoke of; yet the breach of it being a sin so rife, and the Spirit
in Scripture thinking it needful to speak of it, yea, it being put in a
particular and distinct Command by it self, and our most holy and blessed Lord
Jesus having himself commented on it, Matthew. 5. there is a necessity of saying
somewhat of it, but so as to contain within the bounds of Scripture
expressions: O! be therefore afraid of sinning in hearing; remember and
consider that the Lord sees, and in a special manner abhors such vile
Imaginations as shall be irritated and excited even from his holy command
enjoining the contrary, which is indeed both an evidence and a part of the
sinfulness of sin, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.

To take therefore a view of it, let us consider the scope of the Command,
which we conceive is in a special manner, and obviously holden forth in these
few places of Scripture, commending holiness in respect of a man's person, and
condemning uncleanness in all its branches. 1 Thessalonians. 4. v. 3, 4 5. 7. For this
is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication, that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor, not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles, which knew not God -- for God has not called us unto uncleanness,
but unto holiness, Ephesians. 5. 3. 4. 5. But fornication, and all uncleanness, or
covetousness, let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints: Neither
filthiness, not foolish talking, nor jeasting, which are not convenient: but
rather giving of thanks* For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean
person, nor covetous man who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ and of God. Galat. 5. 19. Now the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness.
Romans 13. v. 13. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.
Coloss. 3. v. 5. Mortify therefore your members, which are upon the earth;
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness which is idolatry. In which places, as we see, the sin forbidden
in this Command, held out under the Most odious designations, to wit, a work of
the flesh, fornication, adultery, uncleanness, lasci^iousness, inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence, etc. branches of this sin; and a decent walk
commanded, as contrary to the same; so we may see from them the scope of this
Seventh Command to be an honest, decent, shamefast, chaste, temperate and holy
life, which being well considered, does much illustrate the meaning and extent
of it.

If we might be particular, we could show how there is no Command more pressed,
more fully explained, and sorer plagued in the breach of it, then this, and set
forth with more aggravating expressions, to make it so much more abominable. It
wrongeth God, and the Society of men, it wrongeth others; in particular, our
children and our selves, both in body, estate and name; it brings a blot on
the soul here and hereafter, Job. 31. 12. Prove. 6. 33. It takes away wit and
courage, yea, and even the very heart, besotting men, Hos. 4. 11. compared with
Prove. 6. 32. So did it in Solomon, and therefore the man given to it is
compared to an Ox and a Fool, Prove. 7. 22. 23, etc. It is compared also to the
neighing of Horses, Jer. 5* 8. and the hire of a whore, and the price of a
dog, are put together, Deuteronomy. 33. 18. The madness, folly, yea and, to say so,
devillry and bewitching power of it are set out in Jezabel. It is said to be,
Ephesians. 5. v. 6. A work of darkness, that brings Gods wrath on the children of
disobedience, as it did bring it on Sodom the Old world, and the Canaanites
most signally; and seldom is there a remarkable plague and punishment brought
on a Person or Land, but this sin of vileness has a main hand in the procuring
of it; and where it reigns, it is usually, if not always, accompanied with
many other gross sins, which are occasioned by it, and given way to for its
sake, as drunkenness, murder, idolatry, etc.

For further clearing of this Command, consider 1. The Species or kinds of
faults condemned in it, and the virtues or graces commended. 2. The manner of
being guilty of the breach of it, which (because this Command will be found to
be spiritual as the other commands are) reaches to the heart and affections as
they do. 3. Consider the sin here forbidden in its incitements, soments, and
other sins more implicitly comprehended under it, as idleness glutony,
drunkenness, impudency, gaudiness and unchastness in apparel or nakedness,
dancing, singing of bawdy songs, loose company or fellowship, and every
appearance of this ill, and what may lead to it, and dispose for it* or is an
evidence of it. 4. See its opposite virtues, and the means useful for the
subduing of it, as chastity, modesty, shamefacedness, temperance, lawful
marriage, the remedy thereof, etc. which are required in this Command, and are
very useful for a holy life.

That these things ought to be spoken of, none will deny; that they belong to
one of the Commands, the perfection of the Law requires it; and that they come
in here under this Command, the nature of them, and their conjunction with, or
influence upon the sin condemned, or duty commanded here, will make evident;
the sin of Adultery being a prime branch of the carnalness of our nature, under
it the rest of that kind are comprehended for making of them the more odious.

Now in considering the act of vileness forbidden, we may 1. Look to these
ills, that are simply unnatural, of which these that be guilty are called in
the Scripture, Rev. 21. 8. the abominable, such are these 1. who prostitute
themselvess to the abomination of filthy Fellowship with Devils, as they
suppose and imagine. 2. These who commit be^sti^lity, a vileness most
detestable in reasonable creatures, it is called confusion, Levit. 18. 23. 3.
These who abuse themselves with mankind spoken of, 1. Tim. 1. 10. Romans 1. 26.
27. called also in the Scripture Sodomy, going after strange flesh, having been
the abominable practice of the^s miscreants, whom God ^et ^orth for an Example
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, when he rained, as it were, something
of hell from heaven on them burning them quick, and frying them in a manner to
death in their own skins, because of the lusts wherewith they burned. These are
abominations against nature* against which the Laws both of God and men do
severely animadvert, see Lev. 18. and 20. Deuteronomy. 22.

2. The act of vileness inhibited takes in these ills of uncleanness, that are
in some respect against nature also, though not so obviously, nor so gross,
such as are betwixt persons within degrees of consanguinity and affinity; this
uncleanness is called incest, such are reckoned up Levit. 18. and 20. and Deuteronomy.
22. for this the Can^nites were cast out, and it was abominable even to
heathens, 1 Cor. 5* 1* etc, the evil of incest flows from the unnaturalness of
men's confounding the relations and degrees, that nature has set men distinctly
in; as for instance, nature has made the fathers Wife a mother, to join
therefore with her destroys that relation, and is unbecoming that reverence
and respect we owe to parents; hence this incest is always either in a direct
or oblique line, but not in the collateral, beyond the relations of brother and
sister, which are indeed the very beginings of the collateral lines, and, as it
were* almost one in their common parents; thus conjunction with one of the
furthest and most remote of a line that is direct is incest, which yet is not
so with the very first after these excepted, of the line that is collateral; a
man might not marry his fore*grandfathers wife, nor his sister, but may marry
his Cousin German, and because man and wife become one flesh, it is incest
which is within the degrees to the wife, as well as if it were within them to
the husband himself, and it is also called confusion. Levit. 20. 12 14.

3. Consider it as it is against a tie or bond, called the Covenant of God.
Prove. 2. 17. and this may be three ways considered, 1. When both persons are
married, as David and Bathshe^a were, this most abominable, and that which we
call double a^ dultery. 2. When the man is married, and the woman solute or
free. 3. When the woman is married and the man free, these two last are both
gross, yet the latter is accounted grosser, as having these Aggravations, of
disturbing the peace of our neighbors family, the corrupting his seed and
offspring, and the alienting of his inheritance added unto it, therefore not
only the first, but even the third has been ordinarily punished by death
amongst men; and certainly the guilt of the second, is little inferior, if
not equal, to either of them: for 1. It has the same Wickedness of Adultery,
with the other two, as being contrary to the Covenant of God. 2. It is in like
manner peccant against the remedy of uncleanness and disorder* for which the
Lord did appoint marriage 3. It does no less disturb the quiet and prosperity
of Families, provoking jealousy in the Wife, the more impotent, because the
weaker Vessel, alienating affections, and often hindering a lawful Propagation,
but continually marring the education of the children lawfully begotten, and
the Parents care of their provision: Neither are these things to be restricted
to the man, as if he were only therein criminal; the free Woman the Adulteress,
by her manifest accession, does evidently involve her self in the same guilt;
if a free man lie with his Neighbors wife, the aggravations, flowing from her
married estate, are all charged upon the man, and by the Law of God he is
therefore condemned as the Adulterer; does not then the parity of reason, in
the Case of a married man with a free Woman, equally transfer on her the Guilt
of his Consequences? Neither is it any excuse for the Woman, that the man
ordinarily the temptor; because not only has nature put the Woman's greater
weakness, under the security of a far greater measure of modesty, but the Lords
righteous Law is also binding upon both without distinction: so tha^ I think,
we may well understand all the three sorts of Adultery, to be forbidden by the
same laws, and under the same pains; and therefore conclude with Job 31, 9. 11.
that Adultery, without restriction, is an iniquity to be punished by the Judge
upon the man as well as upon the woman.

Of this sort also is Bigamy, the marrying of two wives together; and Poligamy,
the marrying of many Wives, and keeping Concubines with Wives: For God made but
two at the beginning, one Male, and the other Female; and has appointed every
man to have his own Wife, and every woman to have her own Husband. And although
many holy men have failed in this, yet can we not exempt them from sin; neither
will we ascribe it to Gods particular dispensation to them which we dare not
make so common as that practice was, considering especially what abuse it came
to, as may be instanced in Solomon, and from whom it had its rise, to wit,
L^mech, and what bitter fruits and sad effects it has had following on it in
Families and on Posterity, as may be seen on Abraham, Jacobs, Samuels Father
Helkanab, which made men's marriage a vexation to them, contrary to its ends:
But now our Lord, by reducing marriage to first its institution, has very
expressly abolished it in the New Testament.

4. Consider it in free and unmarried persons, and thus it is Fornication; if
it be constrained or forced, it is death by Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 22, 23. etc. only to
the man; the other is free, and it is called a Rap, if it be continued in, it is
whoredom and filthiness; if with one woman* it is Concubinatus, an
unwarrantable abusing the ordinance of Marriage, and despising of it: if with
sundry parties, it is Prostitution, and most abominable, and whatever way it
be, it is abominable, bringing on the wrath of God, Ephesians. 5. 6. Col. 3. 6. Not
once to be named amongst the Saints: and whether marriage follow or not, yet it
is still sinful,

It may have several aggravations, as 1. if it be in times of light, 2. if with
persons unsuitable to be conversed with, 3. if in Families professing godliness;
especially in the Fourth place, if the person be a great professor: 5. if it be
in a time when God is quarrelling and contending with a whole Society or Land,
and threatening his Judgments against all: Now although this sin be at this
time aggravated from all these considerations, yet oh! how much does it abound
and how frequent is it!

5. Consider this act of vileness inhibited, as it may be amongst and betwixt
persons married and living in conjugal Society; for the use of the Marriage Bed
is not left arbitary more then the use of meat and drink; but is bounded by the
Lord, both in the contracting and in the enjoyment* and when these bounds which
are set, transgressed, the transgressors are guilty. Thus men and women may
begin their marriage carnally, by wooing carnally, which will make them guilty,
although there be no more: Marrying with persons of a different Religion or
with other unsuitable disparities, makes guilty of the breach of this Command,
that sort of marriage not being the lawful remedy of Fornication; or when we
are sweyed more with temporal ends, and with respect to the satisfying of
fleshly Lusts, then with conscientious respect to what God allows, and right
reason requires, referring all to Gods glory; for this thwarteth with the end
of marriage, and does transchange marriage into a cloak for covering
covetousness or filthiness, and so before marriage there may be guilt.

Thus also married persons may break this Command, if they do not possess and
enjoy one another in holiness and honor, 1 Th^ss. 4. 4. 5. and do not give to
one another all due benevolence Thus men do sin in the defect, by not
cohabiting, by withdrawing without consent one from another, and by proving a
snare one to another: The Apostle calls it, 1 Cor. 7. 5. defrauding of one
another: And many pieces of unkindlyness amongst married persons, unbecoming
the honor and respect that the one should have to the other, may be here
comprehended. But men sin more and oftener in the excess, viz. by carnal living
with their own lawful married Wives, and using marriage for lust, living in the
lust of concupiscence, as the Apostle calls it; and that as the Gentiles did
even in their marriage stations 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. And he calls it, Col. 3. 5,
inordinate affection* an affection which a man has to his Wife as to an Whore,
rather then what becomes a Wife: These things, when reproved, must not be
offended at, but the Lord looked unto for the purging of this corrupt nature,
of such filthiness, as is shameful even to mention.

This inordinateness may be in respect of frequencie, unseasonableness,
carnalness in the manner; and what need is there to say more? It may also have
place among married persons, when their conjugal fellowship hinders them from
setting apart any time for extraordinary Devotions, which yet they ought to do;
as may be drawn from what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7. 5. Though excess in this
also is to be guarded against, but when there are times of trouble, and of
private or public calamity, wherein the Bridegroom is called to come out of
his Chamber; in such times as these, married persons may be readily guilty of
inordinateness: And it is known that there were, upon some occasions,
restraints under the Law when a man might not touch a woman, thought his own
Wife, to show that in conjugal Society men should observe a purity, and that
they have not under limited liberty in this, more then in other things as
eating, drinking, etc. For although all pleasure in meat and drink be not
unlawful, yet carnal sensualness is. So what is natural, suitable, and
seasonable, here is allowed, and inordinancie forbidden. Thus during the
marriage, state, guilt mav be contracted.

Again, men may thus sin by unjust dissolving of Marriages, by deserting,
divorcing without the just cause of it, extruding, and such like acts, contrary
to the nature of that strictest bond and covenant. I grant it is not always
necessary to make divorce even where there is Adultery; the Lord is not
offended with reconciliation, where the punishment of the ^n is not executed b^
the Magistrate: But if the divorce be made, and the woman afterward married to
another, her return to her first Husband, even after lawful dissolution of her
second marriage, is an abomination and exceeding defiling, Jer. 3. 1. Thus in
dissolving marriages there may be guilt.

Lastly, this uncleanness may be considered as it is in a solitary person, when
alone, in their actions of darkness and abominable imaginations, which are to
be loathed rather then named; yet these things which are done in secret are
seen of God, though it be a shame to speak of them: see Ephesians. 5. 11. 12. This
secret uncleanness, again, may be by a person, either waking, or sleeping,
mentioned Lev. 15. which confessedly becomes men or women's guilt, according as
they have drawn it on, or by unsuitable imaginations disposed themselves for it:
yea, when it has not ingrata recordatio, an unsavory and displeasing
remembrance, and a holy horror following thereupon, there is guilt: Of this we
spoke somewhat in the Preface to the Commands.

These abominations then are not restricted to the outward act, but extended
further, and many ways men commit this wickedness: as 1. In heart, Christ
calls the lusting of a man after a woman a committing of Adultery in his
heart Matthew. 5. 28. This indeed has degrees ac*cording to the length it
comes, and the entertainment it gets, and other such like circumstances,
but it is still accounted by God to be heart-adultery, and it is called
burning, 1 Cor. 7. 9 and Romans 1. 27. and is exceeding loathsome to the Lord,
and hurtful to the inner man, even when men neither resolve nor intend acting
yet by not abhoring these Imaginations, but suffering them to roll in their
thoughts (O! bewar of carnalness upon the thoughts of this) they become guilty,
and that in ward fire being suffered to burn, often breaks out into a visible
flame; How that 1 Cor. 7. 9. differs from the burning mentioned Rom, 1. 27.
we shall now forbear to mention. 2. Men are guilty of this wickedness, when they
license their outward senses in the sinful pursuit of their objects: Thus eyes
full of adultery are spoken of. 2 Pet. 2. 14. thus Matthew, 5. 28, a lustful look
is adultery: and Job ^. 31. says, he will not look upon a maid. Thus also
obscene pictures, delight in them, or other spectacles of that sort, cannot but
defile the man: The ears are defiled by hearing of, and lis^ning to obscene and
filthy discourses, to drunken, bawdy, or light wanton amorous Songs: the touch
with embracings* and the mouth with kissings: Such are spoken of Prove. 7. 13.
She caught him and kissed him. To insist further here, is not suitable but oh!
there is much guilt contracted this way, and but little noticed, and mourned
for. 3. Men may become guilty by gestures, as they are evidences of this
vileness, or dispose to it, and postures undecent and unbecoming civility, and
godliness: See what is spoken of a naugty person, Prove. 6. 13. 14. and Isa, 3.
16. etc. this is opposite to honest walking which is commended Romans 13. 13. and
a carnal wantonness reproved. 4. Persons become exceeding guilty of this evil
by scurril and obscene speeches, where as this sin should not be once named, by
reading scurril, wanton, amarous ballads or books which is, as if we were
conferring on such a subject, by taunting and reproaching one another in such
communication as corrupts good manners; by jesting that is not convenient,
especially if it be at one that has fallen in some act of filthiness, or by
whatever may be near, or of a sinful sutableness to such an evil; see Ephesians, 4.
24. and 5. 3. 4. etc. 5. This sin is fallen in by too familiar or unnecessary
converse with light, vain, loose company, more especially private companying
with such which is not only an appearance of ill, or a snare to ill, but evil
and loose in it self, called by the Apostle chambering. Romans 13. 13. and
Solomon bids men not come near the door of such a woman's house much less to
enter into it, Prove. 5. 8. 6. Men fall into it by wantonness, imm^desty, want
of due shame fastness. etc. or any other by way where they yield reins to the
loose, wanton, carnal humor that is in them.

There are many others sins which come in here, and although some of them may
be reduced to several of the Commands, yet in a special manner are they
related, and as it were, tied to this: As 1. Idleness, such as you see 2 Samuel
11. 2. etc. occasioned David's fall, and is by Ezekiel, c, 16. 49, charged on
Sodom, as predisposing for, and going along with their uncleanness; Idleness
being in it self matter omnium vitiorum, and noverca omnium virtutum, the mother
of all vices, and the stepmother of all virtues: This breeds unstayed looks,
and gives occasion to, and entertaineth carnal imaginations, and it
occasioneth much gadding, when folks, either have no lawful calling, or are not
diligent and serious in the employments and duties of it, 1 Timothy 5. 13.

2. Lightness and unstableness, charged on Reuben when he defiled his Fathers
bed, Genesis 9. 4. and by the Apostle, keeping at home is (Tit. 2. 5.) joined with
chastity, modesty, and shamefastness; there is a gadding, and also called
furthiness, especially in women, more especially young women, which is
exceeding offensive, and yet exceeding rife, it may be it were more fitly
called impudence, or impudent boldness, which makes them run to all spectacles
and shows, to speak in all discourses (which quite crosses the charracter that
one gives of a modest Virgin, that She loves rather to loose her self in a
modest silence, then to be found in a bold discourse) and to hazard upon all
companies, exceeding unsuitable to that modesty and shamefastness which is
particularly called for in that Sex. Take in here also the manner of going,
minsing, or tripping nicely, and making a tinkling with their feet, spoken of
Isaiah 3. 16. and touched at a little before.

3. Wantonness, and too much carnal mirth and laughter, which is both the
evidence and great fomenter of looseness in the heart; and so foolish jesting,
which is not convenient, Ephesians. 5. 3. is conjoined with this sin, and none ought
to think that there is a lawful freedom in such jollity, as chambering and
wantonness, Romans 13. 13. Now this takes in much, and is of a large extent.

4. Undecent conversing, going abroad in company with rash and offensive
freedom, when as entering the house yea, coming near the very doors of an
whores house is forbidden, Prove. 5. 8. the ill and prejudice whereof may be
seen in Dina^s going abroad belike without an errand, Genesis 34. 1. 2. etc.
Potiphers Wife did cast her self in Joseph's company thus, though he gave her no
entertainment, but in the fear of the Lord fled from her.

5. Add dancing a thing condemned by the people of God as no honest recreation,
at least when in companies that are mixed, and (as we call it) promiscous
dancing, such as uses to be at marriages, and the like occasions, both of old
(as may be seen in the Canons of several Councels) as also of late by our own
and other reformed Churches.

I shall say these things in short of it: First, that ye will not find it
mentioned in Scripture in the person of any of the godly, it becoming an
Herodias's daughter better then professors of Religion. 2. That it will be
readily found to indispose for the exercise of godliness, and so to be
inconsistent, or at best, hardly consistent with either a pious and lively, or
a sober frame of spirit. 3. That it marreth not only the gravity of persons for
the time, putting them in a sort of regular distraction, but lessenet the
esteem of such persons; this insobriety being like a dead fly that make eth the
box of ointment (if any be) to stink. 4, That in Scripture examples we find
this sort of dancing only among profane and loose people, and recorded also as
a piece of their stain or blot, rendering them some way infamous; and oftentimes
it has also snares waiting upon it, as in the Israelites amongst themselves,
Exodus 31. and in the daughters of Moa^ with the people of Israel, and in that
of Herodias's daughter: Some also suppose those whom Dinah went forth to see,
Genesis 34. were thus employed at some feast, or such other solemnity, where she
was ensnared and deflowred. 5. Yea, it is often, if not ever the fruit of some
former looseness and carnalness being the effect that excessive wantonness
usually breaks out in; and can Gods people warrantably have fellowship with
these works of darkness? or can they (if guilty themselves) reproved it in
others? Cicero calls it Postremum vitiorum quia acta sequitur, the last of
vices, because usually it follows former loose carriages. 6. There is no
lawful mean of recreation which is useful for the health of the body, but is,
and may, and should be sanctified by the Word and Prayer, yet I suppose neither
uses this to be so* neither would any think it very suitable, or well
consistent with a praying fram; e and can that which stands not with the
serious exercise of repentance and a praying disposition, or that which none
would think a fit posture to meet death, or the Lords appearing with, be in
reason though consistent with a Christian walk? which should always be with
the loins girded, and the lamps burning: It is somewhat like this, or less then
this, which the Lord condemns, Isa. 3. 16. walking and mincing, or tripping,
and making a tinkling with their feet; what is that but disdaining the grave
way of walking, to affect an art in it? as many do now in our days; and shall
this be displeasing to the Lord, and not the other? seeing he loves, and is
best pleased with the native way of carring the body Jun^u^ and Rivet from him,
calls this minching or tripping, a walking or standing on the Earth in an
artificial way.

Besides these things that are more general in folks carriage, there is
somewhat further in our clothing and diet, which is to be spoken to here,
seeing in these we ought to be christians, sober; grave, etc. and in nothing do
our lightness, vainity (as we ordinarily use* to call people vain from their
apparel*) pride, wantonness, and rioting appear more, then in vain garbs. Hence
the Apostle Paul 1 Timothy 2. 9. joyneth modest apparel with shamefastness and
sobriety or chastity, as also does the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 2. 3. and in
Jezebel and others, decking and dresing to seek love, is ever accounted an high
degree of looseness: It is a wonder that men should take pleasure to deboard in
their clothing, which is the badge of their perfidiousness, and was at first
appointed to cover their shame and nakedness. It is observed that the Hebrew
word, ^eged does signify both perfidiousness and clothing, and comes from
that word which signifies to break covenant, the Lord thereby intending by the
very consideration of our clothes, to humble us, and keep us in mind of our
first breach of covenant with him: and yet such is our wickedness, that we will
glory in that which is indeed our shame. as i^ it were a special ornament; and
whereas at first, clothing was appointed for covering nakedness, for
preventing of incitements to lust, and for decency, now Jezebels like, it is
made use of to be a provocation thereunto; see Prove. 7. 10. God in his first
appointment of ^ayment, for preventing of vainity, and commending honest
sobriety therein, did make for our first Parents coats of skins.

And therefo e we say, that in men and women both, there is condemned by the
Lord, 1. Costliness and excessive bravery of apparel, 1 Timothy 2. 9. which says
not that we are to foster sordidness or baseness, or that men in all places or
stations, and of all ranks, should, as to their apparel; be equal, but that
none should exceed. It is strange, that sometimes the poorest and meanest for
place, and often for qualifications, are finest this way, as if it were the
best or only way to commend and set them out; and that some should have more in
cloath^ then in their stock, is utterly intolerable 2. Strangeness in the
ever-changing fashions, and extravagant modes of apparel, while as the Lord by
nature has continued the shape of men's bodies to be the same; for what is
meant else by strange apparel, so often forbidden in the Scripture, but that
which is commonly called the fashion, or new fashion, a new and uncouth garb?
And certainly men's minds are often infected with lascivious thoughts, and
lustful inclinations, even by the use and sight of gaudy and vain clothing,
and we will see, light, loose, conceited minds discover themselves in nothing
sooner then in their apparel, and fashions, and conceitedness in them. 3. There
is a lightness, in clothing, as to color, mounting as they call it, etc. and
in dressing of the body, which may be seen in these dressings of the hair, in
powderings, laces, ribbon, points, etc. which are so much in use with Gallants
of the time; this, especially in women is insisted on and condemned, Isa. 3.
16. 17. etc. some things indeed there meant o^ed, are not simply unlawful,
especially to persons of higher quality, and at all ^i ^es; but the particulars
following are condemned; 1. Affecting of, and having a lust after, brave
clothing, making our back our God, as some do their belly, Phil. 3. 19. and
this may be where clothes are but mean, yet the lust and appetite after them
may be great. 2. Haughtiness and vanity in clothes and dressings, when we think
our selves better with them then without them, or esteem our selves, because of
them above others, in other things superior, or at least equal to us. 3.
Excess in these, in their superfluity and costliness, as is said, above and
beyond our state and station. 4. Wantonness and lightness in them, which is
especially in nakedness, as to such and such parts of the body, which in
modesty are to be hid; for women having clothes for a cover, ought to make use
of them for that end and it is more then probable, that, that walking with
stretched out necks, there reproved, relates to women, their making more of
their necks, and their breasts bare, then should be, or is decent, they
affected to discover and raise their gorgets, when God commends modesty, and
Nature is best pleased in its own unaffected freedom, yet they stretched them
out: It is both a wonderful and sad thing, that women should need to be
reproved for such things, which are in themselves. 1. So gross, that let the
most innocent be inquired, whence these, more then ordinary discoveries, do
proceed; and they must at least grant, that the first practisers of such a
fashion, could have no other design in it, then the more thereby to please and
allure men's carnal eyes and regards: And 2. so impudent; for if to be all naked
be shameful and exceeding ready to provoke lust, must not nakedness in part,
more or less, be, and do the same? So that this will be found a glorying in
their shame; for nakedness hitherto was always looked upon as a reproach: We
read of old of such as were grave, that they covered themselves with a va^l:
And 1 Cor. 11. married women's going abroad uncovered is looked on as unnatural;
What would such say if they lived in our times; we are pe^^waded the gravest
amongst women are most averse from this evil, and the lightest are most prone
and given to it: And seeing all women should be grave, it must import a
disclaiming of that qualification where this lightness is delighted in: If
therefore there be any shame, if there be any conscience, we will exspect to
prevail with some who are touched with the sense of gravity, that they may be
good examples to the rest* and once endeavor effectually to bring gravity and
modest shamefastness in fashion again.

There is in clothes a base effeminateness amongst men (which some way
emasculateth or unmanneth them) who delight in those things which women dote
upon, as dressing of hair, powdrings, washings) when exceeded in) rings,
jewels, etc. which are spoken of, and reproved in the daughters of Zion, Isa.
3. and so must be much more unsuitable to men Also interchanging of apparel is
condemned; men putting on women's, and women men's clothes, which is unsuitable to
that distinction of Sexes which the Lord has made, and is condemned in the
Word as a confusion, an absurd, unnatural thing, and an inlet to much
wickedness. Whereof the Dutch Annotators, as several Fathers did long before
them, on 1 Cor. 11. v. 14. make men's nourishing and wearing of long hair, to be
some degree, it being given to women, not only for an ornament and covering,
but also in part for distinction of the Female Sex from the Male: And here
having touched a little on this vain dressing of the heir (now almost in alse
many various modes, as there are fashions of apparel) especially incident to
women, it will not be impertinent to subjoyn a strange story which learned,
pious, and grave Mr. Bolton in his four last things, page 40. repeats from his
Author the famous Hercules*Saxonia. professor of Physic in Padua; The plica
(says he) is a most loathsome and horrible disease in the hair, unheard of in
former times, as Morbus Gallicus, and Sudor Anglicus, bread by modern luxury
and excess, it seizes specially upon women and by reason of a viscuou^,
venomus humor, glueth together, as it were, the hairs of the head with a
prodigious ugly implication and intanglement, sometimes taking the form of a
great snake, sometimes of many little serpents, full of nastiness, vermin, and
noisome smell: And that which is most to be admired, and never eye saw before,
these being pricked with a needle, they yield bloody drops. And at the first
spreading of this dreadful disease in Poland, all that did cut off this
horrible and snakie hair, lost their eyes, or the humor falling down upon
others parts of the body, tortured them extremely. It began first, not many
years ago in Poland, it is now entered into many parts of Germany. And methinks
(says Mr. Bolton) our monstrous fashionists, both male and female, the one for
nourishing their horrid bushes of vainity, the other for their most unnatural
and cursed cutting their hair, should every hour fear and tremble, left they
bring it on their own heads, and amongst us in this Kingdom. It is also worthy
the noticing that Tertullian has to this purpose, in his Book de cuitu ^ul.
chap. 7. where having expostulated with Christian women for their various vain
dressings of the hair, he bespeaks them thus; Drive away thus bondage of
busking from a free head; in vain do you labor to appear thus dressed, in vain
do ye make use of the most expert frizlers of hair, God commands you to be
covered and veiled: I wish that I, must miserable man, may be privileged to
lift up my head, if it* were but amongst the feet of the people of God, in that
blessed day of Christians exalting gladness, then will I see if ye will arise
out of your Graves with that varnish and paint of white and red, and with such
a head*dress; and if the Angels will carry you up so adorned and painted to
meet Christ in the clouds. And again; cap. 13. These delights and toys (says
he) must be sheken off, with the softness and looseness whereof, the virtue and
valor of faith may be weakened* moreover, I know not if these hands that are
accustomed to be surrounded with rings and bracelets, or such other ornaments,
will endure to be benumbed and stupefied with the hardness of a chain: I know
not if the leg, after the use of such fine ^^sesgarters, will suffer it self
to be straightened and pinched into fetters* or a pair of stocks: I am afraid
that the neck, accustomed to chains of Pearls and Emeralds, will hardly admit
of the two-handed Sword: Therefore, O blessed woman! (says he) let us meditate
and dwell on the thoughts of hardship, and we shall not feel it, let us
relinquish and abandon these delicacies and frolicks, and we shall not desire
them; let us stand ready armed to encounter all violent assaults, having
nothing which we will be afraid to forego and part with: These, these are the
stays and ropes of the Anchor of ou^ Hope. -- Let your eyes be painted with
shamefastness and quietness of spirit fastening in your ears the Word of God,
and tying about your necks the yoke of Christ, subject your head to your
Husbands, and so shall you be abundantly adorned and comely: Let your hands be
exercised with wool, let your feet keep at home, and be fixed in the house, and
they will please much more, then if they were all in gold; cloth your selves
with the silk of goodness and virtue, with the fine linning of holiness, with
the purpure of chastity* and being after this fashion painted and adorned, ye
will have God to be your Lover, Which notably agrees with what the Apostles
say, 1 Timothy 2. v. 9. 10. In like manner also, that women odorn themselves in
modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, not with broidered hair, or
gold, or pearls, or costly array: But (which becomes women professing
godliness) with goodworks. 1 Pet, 3. ^. 2. especially 3. 4. 5. Whose adorning,
let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of
gold, or of putting on of apparel. But let it be the hidden man of the heart,
in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price: For after this manner in the old
time, the holy women also who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in
subjection unto their own husbands. See also Tit. 2. v, 4. 5.

Next to what has been said of dressing the body, somewhat may not inappositly
be spoke to, annent dressing and decking of houses and beds, and annent
household furniture or plenishing, wherein there may be an evil concupiscence
and lust, and an inordinate affection; our minds being often by a little thing
kindled and set on fire: See to this purpose, Prove. 7. 17. where that woman
spoken of, has first the attire of an whore, then, he faith, her bed is
dressed, her ^epestry and curtains provided, incense and perfumes are in the
chambers: So also beds of Ivory are reproved, Amos 6, 4. which are all used for
entertaining the great lust of uncleanness* which ordinarily has these
alluring extravegancies attending and waiting upon it. O! what provision do
some make for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, and how careful Caterers
are they this way for their corruptions? And certainly Christians are not in
their houses more then in their persons, left to live at random and without
bounds, and folks no doubt may be unsuitable to their stations, as much in the
one as in the other. This excess may be also in the light and wanton manner of
adorning houses and buildings with filthy and immodest paintings, picturs, and
statues, and such like, which, with other things, is spoken of condemned, Ezekiel.
23. 14.

But withal, in what we have spoken in these excesses so incident even to
professors, we would not have folks too rigidly to expone us, for we know that
there are lawful recreations, nor are honesty and comeliness in behavior and
apparel, blameable, but to be commended in their place* neither would we have
any think, that we suppose all such, who do the things above censured, to be
incited to them from this principle of lust; but for clearing of the matter
further, it would be considered, 1, That we speak of these things as they are
abused and particularly condemned in this Church. 2. We would consider the end
of the things themselves, as they have been at first sinfully introduced,
whatever may be the innocent intention of a particulare user. 3. We would
respect others, who may be offended and provoked to lust, by what an actor is
not provoked with, and also may be sinfully tempted to the like from that
example* or if not so, yet may possibly be induced to judge them vain who walk
so and so in apparel, light who dance, etc. which we would prevent and guard
against 4. We would not only abstain from evil, but from all appearance of it;
now certainly all these things we have spoken of, look like ill, and may breed
misconstructions in others, even possibly beyond our own mind and intention; we
may also consider the mind of very Heathens in reference to these things, as
also of Fathers, Councels, and the Divines which are cited by Rivet and Martyr,
on this Command. The Council Lado. Can. 53. apud Bals. has these words, Let
Christians, when they go to marriages. abstain from dancing, but dine or sup,
And another says, Nemo fre saltat sobrius nis^ forte insanit; no man almost
danceth that is sober, unless perchance he be in a fit of distraction or
madness* Neither does David's or Miriams dancing, being used by them as a part
of worship in the occasions of extraordinary exultations, say any thing for the
dancing that is now in use, as their Songs of praise to God used in these their
dancings abundantly show: And beside, their dancings were not promiscuous, men
with women, but men or women a part-Beside, if the seeing of vain objects
provoke to lust, the circumstances and incitements of dancing must do it much
more; and what men commonly say, Take away the promiscuousness of dancing* and
it self will fall: It does confirm this, that dancing is not pleaded for or
delighted in, as it is a recreative motion, but as promiscuous with women,
which beside the great provocation to lust spoken of, occasioneth that both
much time and expense is bestowed on learning this which is attended with no
profit.

What we have said of these evils may also take in excess in sleeping,
laziness, etc. to be seen in David, 2 Samuel 11. 2. and also vain curiosity, as
well as lasciviousness in singing and playing; too much whereof favors of
wantonness and riotousness, as these words Romans 13. 13. are in their
signification extended by some. Now all these excesses spoken of, being
opposite to sobriety and modesty, shame* fasteness and gravity, must come in
under wantonness, and what follows, does come in under intemperance.

The Scripture insisteth much in condemning the sin of intemperance, which we
conceive does mainly consist in gluttony and drunkenness; and seeing these sins
must belong to some one Command (although vertually and indirectly they break
all) we take them especially to be condemned here in this Command, where
temperance is commanded; and therefore we shall find them in Scripture
mentioned with a special respect to the sin of uncleanness, expressly forbidden
here: Fullness of bread and gluttony is observed to have been Sodoms, sin, and
the rise and source of their filthiness, Ezekiel. 16. 49. Drunkenness is marked,
especially as leading to this, Prove. 23. 31. 33. Therefore we choose to speak a
word to these two evils here, which are in themselves so abominable, and yet,
alas! so frequent amongst those who are called Christians.

It is true, there is both in eating and drinking, respect to be had, 1. To
nature, which in some requires more, in some less: 2. To men's stations, where,
as to the kind or quality (as we said of clothes) there is more allowed to one
then another: 3. To some occasions, wherein more freedom and hilarity is
permitted then at other times, when more abstinency and a restraint upon these,
even in themselves lawful pleasures, is extraordinarily called for, so that we
cannot bound all persons, and at all times, with the same peremptory rules.

There is also respect to be had to Christian liberty, where, by Gods goodness,
men have allowance to make use of these things, not only for necessity, but
for refreshing also, and the virtue of temperance and sobriety (as all other
virtues) does not consist in an indivisible point, so that a man is to eat and
drink so much, and neither less nor more, without any latitude; the Lord has
not so straightened the consciences of his people, but has left bounds in
sobriety, that we may come and go upon, providing these bounds be not exceeded.
Neither is every satisfaction or delight in meat or drink to be condemned
(seeing it is natural) but such as degenerateth and becomes carnal.

We would therefore inquire into the sinfulness thereof, and because there is a
great affinity betwixt these two evils of Gluttony and Drunkenness, we may
speak of them together for brevities sake.

we suppose then, 1. That both gluttony and drunkenness are sinful; and that
both in the use of meat and drink men may several ways fail: the many
prohibitions and commands that are in the Word, for ordering us in the use of
meat and drink, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Romans 13. 14. But put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. And Romans 14. 20. For meat, destroy not the work of God: all things
indeed are pure, but is evil for that man who eats with offense. Prove. 23.
20* 21. Be not amongst wine-bibbers; amongst ri^tus eaters of flesh. For the
drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiness shall clothe a
man with rags, The many reproofs that there are for exceeding in both; Ezekiel.
16. 49. Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom; Pride, fullness of
bread and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did
she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy, Luke 16. 19. There was a certain
rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously
every day: with several other places. And the many sad Judgments which have
been inflicted, as well as threatened, for them: Deuteronomy. 21. 20. And they shall
say unto the Elders of his City, This our Son is stubborn, and rebellious, he
will not obey our voice, he is a glutton, and a drunkard. Prove. 23. 21. For the
drunkard and ^he glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiuess shall clothe a
man with r^gs: with the desperate effects following on them, as Prove. 23. v.
29, 32. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has
babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? At the last
it bitteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder: etc. will put it out of
question that they are not only sinful, but so in an high degree.

Yea, if we consider the ends for which God has given us the use of these
creatures (which excess inverteth and marreth) to wit, his honor, and the good
of our selves and others; the rules he has given to regulate us in the use of
them; the holy frame he calls for from us at all times; the difference that
should be betwixt his people and the men of the world in the use of these
things; we will find this excess in the use of these enjoyments to be sinful,
and no less contrary to the holy nature and law of God, and to that holiness
and sobriety that should be in a Christian, then fornication and other
uncleanness are; therefore there is no sin has more woes pronounced by the
Holy Ghost against it, then drunkenness (a woe being ever almost joined with
it) nor more shame attending it, so that of old drunkards drank in the night, 1 Thessalonians. 5. as being ashamed of it; thought now alas: many are drunk in the day,
and some in the morning, and even such as are addicted to it, are with great
difficulty recovered, Prove. 23. ult.

2. We suppose also that these sins may be, and sometimes are, separated and
divided, for one may be guilty of excess in meat or of gluttony, who may be
free of drunkenness, and contrarily: It is the saying of a holy man, Aug. lib.
10. confess. cap. 17. Drunkenness, O Lord, is far from me, but gluttony has
often prevailed over me. And therefore we are not here to account our selves
free when both these ills cannot be charged on us; it is often incident to men
who think themselves sober to be much more watchful against drunkenness then
gluttony; yea, and usual for some to excite and put others much more on to
exceed in eating then they dare do in drinking; as if there were not that same
hazard in the one that is in the other, and as if one and the same rule were
not given for both.

3. We do also suppose that there is not one way only whereby men may become
guilty of both these sins, but there are many ways and also degrees thereof,
and though all be not alike gross, yet all are sinful: Therefore we would. 1.
consider these evils in diverse respects: Then 2. lay down and fix some general
limits, which we are not to pass: 3. Instance some slighted particulars.

For Gluttony in general there is a Latin verse, Praepropere, laute, nimis,
ard^nter studiose.
In which five words there are five ways of being guilty of it; 1. By hasting,
that is, desiring meat and drink before it be convenient; thus eating and
drinking in course, not for hunger or thirst, but for custom, good fellowship,
carnal pleasure, etc. is gluttony, and is cursed by the Holy Ghost, Eccles. 10.
16, 17. VVoe to thee, O Land, etc. here drinking and eating are tied to their
seasons. 2. By delicacie in the kind or quality, as when meat and drink are
excessive for costliness or fineness lavishly provided, as Feasts very
ordinarily are, Prove. 30. 8. So of the rich glutton it is said, be faired
delicately every day, Luke 16. 19. 3. In the quantity, by too much, when eating
is exceeded in, even to indisposition for the duties of our general Christian,
and of our particular callings, not to the strengthening us for them, Eccles.
10. 17. 4. In the manner, viz. too ardently, when meat is desired with a sort
of lust, Prove. 23. 3. 20, 21. 5. In the preparing of meat, viz. studiously,
that is when it is too riotously dressed, for pleasing men's carnal appetite and
taste, or pallat, by the fineness of it, and othere curiosities of that kind
More particularly, we may sin either in the exces^ of meat and drink, when we
go without just bounds; or in the defect, which may as well mar the end, to
wit, Gods glory and our fitness for duty, as excess may: therefore does Paul
exhort Timothy to the use of a little wine, as needful for him.

2. Consider the sin of Gluttony in the matter of that which we eat and drink,
thus some may fail, as was just now said, by too much daintiness in their fair,
as well as too great a quantity: And again in the manner, wherein many are very
sensual and carnal, as being much given to satisfy their appetites, which
Solomon speaks of, Prove. 23. 1. 2, 3. etc. so Isa. 5. 11. 12.

3. Consider it either in reference to a man's self, when he himself fails, or
consider it in reference to others, when he puts them to eat or drink, and
occasioneth their sin; either of the ways is sinful, and the last is
particularly cursed, Hab. 2. 15. although profane men have often made, and do
make a pastime of it; and some others that would seem more sober, are but
little troubled with it, and many seem by their practice to think they cannot
make others welcome to their houses, unless they put them to exceed this way.

4. Consider it in the act, and in the lust to it, even as there is fornication
in the act and in the lust, so is there also drunkenness and gluttony; and
thus, as is said Phil. 3. 19. the belly becomes a God, and men's great care is
to satisfy it, Matthew. 6. 25. So to be given to wine, 1 Timothy 3. 3. and to look
on it with delight, when it moves it self aright in the cup, etc. is
condemned, Prove. 23, 31.

5. Consider failing here morally, which is not suitable to a man, and which
even a Heathen will disallow, and failing spiritually, which is not suitable to
a Christian; as when a man's eating and drinking is merely governed by sensual,
or at best only by physical injunctions and customary occasions, and not by
Christian directions, and is not levelled toward the great end, the glory of
God, to which Christians, even in eating and drinking, are obliged by Divine
precept to have a due regard.

6. We may consider these sins as in the act, or as in the effects; the act is
excessive use of meat and drink in it self, whether evil effects follow or not;
the effects are these which follow, either in distempering the man in himself,
or making him fall out with others, the sin is properly in the act, (though the
sinfulness of the effects be not so diminished by their following on
drunkenness as many suppose) and there may be a sinful act, when there is no
visible sinful effect in the man's carriage or distemper. Hence Isa. 5. 22.
there is a woe denounced against those who are strong to mingle or drink strong
drink; the fault is not that they are strong, that is a property of nature; nor
is it that they were drunken, but that being strong to bear much without being
distempered, they took on more, lippening or trusting to that, and so abusing
their strength beyond the right end of it, and drinking more because they were
strong, then they durst have done if they had been weaker

7. Consider eating and drinking in their circumstances, and so sometimes meat
and drink somewhat beyond ordinary, and cheerfulness in the use of them, are
allowable: Sometimes again abstinencie is called for, and though no particular
time be set for abstaining from meat and drink, or for fasting, but God has
left that to men's prudence; yet it cannot be denied but when one will at no
time want dinner nor supper, that he may have the more time, and be in a better
frame for praying, furthering of mortification, sympathy with Joseph's
affliction, etc. there is no doubt but he will be found guilty of this sin: See
Isaiah 22, 13. 14. where some are cursed for killing oxen and sheep, eating
flesh and drinking wine; for certainly sometimes God calls for a restraint
upon the (at other times lawful) use of creature enjoyments.

8. Eating and drinking may be considered as to the expenses we bestow on what
we eat and drink, and the affection we have to them, or delight in them, spoken
of; as also in respect of the time we spend on them. Hence is the curse Isa 5.
11. Woo to them that rise early, and tarry long at strong drink; much time
spent this way, even when the grosser effects follow not, will bring a curse
from God; for he has given time for other ends, and will have that no less
tenderly minded then estate, health, or any other benefit; and if we dare not
spend, waste, or abuse these in eating or drinking for fear of sin, why should
we take more liberty as to our precious time?

9. Consider eating and drinking as a mean seasonably made use of for its end,
as strength, or health and the honor of God, or as an end it self, or without
respect to another end; and thus it is sinful, Eccless. 10 16. 17. and the Land
is cursed that has Princes that keep not the bounds allowed; which implies
that the using of meat or drink, without respect to its end, and that in due
season (as God gives all things, Psalm. 145. 15. and as we should pray for all
things, Matthew. 6) is a breach and excess.

10. Consider eating and drinking, either as going the length of evil, or as
having the appearance of evil, where either of these is, there is a breach,
since we ought not only to abstain from evil, but from all appearances of it, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11.

What has been said agrees both to sins of drinking and eating: We shall now
give some general rules, the observing whereof will further discover the sins
that are in the use of meat and drink, either in the excess or defect.

The first is, we should look to a right end, both in eating and drinking,
which is threefold: 1 Supreme, Eat and drink to the glory of God, says the
Apostle, ^ Cor. 10. 30. thus we may sin either in the defect or excess, by
disinabling our selves for any duty of his worship or, by not adverting to this
end; this rule therefore faith, we should be so swayed in quality, quantity,
time, etc. of our eating and drinking, as we may most glorify God. 2.
Subordinate, and so we ought to have a respect to others in all these; hence it
is that 1 Cor. 8. 9. Romans 14. 20. there is a woe to him that eats with
offense: thus by frequenting Taverns, though we exceed not in drinking, we
strengthen others to follow our example to a greater length; or it gives them
occasion to misjudge and misconstruct us; so also the using of unlawful
enjoyments in a too carnal and joval a way, before carnal men give them
occasion to think that we place some happiness in these things, as they do. 3.
Our own strengthening and refreshing is an end to be looked to in the use of
meat and drink, and so when we weaken and indispose our selves by them, we sin,
against this end.

2. Consider the act it self of eating and drinking, if it be excessive for the
kind of meat or drink, as too delicate, etc. or for the quantity, too much, or
for the time that is spent, too long, etc. it is sinful.

3. Consider the manner, If creature enjoyments be with delight sought for, or
excessively delighted in, and folks become restless and anxious about them,
Matthew. 6. 25. and too eager in pursuing these things, and too much taken up
with them, so that the seeking after them marreth contentment and the quiet
frame of the mind, then there is sinful excess.

4. Consider the effects in diverse respects; 1. In respect of a man's ^^^ward
estate or family, and so a man sins when he eats or drinks beyond that
which he may uphold, or his condition in the world will allow, and when his
eating or drinking so, may make himself or his wife and children fast for it
afterward, or to be much pinched. 2. In respect of his calling, if it divert a
man from that, and mar the work in his hand, and make him break appointments
set by him for finishing of other men's work, which he might other ways have
kept, and much more if it indispose him for speaking of, or doing that which
concerns his calling, it is then sure in the excess. 3. In reference to his
body, if it be weakened, dulled, or indisposed by the excess of meat or drink:
This is called Isa. 5. 12. inflaming of them, and is not allowable. 4. Look to
it as it affects folks reason, and in less or more indisposeth them to
conceive or judge of things aright; much more when it raises a fury or
madness, and makes them as reasonless beasts in their carriage, it is
excessive and to be eschewed no doubt. 5. Look on it in reference to the
spiritual duties of a man's christian calling, as of praying, reading, hearing,
repenting, etc. the obligation to these dutis laying on always, and our
refreshments being in themselves midses to lead to the more cheerful
performance of them, when by them we become more indisposed for them, so as
either to forbear them, or to be formal or drousie in them; that is sure not
good, but to be evited. 6. Look to it in reference to the serious inward frame
of the mind, which these should have who ought to walk always with God, keep
communion with him, and be filled with the spirit, whatsoever marreth that or
obstructeth spiritul consolation, or is inconsistent with it, cannot certainly
be good: Hence Ephesians. 5. 18. to be filled with the spirit, is opposed to excess
in wine or drunkenness, so that what is inconsistent with the one, may be
understood as belonging to the other, and although this sensible joy of the
spirit cannot be always carried along, yet none should incapacitate
themselves for keeping up with it. 7. Look on it in reference to our
corruptions and the promoving of mortification; when it either marreth this, by
dulling and weakening of the graces of the spirit, or indisposing for their
exercise; or strengthens and provokes the former, it cannot be but sinful,
being a feeding of the flesh, a making of provision for the flesh, as if we
fostered our corruptions of laziness, sensuality, and other lusts, when we
feast our selves. 8. Look on it with respect to its opposite, sobriety and
temperance; what is not sobriety, is excess, and contrarily; and sobriety being
not only no excess, but a denied sober use of creatures, there must be excess
when the mind, as well as the body, is not sober, in the use of these things,
9. Look on it with respect to its end (with which we began) when it leads not
to, and fitteth not for honoring of God, when it marreth our being useful to
our relations and others, either by taking up our time, or spending our means
that we cannot provide for them, and supply them or indisposeth us for duties,
or hinders a man from considering his own last end, thus it is sinfully
excessive. 10. Look on it in reference to death and Christ's second appearing,
for certainly our frame and posture in every thing should be such as we may not
be surprised with that: Hence is Christ's warning, Luke 21. 34. Take head that
ye be not overcharged with surfeiting, gluttony, and drunkenness, and the cares
of this life, and that day come upon you unawares: where he makes not only the
coming of the Lord, an aw-band to keep from gross out-breaking into these sins;
but joining them with the carts of the world, he shows that there may be, and
often is, an indisposition for that day even from the inward frame of the mind,
occasioned by sensual inclinations and desires, when nothing does outwardly
appear.

Now put what has been said to trial, and ye will find that it is not only he
who by surcharging himself staggereth, vomiteth, or has no use of reason, who
in Scripture is accounted guilty of these evils; but many more, as will be
sadly evident when the Lord comes to count with them; and if he should call
many to this reckoning at the time of their eating or drinking, it would be a
terrible surprisal to them: It is marked (Matthew. 24. 39.) as an evidence of the
sensuality and security of the old world, that they continued eating and
drinking, and knew not till the flood came; and it is more terrible and sad
what the Lord says afterward, So shall it be at the coming of the Son of Man.
O! fear and think seriously of this when ye are at your cups, and after them,
and do not imagine that you are never guilty, but when you are like to beasts
void of reason; for the Scripture condemning drunkenness, comprehends under
it all excess in drinking, and that which may indispose for going about what we
are called to, though the exercise of our reason be not always disturbed.
Neither to constitute drunkenness is it needful, that the person willingly and
purposely intend drunkenness, it is enough that he willingly drink (and his
will cannot be simply forced) although he be not desirous that these effects
should follow; for it is the act and not the effect which is properly the sin,
as is said: If there were any thing of the fear of God, or sense of duty, or
shame of dishonesty, there would not need many motives to dissuade from these
evils; by committing of which most holy men have brought sad things on
themselves, and occasioned sad curses to their children, as in Noah and Lot is
clear; and therefore their examples and falls are so far from being to be
imitated, or made use of to diminish from the account men ought to have of the
greatness of the guilt, as they often alas are, that they are set up as beacons
to scare and fright from them.

What sort of persons it does worst become, is not easse to determine, it being
unbecoming to every person, yea even beastly and against nature, men being by
it not only put for a time from the exercise of their reason (as it is in
sleep) but incapacitate to act it, and put in a contrary beastly fury. How
unbecoming is it for old men, that should be examples to others in sobriety?
How unbecoming is it to young ^en, whose youth should be otherwise exercised?
How unbecoming for mean men, who ought to be sober? and how especialy
unbecoming is it for men of place and reputation? upon whom this sin brings
disgrace, and particularly it is most unsuitable for Ministers to be given to
drink, or to their appetite, to whom the Lord 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. has given
special rules and directions in this matter; but most of all in wom n it is
abominable, and was and is so even amongst Heathens; In sum, whoredom, wine,
and new wine, Hosea 4. 11. take away the heart; and men are unmanned and made
effeminate by them, as was said; yea, are transformed as it were into beasts;
of old, men were so ashamed of drunkenness, that such as were given to it,
betook themselves ordinarily to the night (though some indeed did rise early in
the morning to follow strong drink, Isa. 5. 11.) And when folks will not keep
at distance at the beginning from this sin of drunkenness, but will needs take
a liberty and be cheerful in it, it prevails sadly over them, and makes
them inslaved beasts ere long to it, and they become bewitched with it, so that
they can hardly begot free from the fascinations and inveiglements of it, Prove.
23. v. last.

If it be asked here, Whether men or women, when health requires vomiting, may
not drink excessively for provoking to it, in place of Physic?

Answ. 1. That in some diseases there is more allowed of some sorts of drink
then in health, cannot be denied: Yea, 2. a difference is to be put betwixt
sorts of drinks; some are not inebriating, that is, the drinking of a great
quantity of them will not disturb the use of reason; others are such that
excess in them will not only indispose body and mind, but quite obstruct and
remove the use of reason and judgment; the first sort of drink (which is more
properly physical) may lawfully be drunken* but in no case is it lawful for a
man to exceed in the use of that drink, which brings with it the disturbance
of his reason; the reason is because this is sinful in it self, and expressly
against Gods command, and defaceth his Image in us (which is in knowledge) and
is deregatory to it therefore is it still reckoned a proper fruit of the flesh,
Gal. 5. 21. and it secludeth from the Kingdom of Heaven, as well as
fornication, theft. etc. and therefore can no mo^e be lawful under that pretext
then the other are; see 1 Cor. 6 11. 12. it is also opposed to ^n honest
Christian walk, and to the putting on of Christ, Romans 13. 13, and that is
always true which we have Romans 3. 8. that ill is not to be done that good may
come of it; neither has God made exception in drunkenness more then in
fornication, for which some such pretexts will not be wanting with some to
palliate that ^in* Again, this is not the proper end of drink to procure womit
(I mean the forementioned sort of drink* which none ever read of as approved*)
beside, it draws along with it many other sins, who can tell but when they
are in drunkenness, they may blaspheme, curse, commit adultery, murder or such
like? should they then actively remove the use of their reason by a practice
which may be inductive to such abominations? yea may not death then come? and
should it not always be looked for? and what a posture would a man be in, when
in such a case, to meet death? moreover the distemper that follows such
drinking is not such as follows Physic, which does only make sick or
indispose the body, and what influence it has on the brain and reason, is but
accidental and indirect, but it is otherwise with that distemper that
follows drunkenness, which puts the person in such a sort of fury and
distraction that the carnal, unrenewed part does most frequently get great
advantage by it.

If it be asked further, What is to be accounted of these actions, which are
committed in drunkenness? Answ. Somewhat was said of this on this on the first
Command; but further we say, 1. Drunkenness being a voluntary act* it cannot
excuse, but makes the person doubly guilty, 1. by making the man guilty of
such an act, 2* by drawing on that incapacity on himself, whereby he disposed
himself for that and many more: In this respect the person committing murder*
or sinning otherwise, in drunkenness is more guilty then another, who not
being in drink commits the same sin, because two sins concur in him* and not
in the other: And therefore 2. although the murder, swearing, etc. of one that
is fresh is more gross murder and swearing, etc. in another respect because it
is more immediately from the exercise of deliberation and choice, and that on
this ground drunkenness may in part extenuate the resolute pertinaciousness of
the fact, yet it aggredgeth guilt upon the person on the former account. It was
once answered by one, who being desired to spare a person that had committed
murder in drunkenness, and to impute it to his wine: that he should so do, but
he would bang up the flagon wherein the wine was; and seeing the man made
himself so, his punishment was just, for had he not been the flagon of that
wine, that sin might have been prevented.

Let me touch on some particular ills, which it is possible are more abounding
and less looked to then beastly drunkenness, yet hateful to God; and take not I
pray the mentioning of them ill, for they will by unstrained consequence follow
to be condemned by the former rules.

The 1. is the liberty that is taken by all sorts of persons in respect of
meat; as if only appetite or lust where their rule, which may be seen in that
excessive and superfluous vanity which is in feasting, wherein that is
sensually spent, which might be usefully employed, and often they that are most
prodigal and profuse that way, are least in charity; and if they may pamper
their own flesh, or get the name of Goodfellows and good Housekeepers, though
it be to such as have no need, and though there be nothing or very little
allowed for the supply of the necessities of the Saints, or of others, and much
more with held that way then is meet, yet they think all is well.

2. There is your tippling, though ye drink not drunk, your four hours (as ye
call them) this drinking, as ordinarily used, is certainly not for strength,
and therefore as is clear, Eccles. 10. 16. 17. by the opposition there, it must
be for drunkenness. If many men were put to search in this particular, it would
be found that there is more expended on these in the year, then is bestowed in
charitable uses; more time taken up in them, then in religious duties, and more
inclination to attend them, then to hear sermons; men cannot come abroad for
this end, they cannot shift their business without hurt, but for their company
they can do both: Prove. 23. 29. 30. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has
contentions? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has redness
of eyes? They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. Here
you see who are the persons that have a woe and Gods curse on them, and other
inconveniences; are they not the tiplers, even they that tarry long at the
strong drink? drink how much or how little they will? Isa. 5 22 Woe unto them
that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink.
Certainly God has made man, and given him time for another end then that, and
has not for that end given his creatures to men to be thus abused, this cannot
be eating or drinking in due season, and I am persuaded it is not for
necessity, for our own health, for the edification of others, or for the glory
of God.

What then can be said for it? that it helps to pass the time (which is
pretended by many as an excuse) is a part of its guilt and just accusation, for
it makes the time to be lost, which ought to be more thriftily and carefully
spent; and what cheerfulness it is accompanied with is often carnal* when is
their spiritual discourse, and what may be edifying, and minister grace to the
hearers at such meetings? when do ye pray for the sanctified use of that time*
fellow ship or drink? if at all it is but seldom; many a cursed four-hours is
taken by some, though all Gods creatures be good, being sanctified by the word
and prayer: be exhorted therefore to forbear this* especially ye who have place
in government, either Civil or Ecclesiastic; do not ye make others to offend
with your example, nor strengthen these in their wickedness (to whom ye should
be examples of good) encouraging them to go in and drink drunk in Taverns or
Ale houses, when they see you go in to tiple: it is a shame to ^ear what
drunkenness of this sort is to be found even amongst young men, and others from
whom we would least expect it*

3. There is your drinking at bargains making so frequently, without respect
to, the end wherefore drink was appointed and given, as i^ ye were to honor
drinking as a help to you in your bargains, although this evil be now alas
epidemick; and hardly will a man that has much business get it at all times
shunned, considering the humors of others he deals with, yet certainly if ye
would all set to it there would be no great difficulty of reforming it, but if
some begin not, how shall it be done? It is an uncouth and strange thing, and
even unnatural, that neither a man's appetite, nor his health, nor the time of
the day, nor his ordinary diet shall be the reason or occasion of a man's
drinking, or the rule whereby to try the convenient when or season of it* but
when ever a man shall make such or such a bargain with me, or pay me for, or
get payment from me of, such and such things, that must be the rule of my
eating and drinking, what beast will be thus dealt with? O how many irrational,
and almost infr^ brutal practices are amongst us?

4. There is drinking of healths, and constraining a pledging (as it is called)
of them, and thus by this means, forcing, or tempting, or occasioning (although
it be willingly done by them) drinking in others; this is one of the highest
provocations in drunkenness, and a dreadful perverting of the end for which God
has given meat and drink, neither health nor necessity calling to it: For 1.
this has the woe appropriated to it that is pronounced Hab. 2, 15. Wo^ to him
that gives his neighbor drink; this is a great incitement and provocation to
drinking, and how many times has it occasioned drunkenness? Again, 2. whereas
every man's own appetite should rule his drinking, this makes one man prescribe
the quantity and quality to others, and so one man, or several men, drinks by
the measure, will, and appetite of another; which is unreasonable, it being
contrary to nature that men should drink all at one time, and precisely so
much, and of such drink. This even in Abasuerus his Feast. Esther 1. 8. was
forbidden* Beside what can be the use of drinking of healths? it cannot be the
health of another whom we respect, because that is to be expected in the
approved way of prayer, which is the mean that Christians ought to keep
fellowship in for the health one of another, and we suppose they are readiest
to drink healths who are least in prayer for such whom they pretend to respect.
It was a notable saying of a great man (solicited belike to drink the Kings
health) By your leave I will pray for the Kings health, and drink for my own:
And certainly whatever it be in it self, yet the many ill consequents which
have followed the drinking of healths, the many drunkennesses and quarrellings
occasioned by it, the resentments that men will have if they seem to be
slighted (as they account it) either when they are drinking themselves, or when
their name is mentioned in the health to be drunk, do manifest that they who
use it, esteem more to be in that way of drinking then in any other, and so
allege that if a man drink not as much as they, he respects them not. Again,
men in company drinking healths, either take drink when it is necessary (and in
that case, healths are but for the fashion) and do not press it on others, and
even thus, though it be indifferent like, yet considering the abuse which has
been of it, the offense that may flow from the maintaining of it, and that it
often proves the rise of more, and gives occasion to others to follow it
more, and to hold it on (even beyond the intention of the first Inventer or
Proposer*) it is much more safe to forbear; or they drink unnecessarily and
press it on others, and thus it is abominable. See what the Fathers think of
this in Mr. Bolton's directions for comfortable walking with God.

If we look narrowly into the thing it self (although custom when it is
inveterate weakneth us in the right uptaking of things, yet) it will probably
be found to have arisen from heathenish Idolaters, who used Libamen Jovi,
Baccho, etc. and if it be supposed to help the health of others, that cannot be
expected from God, who has given no such promise, it must therefore be from
the Devil; it was called by the Heathens, Phiala Jovis, drinking of healths
being among them as a piece of Drink*offering or Sacrifice to their Idols on
the behalf of those they mentioned in their drinking, or whose health they
drank; and it is certain there is no vestige of it in Christianity, nor any
reason for it, and experience clears that many grow in a sort superstitious
in the use of it, as if the refusing such a thing were a prejudice or indignity
to the person mentioned, and that the Devil has made use of it as a rower to
convey in much drunkenness into the world; we think it therefore absolutely
safest to forbear it, and we are sure there is no hazard here; See Ambros. de
^le^ and Jejunio, cap. 13. and 18. August. de temp. ser. 231* 232. Basil. in
Epist. ad Cor. ser. 14. Cartwright's Confession. To this same purpose these old
Latin lines are worthy the noticing Una salus sanis nullam pot^re salutem,
Non est in pot^ vera s^lute salus*
Which may be thus Englished; To drink no healths for whole men, good health is,
In drinking healths we real health do miss*


We suppose that a kindly motion toward a person that is present when one
drinks to him, may be differenced from this yea, and taking occasion also to
remember others that are absent; for our eating and drinking together, being
that wherein our familiarity and freedom one with another venteth it self, to
have some signs or occasions of testifying our kindness to, and remembrance of,
those whom we respect, will not be unsuitable,

5. There is your drinking at the birth of children, and that not only, or so
much, at their Christning or Baptism (whereat as appears by the example of
Circumcision, somewhat may be allowed in Christian hilarity) as in after
visits, so long as the woman is in Child*bed, or does lie in, so that none can
see her though it were many in one day, but she and they must now drink, and
then again drink; O what a debauched time is i^ to many? that while they are
lying* and while God calls them to be otherwise* employed, they should be
entertained with tippling; and it is a sad matter^ that though it be both a
burden to the receiver* and expense to the giver yet neither of them will
stand in the way of it* but both will concur: Indeed, where women in that
condition are in strait we would allow in that case to give them some drink, or
rather to furnish them with money to provide it, but when there is no want, but
rather superfluity to add more, what is that but to keep up a fashion or our
own supposed credit? This is not the end for which these creatures are given,
nor is this the fellowship that Christians ought to have one with another
seeing therefore there is in this custom both sin in abuse of time, and of
meat and drink in a high degree; and seeing there is in it also shame, that men
and women shall let others furnish them as though they were poor, or do them a
favor in buying drink for them (when their necessity is provided) as though
they loved to drink and tipple: and seeing withal there is often damage here,
and much money foolishly spent, etc. to the hurt of many, we would entreat you
to for bear this also* and except such of you as are poor and stand in need of
drink, we would have none of you suffer any stranger, or other then your selves
to bring in drink to your houses, but rather set your selves to be christians
in your fellowship; and I suppose also, that fewer visits in that case would
suit better, and would be much more comfortable and advantageous to the sick
party.

6. There is your drinking at Lick-wakes or Dergies (as ye call them (after the
death, and also after the burial of friends or neighbors, as if that gave a
call, and made a rendezvous to drink. Certainly if drunkenness and tippling be
unsuitable at any time, much more on such an occasion is it so, even most
unsuitable* Is this the way to be made christianly, to mind your own approaching
death, and to be prepared for it? is it not rather to make the house of
mourning a house of feasting* and to forget the end of all living, which the
living should lay to heart? Is this to bear burden with a smitten family
wherein one is dead, to come and burden them, and table your selves in their
house? Will this fit them who are alive to get the right use of the stroke, to
be disturbed by providing such and such meat, drink, servants for you: when it
is like that thus, praying comes to be neglected, and heaviness swallowed up in
this heathenish way of drinking away care and thought; certainly if the parties
be sad that sort of fellowship is not fit at all, and proper, if they be in
hazard to take no impression of the rod, this stumbleth them, and quite drives
it away: O heathenish, hateful and abominable practice! And where was it ever
seen that frequent company at such a time, and such company, proved useful?
yea, often it has been followed with abuse and many sad consequents: and is
the dreg of old superstious Popery not fully removed out of the hearts of some.

If what we have said be truth, viz. That eating and drinking should be in
season for strength, as it is Eccles. 10. 16. 17: and for the honor of God* we
are persuaded that it contradicts all these evils, as unbecoming Christians:
And therefore if the truth of God, or your own credit and esteem have place
with you, let these things be forborne and abandoned; are we laying heavy
burdens on you? Does not this way proposed by us, look both more christian and
more civil*like, and if in such outward things that are hurtful to your selves,
and none can say but the reforming of them is some way in your power. If in
such things* I say, we prevail not with you, wherein shall we prevail* Are
there any who come to deaths dote but these things are loathsome to them, and
their conscience cries out on them* and therefore seeing we say nothing but
what your conscience will confirm, let us prevail with you so far as to procure
a reformation of these evils that are so hurtful to your selves, and
dishonorable to God.

7. There is one thing more whereof I shall speak but a word: I supose the
excessive number of Tavernskeepers, Vintners, and Hostlers cannot but be a
breach of this Command, and an occasion, if not a cause of intemperancy in
drink, for such a number cannnt be supposed to be necessary for man's lawful
use; it must therefore be to provoke to the abuse of the creatures; and this
employment is now become so common, that he who is desperate of any other way
of living, will betake himself to this shift* and readily such fall under that
woe pronounced Hab. 2. against those who hold drink to others: Take heed to
this ye who take this Calling on you* it is lawful in it self I grant, but
often it is made unlawful, and such as are in it become often partakers of many
sins committed in their houses, which for their own particulare advantage they
overlook, and particularly of the sin of uncleanness and whoredom, debauched
drunkards being ordinarily vile and lascivious persons; you ought therefore to
discountenance night*drinkers especial, by refusing to give them what they
call for, as you would not make your selves partakers of their sins.

From what has been said it does appear how base and unbeseeming Christians
these spoken of drinkings and tipplings are, which are of that nature, that we
can neither in faith pray for, nor promise our selves a blessing upon them from
God, they being neither in season nor for a right end: And no doubt when the
Lord comes, such as have been given to these sins, will wish they had been
other ways exercised. -- Thus much for this Seventh Command.

The Eighth Command.
Exodus 20. 15. Thou shall not Steal.
WE come now to consider this Eight Command, Thou shall not steal: In the
former the Lord restrained the lust of the flesh, and men's abusing of their
bodies. In this he regulateth them in the use of their riches and estates, and
sets bounds to the lust of the eye, and the covetousness of the heart.

The scope of the Command in general is, to regulate us in reference to the
outward estate of our selves and others, that we fail not either in wronging,
or in ordinate and excessive profiting them or our selves: And miscarriages of
this nature are comprehended under this of stealing, to make them the more
odious.

From the general scope of the Command we may see, 1. That the Lord allows
property amongst his people, otherwise there could be no stealing. 2. That
men have not liberty to manage these things of the world according to their
mere pleasur and arbitrament, but there are rules set to them, by which they
are to be governed in reference to them* and there is religion in buying and
selling, and such like, as well as there is in praying and hearing the word,
though the things be of a different nature.

For opening the Command, Consider 1. the sin forbidden, stealing, with the
positive duty comprehended under it* 2. Consider its extent as to the kinds; of
theft: Consider how theft may be said to be committed: 4. You may consider
more, particularly some particular sins prohibited, and duties commanded, and
Questions that may be moved concerning them, as about Charity or giving Al^^
Usuray, making of bargains or contracts, pursuing of iches. etc.

The sum of this Command we may gather from Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole
steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his bands the thing
which is good, that be may have to give to him that needs. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter; because that the
Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and testified.
Lev. 19 11. 13. 35. 36. Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie
one to another, -- Thou shall not defraud thy neighbor, neither rob him? the
wages of him that is hired shall not abide with the^ all night ^ntill the
morning. -- Ye shall do no unright^o^s^^s^ in Judgment, in (...) in weight or
in measure, just balances, just weights, a just ep^a^, and ^ just ^ine shall
ye have: I am the Lord your God which brought you out of the land of Egypt.
Theft is most strictly defined to be the taking away of that which i^ another,
^e not knowing it, and that to his ^urt; but more generally we take it to be
any inordinatnese in referance to riches, either by wronging our neighbor, or
profiting our selves, and that whether it be in the attaining, retaining, or
using of them* this, thought in few words, yet comprehends much.

1. Then we call that inordinateness, when men mistaking the right end for
which and the golden mediocrity according to which riches are to be employed;
they do fail either in the excess, by transgressing the just bounds, or in the
defect; or making use of wrong midesses for attaining the end: Hence the love
of mo^ey or of riches being the root of all evil, becomes Idolatry, when
riches are made the ^ltimate end, and pursued and made use of only to satisfy
the lust of the eye; or when this love of money is made subservient to some
other lust, as to the pride of life, thus the love of money is inordinate as to
its end, when it is for an end without and beyond that which is convenient for
us. 2. We may be inordinate by our being too vehement in our desires after
riches so that we will be rich, as it is 1 Timothy 6. 9. we resolve it, and must
be so by any means, as it were: which is most dangerous, and by being desirous
of too much, keeping no proportionable measure, but being sometimes in the
excess, spending ou^ time in seeking more then is convenient, sometimes in the
defect, trifling away much time in the lazy, careless, and negligent pursuit of
what is convenient 3. There may be inordinateness in the mide^^e^ made use of
for attaining or retaining riches either by an unlawful way of conquest simply,
or by that which is such in some respects; as by unlawful callings and such
like: All which unlawful ways may be reduced to these three, ^apina, furtu^^,
and turpe ^^cru^, rapin^, theft, and fi^thy Iuer^; of which more afterward.

Again, this inordinateness we say is when either our Neighbors estate, or our
own, is wronged* his may be wronged when ours is not advantaged; as by
destro^ing, firing, and the like, out of hatred and ma^i^^; yea, it may be
wronged by our negligence, when possibly he and our selves are both wronged,
yet this is condemned in Scripture; and Exodus 22. 5. and sequent* the Lord
provideth Laws annent it. It may be also in reference to the profiting our
selves or our neighbor, or bettering of our own estate or his, there is no
doubt inordinateness in getting; keeping, and using that which belongs to us or
to our neighbor, as when we get it without right, or its due price by another
folly or negligence, etc.

To proceed a little, we shall consider the sin forbidden in this Command, as
drawn to these three forementioned heads, r^pin^, furturn, turpe lu^ru^,

R^pine incl^deth violence of all sorts, both by land, and that either by more
petty parties, as robbers, plunderers, etc. or such as are more strong and able
to carry their point, as Conquer^rs, General^ of Armi^s, etc. meddling with that
which is not theirs, which is robbery in the Lords account, Hab. 1. 6. And by
Sea, this is called paracy: It was a true and sharp answer which a Pirate did
give to Alexander (as is recorded) who being taken by him, and asked, How he
could or durst live that way; replied, He did only what he himself did; save
that Alexander ^ereft ^en of kingdoms, ^e but of a little of their means: be
with more strength on the land followed his point, be with les^ upon the sea,
Of which Piracy, whether caping or robbing poor innocent Sea*faring*mens goods,
as it is now used by many, I wish all Capers and their Confederates in all
Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths, would seriously consider, and would to
this purpose take notice of what the eminently learned Gro^ius says in his
Book de jure belli and pacit, lib. 3. cap. 18. s^ct. 2. but more especially
sect. 4. where he does with much reason (whereof he was a great Master) and
religion, assert. That when justice, strictly so called, is not hurt, yet a man
^ay sin against that duty which consists in the loving of others, and more
especially what the Christian law perscribes (which yet here is only
corr^b^rative of the moral law, that perfect and perpetually binding Rule of
life and manners) so that if it be manifest that such caping, robbing, or
spoiling, will chiefly hurt and indammage, not the whole body or generality of
the Enemies, or of the King, or such as are of themselves guilty; but the
Innocent, and that in such a measure* as will thrust them into the very
greatest calamities and miseries; wherein to cast even such as are our private
and proper debtors, were a merciless and cruel act: But if to all this it be
added, that such spoiling or robbing is found to be of no considerable moment
or importance, neither to put an end to the war, nor to cut short and consume
the public and main force of the Enemy* then, and in that case, such gain
ought to be accounted unworthy of a morally good man, and more especially of a
Christian, as being mad only of the calamity of the times. On which account
Plutarch blames Crassus, that he had made purchase of the most part of his
riches by robbing and spoiling in times of fire and sword, looking on the
calamities of the times he lived in, as his greatest gain, Grot, annot, ad idem
illud cap. 18. Whatever will be said for pressed men and other Subjects who on
the express call of the Magistrate go to Sea fights, their non-obligation to
inquire narrowly and scrupulously into the justness of the War, when it does
not appear to them unjust* yet unquestionably such persons as go a caping and
their Compartners, for a share of the gain, are obliged to a strict and
accurate examination of the justness of the war, since they willingly offer
themselves to such work, yea, seek for access to it as a special favor and
privilege; which they may let alone if they please, and so in this case,
ought, on the least scruple or ground of haesitation, to let it alone; and if
they go on, and seek not satisfaction to their consciences to the yondmost
annent the Justness of it, they make themselves as guilty in their station as
the Prince, State, or Commonwealth do, who engage in an unjust War; since
whatever is not done in faith and from a persuasion of the warrantableness
thereof is sin: And thought a War were uncontravertibly just, yet Grotius his
grounds before laid down, would be considered, by such especially, who out of a
covetous humor and desire to make gain, though under the silly pretext of
weakening the Enemy, the least thing ordinarily intended by them, engage
themselves in this course, which not only crusheth many poor Innocents, but is
also often waited with bloodshed, and taking of men's lives; who (it will not it
seems be readily denied) may defend themselves and their goods, the means of
the livelihood of themselves and their families, won with much toil and hazard;
and if they may endavour the preservation of these goods, and defend themselves
against such as would spoil and bereave them of them, then it is worthy of very
grave consideration, if in this case the assailants wounding, mutilating, or
killing poor private men, quietly following their callings for their bread, in
their own lawful (at least hitherto in this so circumstantiated case by
Grotius, not judged and determined unlawful) defense, will be found altogether
free (especially if the justness of the War be doubtful, or not conscientiously
inquired into) of murder: And if the aggressors themselves should be wounded
or killed by these defendants, whether they will be without all culpable
accession to their own self murder; and so whether they will not be involved
in the guilt, not only of the breach of this Eighth, but also of the Sixth
Command: And whether goods and an estate acquired or increased by such means,
may be brooked and possessed with solid peace, and with the well-grounded
expectation of Gods blessing, which makes rich, and adds no sorrow
therewith: This, I say, calls for grave consideration. Beside that, it has
been observed, that such courses have sometimes not only made these estates
that were acquired by them, quickly to melt away, but also to have been a moth
in the estates for the time bettered by them. Observable: and not altogether
aliene from this matter, is that christian and grave Act made against
Prize-goods in the Town-Councel of Edinburgh, the head City of this Kingdom, in
great Mr. Knox his days (as one blessed fruit of the Gospel amongst many
others) May 10. An. Dom. 1561. the very year after the public establishment of
the reformed Protestant Religion in Scotland. The tenure where of follows: It
is ordained that no man within this Burgh buy any Prize-goods, under the pain
of tinzel of his freedom for ever, and punishment at the will of the Civil
Magistrate, it being contrary to a good conscience, and that we are bound to
deal with every Christian Brother as we would wish to be dealt with, and the
Goods not to be sold by any godly man within this Burgh.

This Rapine, again, having a sort of pretext, becomes Oppression, when a man
by power, favor, or such like, outreacheth and goes beyond his title, and
indamageth the party with which he contendeth more then his right or title
would warrant him to do; and this may be in great men over their inferious, as
Masters over Servants, of Landlords over Tenants, of Magistrates over People or
Subjects; and in all these, who any way make use of greatness to distress
others, or thrust at them, either to make them quit a right they have, or by
retaining from them what is their due or, by exacting them by their title what
is really prejudicial to the others property, even though by oppression the
person be made willing to condescend. Thus also over-powering of others in Law
suits and Courts, and making use of monyen to bear them down in their right, is
interpreted by God as Oppression.

For the second, to wit, Theft, more properly it looks to all ways, whereby,
without pretext of violence, another is wronged: This is again divided in four.
1. If it be a wrong done to a Commonwealth, it is called peculatus, which in a
large acceptance includes not only private men, or Magistrates, stealing or
robbing the public treasure, but also Collectors, Questors, and others that
are in such like offices, who, when they intervert what belongs to public
use, become guilty; and proportionably all such as are entrusted with the
keeping and distributing of what belongs to Corporations and Societies, and
do intervert it, as Judas did in some respect, when he interverted what was
committed to his keeping for uses not allowed, and therefore he is called a
Thief, though his crime was also Sacrilege. 2. As it respects any thing
appointed for pious uses, so it is called Sacrilege; see Lev. 5. 15. Mal. 3.
8. Acts 5. 2, 3. and though now we have nothing that is holy by such a
consecration, yet what is appointed by Gods warrant for holy uses, cannot
without sin be interverted; such are Churches or houses built for Gods worship,
stipends for maintaining of his Ministers and Ordinances, because these belong
to the Church, as the other do to the Commonwealth; such also are the poors
money, collections, etc. for if their be an appropriation of these things for
that use, then why should that property be incroached on, more then other
properties? And if any should say these are the Magistrates gift, and he may
use them as he pleases? Answ. I am not speaking now of what power the
Magistrate may have in an extraordinary case of necessity, there being no doubt
times, when particular men's property will not have place, but ought to cede to
the public good; but in ordinary cases, I say, that the right which the Church
has in them, for these formentioned uses or ends, is no less then any private
man's in his own particular estate; beside that, they are indeed given unto God:
And therefore it is not in the Magistrates power to make what use of these he
pleases, neither is it at his option to appoint them, and maintain and keep
them up, or not, as he pleases, but it is his duty, and that which is required
of him to do so, as he would be found faithful in the discharge of his Office.
3. There is a gross kind of theft in men-stealing, not so much used now, as of
old, when there were Slaves, of which men made advantage: This may be also in
taking or enticing away of another man or woman's servant, to their Masters or
Mistress prejudice, which is clear theft, though often practiced, and by many,
little regarded: As likewise in seducing of Children to a false Religion, to a
bad Marriage, to evil Company, to drinking, whoring robbing, etc. to run away
from their Parents out of the Country, without a just and necessary cause, etc.
this is condemned in the Law, and 1 Timothy 1. 10. The 4. sort is single theft, or
the wronging of a man in his private and personal estate* as when a man's money,
clothes, houshold-furniture, corn, horses, cows, sheep, merchant-wares, books,
working-tools, etc. are stolen, and privily taken from him. And here do come in
the general heads of that theft formerly mentioned.

Turpe lucrum, or filthy lucre, is that gain which is acquired either by simply
unlawful, or by dishonest, unworthy, and base ways and means: As, 1. by
niggardliness, when a man seeks to make great gain of the very least and
smallest things, who uses to be called (...) and (...) or Cuminibilis, that
is, so miserable a wretch, and so base a niggard, that he would cut a
Cumin-seed and sell it. 2. By taking too largely and greedily when gifts are
going, whether to the prejudice of the giver, or of others standing in no less,
or in more need, and of no less, or it may be, of greater deserving, thereby
incapacitating him to give to them. 3. By a man's prostituting of himself,
without all necessity, only to win the world, to base offices and employments,
disgracing his station, as for great men to turn to such, whereby they eat as
it were the meat out of the mouths of poor men, who have all their days been
bred up in, and followed such imployments' For Ministers of the Gospel, in a
peaceable state of the Church, and without any necessity, to turn to, and deal
in worldly Trades; or in a time of trouble to betake themselves to the very
basest of them, when others would do as well, or well enough for their
necessary maintenance. 4. By vice and villainy, as for gain to play the whore,
to be a pimp or pander, to keep a stew or bawdy house to forswear or bear false
witness, willingly to sell drink till men drink to excess and be drunk, and to
allure and solicit them to it, if the drink may but so go away, and bring some
advantage to the Vintner, etc. 5. By squeezing, under color of Law, as by
biting Usury, forging of Writs, by moyen and buds prevailing in law to dwang a
man from his right, for a man to buy Pleas, to deal in broken, crazed, or
incumbered estates that he has no thing to do with, on design to make gain by
defrauding Creditors, or forcing them for his own advantage to hurtful
compositions, etc. 6. By excessive, immoderate and hurtful travel and pains to
win a ^ery little and inconsiderable thing, and it may be without all necessity
too. 7. By robbery and murder: Prove. 1. from v. 10. to 20. 8. By spoiling the
dead, riffling Tombs, taking offerings or linnings, etc. 9. By carding, dicing,
and Stage-playing: and making conquest and gain by any other dishonest or
crooked mean.

Thus we have hinted the first distribution of inordinateness in inquiring into
rapine, theft, and unlawful or filthy gain. Consider it again, 1. As it
wrongeth others only, or as it profits us also: 2. As being direct theft, or
as being under pretext of Law: 3. As by acquiring donations, or by mutual
contracts or bargains: 4. When it is in respect of our selves, or others" 5.
When it is in attaining, and then it is called avaritia, avarice; When in
retaining, then it is tenacitas, tenacity, niggardliness, and sordid parcimony,
in not spending with such a suitable proportionableness as is requsite, or not
giving back what is unjustly purchased, or taken from any man, by false
accusation or otherwise, called restitution, whereof Zacheus speaks* Luk 19
8. 6. When it is by an ill employment, as playing, gaming. etc. or by the abuse
of a lawful calling: 7. As it profusely wastes what we have, and spoileth
others of what we should bestow on them* or as it holds in more then is meet,
and so spoileth our selves of that comfort we might have in our estates, the
one is by prodigality, the other by sordid parcimony, as we have said; see
Prove. 11. 24. 8. As the wrong may be done at first through ignorance, or
continued in after folks come to the knowledge of it in which case the thing is
to be restored, and the amends is to be made* as is clear Lev. 5. 15. 16. And
in Abimelec^s dealing with Abraham's wife, whom, after he knew to be his wife,
he did restore again untouched.

O! how does men's addictedness to creatures make them find out many inventions
to satisfy their lust with them* Hence is this Command so broad, that it is
difficult to speak of it in all its particulars. In further prosecuting
whereof, we shall not astrict our selves to so precise a method, but endeavor
to lay down the direct breaches of it by which the positive part, and these
duties that are required, will be the more easily discernable.

Consider then its breach, 1. as it wrongeth others; 2. as it wrongeth our
selves; 3. as it wrongfully seeks to benefit our selves, or better our own
estate.

As to the first, Consider it first in the quantity, it is theft whether the
matter be in little or much, if so be it be a real wronging of others in that
which is theirs, even as a lie is a lie in any matter, in great things as well
as lesser, and this theft in little or much will seclude from the kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 6, 10. and as drunkenness may be in drink, that is, not the very
greatest quantity of drink, nor in the finest drink, so may theft be in little
or course things, Consider 2. as it looks not only to the hand, but to the
heart also, even as adultery and murder do; it is a piece of the evil treasure
that Christ faith is in the heart, Matthew. 12. 35. and 15* 18. 19. 3. It may be
sometimes, when he that commits it, knows it not, but supponeth such a
thing to be just and due to him, as when he uses not means to know, and when
he knows, does not restore it. 4. It is sometimes wholly so carried, as that
he who is wronged, knows nothing of it; as when (for instance) such a right
that would clear him in his business is to his prejudice kept up, and he made
to believe that he has no such right, although he quarrel it not, yet it is
theft before God. 5. It is direct, when though one knows such a thing to be
another, yet he will needs have it. 6. It is less or more, as there is a
seeming necessity, or none at all in the person stealing; for if the thing be
indeed necessary for life, it is not theft; so also if the thing have a general
and common allowance among men for its warrant, it is not theft, thus the
Disciples plucked the ears of corn, which was not theirs, and yet were not
thieves: The sin is gross, when in holy things, or public things, or when
things are taken with violence and hazard of life, blood, etc. or when there is
great prejudice following it to our neighbor, or when it is more frequently
gone about, or when it is under trust, etc. 7. It is in contracts or bargains
to our neighbors prejudice; as by too close sticking to clauses of Writs,
beyond, it may be, the intention of the makers, and when there is some pretext
of Law, this is against the end of Writs and Law. 8. It is in buying or
selling; and so, 1. we fail in the end, when we mind our own good only, without
any regard to our neighbors; 2. In the matter, when the thing is not good that
is sold; as the refuse of wheat that is spoken of, Amos 8. 6. so when ye sell a
thing for better then it is, or in buying, will needs make a thing worse then
it is, or pay the price in base money, you are guilty of theft: 3. When the
measure or weight is scarce, and not so much as it should be; see Amos 8 5. 4.
In the manner, when the buyer dispraiseth any thing below, and the seller
commends it beyond and above its worth, Prove. 20 14. It is naught says the
buyer, etc. which although in some degree it be inevitable, yet no doubt, when
on either hand it is wittingly and designedly done, it is a fault. 9. It may be
committed in the matter of just debts; As, 1. when nothing is paid; 2. When a
part is only paid; 3. when payment is made out of time, which prejudiceth them
we owe to, as much as if we kept a part back; 4. when means are used to get
what we owe diminished; 1. by dwanging and constraining a man to quit some part
of it; 2. by dealing indirectly to get something down of the sum which we owe
10. It is committed when advantage is taken of another necessity, and so 1.
when they are constrained to sell cheaper, then without loss they can; 2. when
we sell dearer to our neighbor, because we see he must have it; 3. when
neighbor, because we see he must have it; 3. when one is forced to
unreasonable terms, because he must have money; dealings of this nature are
like to that, to fell the poor for a pair of shoes, which is reproved Micah.
8. 5, 6. 7. and is a gross theft. It is true, in some cases, as for instance,
when others would not buy such things, and we need them not our selves, neither
would buy them, were it not for our neighbors good, and if they be not so
useful for us, an abatement in such a case may be lawfully sought. 11. It may
be by Lawsuits, even when Law seems to side with folks, summum jus, being
often, summa injuria; as 1. by putting folks needlessly to sue for their own, or
by our seeking what is not ours; 2. by bearing through a business to the
prejudice of another, upon a title of Law beyond Equity; the first is condemned
1. Cor. 6. 1. etc. the second in Job 31. 21. If I have list up my hand against
the fatherless (says Job) when I saw my help in the gate; see also to this
purpose Prove. 3. 29. 30. 12. There is a breach of it by wronging our neighbor
under trust (which is a high degree of theft) As 1. by giving advice to his
prejudice, when he lipneth to, and confideth in our counsel; 2. When Advocates
are not faithful; 3. When Partners in trade and bargainings are not faithful
one to another; 4. When Servants, Factors, Treasurers, ^tc. are not faithful,
who, as Joseph, have all committed to them, and like the unjust Steward, can
count up or down fifty for eighty, and eighty for fifty; 5. Especially here
fail Tutors of Orphans and Fatherless Children, who having these committed to
their trust, make it their work to prey upon their estates, if they can but do
it handsomely, and without observation, this is theft, robbery, oppression, and
deceitful dealing, in the highest degree. 13. There is a breach of it by
bribery, when Judges suffer themselves to receive gifts, presents, buds or
bribes, whether to the perverting of Judgment, or for doing right in Judgment
which they are obliged to do without these. Whoever suffer themselves to be
bribed for Judging right, may easily be tempted by a bribe to do wrong in
Judgment; all such forget that the Judgment is the Lords, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. that
they ought not to judge for men but for the Lord, 2 Chorn. 19. 6. that they
ought in a special manner to be fearers of God, men of truth, and haters of
couetou^ness, Exodus 18. 21. that they should not respect persons in Judgment,
but hear the small as well as the great, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. that they should not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but judge
righteous Judgment, Lev. 19. 15. that they ought not to wrest Judgment, nor to
take a gift (which blinds the eyes even of the wise, and perverteth the words
of the righteous, Deuteronomy. 16. 19. Exodus 23. 8.) and that fire shall consume the
tabernacles of bribery, Job. 15. 34. the Lord does highly resent, and will most
severely punish the breach of this Command in such, because they do more
immediately represent himself, as being placed in Judgment to supply his room.
14. There is a breach of it when there is inequality betwixt our advantage, and
that which is expended by us for others, or when for what is not useful and
needful, their money in trusted to us is exhausted, or when we occasion them to
spend money needlessly, upon any thing that is not useful, but rather hurtful,
as in excessive drinking, feasting clothing, that is full of vanity, or in
vain fashions of clothing, playing at unlawful games, as cards and dice, or
excessively at unlawful games, or in dancing and fidling, and such like, which
are amongst the lavish and profuse ways of living, and whoever are accessory
to make others follow these, or for these do procure money from others, become
thieves. And thus all idle Vagabonds, Playfairs, Sporters, Minstrellers,
Stage Players, and such like, livers on other folks charges, are guilty of the
breach of this Command. 15. There is a wronging of our Neighbors estate by
negligence, sloth, etc. when that is not done which we ought to do for their
good; this is done especially by Tutors, by Servants, and others, who stand in
such relations to any, as that by virtue thereof they are obliged to have a
care of what they are interested in. 16. We wrong others by engaging them to be
sureties for us, when we see not a way how to relieve them. The ingagers
themselves also become guilty of the breach of this Command, except in such
cases wherein equity and charity requires their engaging, and this way, many
are stolen from their estates. 17 It is committed in retaining what is our
neighbors; As, 1. when the payment of money or things borrowed is delayed
beyond the time appointed, Prove. 3. 28. 2. When things borrowed are hurt or
wronged, the Lord gives Laws for this, Exodus 22. 14. 3. When pledges are lost
by negligence, or interverted to our own use; 4. When our Neighbors beast is
straying, and when seen by us, and not kept for him, as we would he should do
to us; see Deuteronomy. 22. 2. Lev. 6. 4. 5. When something is lost, and we keep it,
as if finding gave us a right to it; it should be for the right owner, and if
he cannot be found, public signification should be made of it, as the Law
requires. 18. This Command obliges us to restore, 1. What we have unjustly
taken from, or gained of others any way, as Zacheus did, Luke 19. 8. It is
recorded of Selymus the Turkish Emperor, a most bloody man, that when he was a
dying, one of his Bas^aas desiring him to build an Hospital for relief of the
poor, with the wealth taken from the Persian Merchants; he replied thus,
Would thou, Pyrthus, that I should bestow other men's goods, wrongfully
taken from them, on works of Charity and Devotion, for mine own vain glory and
praise? assuredly I will never do it; nay, rather see they be bestowed on the
right owners again. Which was done forthwith accordingly, to the great shame of
many Christians, who mind nothing less then the restitution of ill gotten
goods, whether by themselves, or by their Ancestors, but cull out some small
fragments of a world of such ill-gotten goods to bestow on some charitable or
pious work, as they call it. Zacheus his penitent Proclamation here consisted
of two branches, to wit, restitution and destribution. 2. It obliges even
Children that have somewhat transmitted to them from their Parents, which they
have unjustly conqueished, to restore it, otherwise they make themselves
guilty: And in all these we would distinguish the Court of the Lord, or of
Conscience, from men's Civil Courts, and thus it will not warrant the Heir
before God (though before men it may) to retain that which he possesses, that
the Father left him a right to what he unjustly purchased. It may be it is the
doing of this which makes great estates melt away in the Childrens hands,
because it thus descended; the Lord hereby would have men know that they are
not richest who have most left them, but who have it well conqueished with Gods
blessing. 19. Consider it as it does not properly take from our neighbors, yet
wrongeth them and deteriorateth their estate; so men may wrong the house they
dwell in, the horse they ride on, or any thing which is set or given in loan to
them; thus they may wrong the instruments that others win their living with; so
also we wrong others when their time is taken up either by waiting idly on us,
or by unnecessary employments put upon them, visits, and such like; or when
weakness of body is occasioned to them by any of these, thus Exodus 21. 19. the
Lord will have reparation made for lost time, as well as for lost means. Many
tiplers are thieves this way, to each other, and to themselves, which God will
make them count for, how little soever they think of it. 20. There is a
wronging of our neighbor without a compensation, and there is a wronging him
with a pertended compensation, that is, either when the thing is not so good in
it self, or not so good to him; thus Achab, 1 Kings 17. was guilty in desiring
Naboths Vineyard, even though he offered him as good, yet it was not so good to
Naboth, because this was his Fathers, and he esteemed it more: Thus also there
is a stealing of another man's contentment, although that in which he places it
may be a matter of very little or no worth at all, but yet if therein he has
an interest of affection, as they call it, such as a man may have for some
petty Jewel, a Hawk, a Hound, or the like, so that it please him, or delight
him, the wronging of him in that, is not only a sin against the sixth Command,
in grieving him, but against this in prejudicing him of his contentment, which
as to him in some respect, is a sorer wrong, then the taking from him of that
which in it self were of far greater worth, would have been. 21. There is a
failing by unskilfulness; as when one takes on him some office, and receiv eth
wages or hire for it, and is not qualified for, nor suitable to the place and
employment; thus Physicians, Lawyers, and Judges, often steal from men, through
their ignorance: As also Ministers who supply Charges they are unfit for, and
consume that which should entertain others* but this sin in Ministers is
oftentimes more through unfaithfulness, when being sustained for the good of
the people, they turn rather to be hurtful. Thus Christ* John 10. 1. calls
false Prophets, Thieves and Robbers And indeed it is the worst gain in the
world, that utterly unskilful and unfaithful Ministers get by straving and
murdering the immortal souls of men, 22. We wrong others when we communicate
not to them when they are in need, and we in a capacity to help them, yea, when
by idleness and prodigality we incapacitate our selves to communicate to the
necessities, of others as Ephesians. 4. 28 is clear. 23. Beside, there comes in
here all selling and buying of what should not be sold or bought, as public
places in Church or State; this first from Simon Magus, Acts 8. 18. 19. is
called Simony, and is a sin of a high degree, making that saleable which the
Lord will have free: and it takes in not only giving money, but any other
thing upon this account to promove such and such persons, or receiving any
thing to be sweyed so, and so whether it be munus manus, linguae aut actionis,
a gift of the hand, tongue, or action. 1. By a gift of the hand is understood
money or things that are usually given. 2. A gift of the tongue comprehends
fair speeches, solicitations flatteries, etc. 3. By a gift of action is
understood, service, dependence, on waiting and courtesies (as they are called)
made use of to procure another favor; and in all these three men may greatly
sin, as when they hunt after, and are sweyed with any of them, and so covet
them; as when Magistrates or Judges sell Justice for bribes, when men by lying
and false-witness bearing, sell the truth* whereof Lawyers are chiefly guilty,
who for fees plead ill causes wittingly: or when one gives them, that he may
gain more really upon the other; as for instance, when men by any of these
bribes buy Justice, and much more Injustice, and buy lies and false testimonies
to prevent or pervert Justice. 24. There is a guilt in consenting too,
encouraging in, conniving at, or justifying of such as commit this sin, or are
receivers or resetters of what is stolen, for their strengthening and
encouragement; see Psalm. 50. 18. Prove. 1. 10. 25. Seasing upon other folks
goods sometimes under pretext of escheats, as Admirals do upon Sea wrack, and
such like; when there is no just ground to take away the owners right, and this
is reckoned open violence before God, and is a most cruel adding of affliction
to the afflicted. This sin then of Theft, in reference to our neighbors, is
fallen into by violence, deceit, negligence, unfaithfulness* ignorance
unskilfulness, etc. And when all is said, a tender heart will still need its
own examination and trial of it self, there being as many ways to break this
Command, as there are ways to prejudice our neighbors estate.

We come now to consider how a man is guilty in wronging his own estate (for
there is a skill and dexterity in the managing the unrighteous Mammon) which we
consider two ways; 1. As he wrongeth and diminishes his estate by not
providently caring for its preservation and increase, or improvement' when he
is not frugal, or not so frugal as he ought to be, but lazy and sloathful, he
becomes guilty of the breach of this Command, because he incapacitateth
himself for being useful to others, and puts himself in hazard of poverty
and want, which is the proper snare of this sin of stealing* and disposes for
it, Prove. 30. 9. This poverty which is so ensnairing, is brought on 1. By
sinful spending and debauching away of our estate and time, as the Prodigal
did, Luke. 15. 11. etc. 2 By unnecessary waste in prodigality and lavishness,
such as (though unjustly) Judas condemned in the woman, spoken of John 12. 5*
For much spending must have much to uphold it, and must have many ways to
furnish it self according to the Proverb most ordinarily verified, Omnis
Prodigus est avarus, every Prodigal man is greedy or covetous, to satisfy one
lust he exerceth another; however, he being but a steward of what he
possesses, he by his prodigality, not only interverteth from the right end
what means God has given him to be otherwise disposed of, but also draws
upon himself poverty. 3. By negligence, laziness, carelessness, etc. in a lawful
calling (for they that are given to sleep, or idleness, shall come to poverty,
as the Wise man says) or being without a calling altogether. When God gives
men ability of body or mind, it is sad that they should be useful for nothing,
nor active in any thing but to sin, and be snairs and reproaches unto
Christians and Christian Religion, as all idle persons, bearing the name of
Christians, are, whoever they be, whether Gentlemen or others It is observable,
that both before the fall, and after the fall, God put that task of working in
man's hand, commanding him to labor: many other such foolish ways there are
whereby a man comes unto poverty, and becomes guilty of not providing for
himself, or his family: Also by suretyship many are bowed and brought low,
which although it is not simply to be condemned, more then to give freely, yet
it is to be well regulated by charity and prudence, directing so to assist our
neighbor in his present exigence, as we may also be sure of our after relief,
lest for the debts of others, our own families be made to moan for want. 2. We
may consider a man's failing in reference to this Command, as he wrongeth and
steals from himself the ^ree and comfortable use of his own estate; of this
man Solomon speaks, Eccles. 4. 6. 8. and 6. 1, 2. and he stewardeth not the
world well when he has it, who cannot find in his heart to live on his own,
and who lives heartlesly as if he had nothing at all* in this repect a man
wrongeth himself, and particularly these ways; 1. By coveting too great a
measure of riches, so that he will not be content with enough, but he will and
must be rich, this is avaritia, or greed, even though the means be lawful which
he uses for acquiring of riches. 2. By the vexing anxious manner of seeking
after even what is necessary: Thus a man may be diffidently and vexingly
solicitous for his to morrows dinner, and be vexed about it, as it is Matthew. 6.
31. Caring for the morrow, what he shall eat or drink, or taking thought about
it, this is carking carefulness. 3. There is a failing in keeping any thing of
the world that we have gotten, when we cannot bestow it* cannot twin or part
with it, for charitable, either public or private, uses, nay not for honest
uses, this is niggardliness: And when it is universal, both in reference to our
selves and others, it is Du^ities, or extreme hardness. 4. Some may spend on
themselves liberally, but they can part with nothing for charitable supply of
others, such a one was Na^al, 1 Samuel 25. and this is churlishness. 5. Some
cannot even bestow on themselves what is sufficient, either for meat, drink, or
clothing, as we may see Eccles. 6. 1. 2. and chap. 4. 8. that the man has
much, and yet can neither sleep nor eat heartily, because the comfortable use
of creature enjoyments is Gods gift, this is sordidness. Over all these persons
the world prevails, it mastereth and overcomes them, and they do not master
and overcome it as Christians ought to do.

If we would come to consider, in the next place, how a man should profit
better, and improve his own estate, it will be hard to speak so of it as to
pitch upon particulars; for certainly God allows prae^onie, or suitable and
due sparing, and frugalitie, as he disalloweth and discountenanceth the
extremes in the defect and excess; we would then consider the midst, in qu^
sta^ virtus, as they use to say, and so speak of the positive part in these
following questions. 1. If a man may aim and endeavor to increase his estate,
how far? by what means? or how? and for what ends? 2. How we are to walk in
merchandise and bargains? 3. How to walk in charity, alms, and distributing to
others? 4. How to walk in managing of our estate, as to the gathering, keeping,
or preserving and using o^ it? 5. What to judge of, and how to carry in Usury
(as it is called)? 6. What to account of the punishment of theft in the Court
of men? 7. How it came that the covetous have been so marked or noted in the
primitive times, 1 Cor. 6. 10. and Ephesians. 5. 5. that they have been looked on
as persons secluded from Heaven, and not worthy of Church fellowship? and what
marks to know them by? where we may touch a littl on the ill of that sin, and
speak a word by way of disswasive from it.

For the first, That one may lawfully increase his estate or goods, cannot be
denied, it being well qualified: Jacob, Genesis 30. 30. found it necessary to
provide for his family; and 1. Tim. 5. 8. it is a thing that nature it self
teaches a very Infidel. The great matter is to qualify it rightly; 1. as to
the end, 2. the measure, 3. the means, 4. the way and the manner.

1. For the end, 1. The chief and last is God-glory that we may be serviceable
to him with our substance, in our generation, and may be kept from stealing and
lying, Prove. 30. 8. 9. 2. Others good, that we may be helpful to them, for men
may and should work for this end, although they had what were sufficent for
themselves, see Ephesians. 4. 28. 3. Our selves are to be considered, and we are to
look here, 1. to necessity, 2. to c^nvenience, 3. to honesty. There is a
threefold necessicy, 1. of providing for our selves, 2. for our family, 1 Timothy
5. 8. 3. for our place and station, such as Nehemiah, cap. 5: 14. etc. was
apprehensive of, hence tribute is allowed to the Magistrate, being in so
public and eminent a station^, and so useful for the people: In all these we
should live, as far as may be, on our own, having an eye to that direction of
the Wise man, Prove. 5. 15. 2. Conveniencie requires more then necessity, and
is to be provided for, see Prove. 30. 8. where* Ag^^ prays for that which is
neither too much nor too little, but convenient. 3. There is honesty, and this
has yet a farther reach then convenience, and thus we are to provide things
honest in the fight of all men, which may be lawfully aimed at; to be honest
then* even before men, is commendable, honesty being no pride, see Romans 12. 17.
2 Cor. 8. 21.

2. As for the measure which is to be kept in the increasing of our goods, it
is hard to determine it, yet sure folks are not left to gather as much as they
may even by lawful means attain to, having no bound set to their desires,
designs, and endeavors, but adding one thing to another, till they be, as it
were, alon^ in the earth, which is reproved, Isai. 5. 8. Hab. 2. 9. This
boundlesness, alace! haunteth and attends too many, and has never
satisfaction. Agur found there was an excess in riches to be prayed against, as
well as poverty, other ways he durst not so have prayed: It is with riches as
with meat and drink, competencie is good, but excess surfetteth and loadeth,
Luke 2^. 34. Hab. 2. 6. We conceive these generals may be laid down here, 1.
What may conduce for the ends aforesaid, and is necessary, convenient, and
honest; that men may aim at, and no further is needful. 2. Riches not being
promised, but only what is convenient, and our endeavors being commanded only
for things honest* this indeed may be aimed at, but a man should not intend to
attain to any thing beyond what he has a promise or command for: The promise
is, ^e shall not want any good thing, Psalm 34. 10. and 84. 11. which is indeed
broad enough, and may in some respect be extended even to the command for
things honest, whereof we have spoken; see Hebr. 13. 5, 6. where, in the Greek
(to guard the hearts of the people of God against covetousness, and to fortify
against all fears of wanting what is necessary and competent) there is a five
fold negative in the promise, I will not, not, leave thee, neither, not, not*
will I forsake thee, (...) -- 3. A man may aim and endeavor to be as rich as
he may warrantably pray to be, but no more; and his prayers are guided partly
by the promises, and by the commands, Give us this day our daily bread -- and
partly by the Saints approved examples, as that of Agurs, Give me neither
poverty nor riches, Prove. 30. 7. 8. 4. The measure may be judged of, and tried
by this general, to wit, if the omitting of such a thing has the just ground
of a challenge in it, a man must think it his duty to aim at that, and his sin,
if he should not, and it is not his inclination or affection that must guide
him here; now men will be challenged in their conscience for not aiming at
competencie, but not for not seeking to be rich* only know there is not, not
can be one rule for the same measure to all persons, in this matter; men having
different burdens and charges may seek more or less accordingly, and therefore
when Jacobs family increased, Genes. 31. he thought it time to provide for
them, neither can there he a rule for the same measure, even for the same
persons at all times, as is clear Jerem. 45. 5. in B^ruch and Ne^e^^a^, Nehem.
5. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. men ought not to aim to be as others, but as is needful
and competent for their rank, burden, and station. Neither 5. must we reckon
in this matter by a man's success; some there are who think they are exonered if
they use but any means for providing for themselves, and they have a sort of
peace in the endeavor, be it less or more: Others there are, who even by
lawful means seek, and also attain to more then is convenient for them, and
think they may do so, because they have success; but endeavors would be suited
and proportioned to the foresaid ends, with dependence on Gods blessing,
whatever be the success, Psalm 127. 12.

3. It would be qualified by the right means, there would be righteousness in
the way of purchasing or conqueishing our estate; and it supposes, 1. That it
be by a lawful occupation, which excludes what is gained by cards, dice,
wodding, or wagering, etc. 2. By an occupation useful to others, as well as
profitable to us, gain must not only nor chiefly sway; but, we should aim at
that wherein we may be useful to Church or State in our Generation, then it is
lawful to make gain, as the wages of that service. All Tradesmen, and men in
place, would be as Officers to Church or State, and upon that ground they have
a right to make gain. These tradings in Wines, in such quantities at least,
that wrong the Country, and in other things subservient to vanity. I know not
well what to say of them. only I think, I may say it had been good for
Commonwealths, some Trades had never been: It is the thing that is cond^mned
Romans 13. 13, 14. Ephesians. 4. 23. 3. We would have a care that neither deceit,
lying, or any other unlawful shift be used in a lawful calling, which may wrong
it, Leci^. 19. 1^.

4. As to the manner, it would be qualified thus, 1. That it be in obedience to
God, serving him in some measure in that Calling or Trade, as well as in
Prayer; and acknowledging him in the particulars of our gain: 2. That it be by
faith on him, waiting, as was just now said, for the blessing from him, Psalm
127. 1. 3. That it be by a Christian way in every thing, submitting to him when
a cross comes, being without peremptoriness or anxiety, being quiet in
praying, as Matthew. 6. but not thoughtful: 4. That it be by trysting and
ordering our care for our estate in the World, so as it may be most consistent
with promoving our edification, and we not in^angled with the affairs of this
life, as it is 2 Timothy 2. 4. nor so hedged up and straightened with them, as to
have no time for other things more necessary: In sum, our manner would be such
as the heart may be kept in a good frame for praying, praising, keeping
communion with God, and even for dying in the midst of our endeavors of that
kind, Luke 21. 34. other ways we may be su^fetted, even in cares, about lawful
things, and made also indisposed for spiritual duties, as a man is by gluttony
and drunkenness.

Let there be therefore moderation in all these respects, other ways, as says
the Scripture, a man that will be rich, 1. He loadeth himself with a burden of
thick clay, Hab. 2. 6. 2. He puts himself amongst briers and thorns, for
Matthew. 13. 22. riches are compared to these: 3. He surfetteth himself as a
drunken man does, Luke 21. 3^. 4. He runs himself in a snare, and draws on
many sorrows, nay pierces himself through with them, 1 Timothy 6. 10. O! but many
souls will cry out greatly one day of this evil of immoderate pursuing after
riches: 5. He brings a woe from God upon himself, Isai. 5. 8. 6. He will
readily be high-minded and proud, 1 Timothy 6. 17. 7. He is in eminent hazard to
trust in these uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6. 8. He is in great danger to turn
aside from the truth, and to embrace error, which is strange, yet most true; 1 Timothy 6. 10. 9. He is in great hazard to be an oppressor, James 2. 6. and 5. 4.
10. Riches immoderately sought after, do the man still evil that possesses
them, as Agurs prayer, Hezekiahs experience, and 1 Timothy 6. 10, 11. is evident,
where it is said they fall into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
them in perdition and destruction.

The second thing is concerning trading and merchandise, whereof we shall say
but little in particular; In general then, 1. Trading is lawful in it self, as
a mean to the ends proposed, as is said, being also well qualified (as was
spoke to in the former) conform to the qualifications of end, midses, means,
manner. 2. There may be faults in buying and selling both, all men generally
loving to buy within the worth, and to sell dear, as a Heathen once told a
Company what was in all their minds. 3. A Merchant-man and Tradesman bestowing
his time, pains, estate in trading, may take gain as the wages of his pains, as
a servant may do for his work, as Teachers and Physicians may do for their
pains, because they cannot be wanted, and none can go about these employments
without livelihood, therefore is the workman worthy of his hire, but it must be
such a work as is worthy. 4. Yet a man's rule in bargaining is not to take
whatever he can get; nay, not always as he bought, having, it may be, bought too
dear, or these Wares not being now in such esteem, nor as they were when bought
by him; nor is the price always to be hightned by him as the Wares grow more
scarce, if so be they be not dearer to him. But Folks would consider, 1. The
worth of the thing in it self, and according to the necessary and just
circumstances of his Calling and Trade; so that suppose they were buying it
themselves, they would be content to give as much as they demand, and men
should never offer less to others, then they would demand themselves, though
their ordinary way is much contrary to this, as we may see Prove. 20. 14. 2. No
shifts are to be used by the seller to overvalue or call his Ware better then
it is, or by the buyer to under-value and despise it, below what we think it to
be, Levit. 19. 11. 3. We should never simply or only mind our own advantage in
selling and buying without respect to the advantage of others, but would so
sell and buy as they might be also gainers; and thus we see that charity
regulateth us, Phil. 2. 4. 4. Neither would the buyer deceitfully hide what may
commend the price of Wares, nor the seller what may make it less; as suppose
one knew such Wares or Merchandise would shortly grow cheaper or dearer, and
therefore ^he either sells or buyeth purposely to put the loss on his
Neighbor, or at least to make gain to himself, without any regard to his
neighbors loss. 5. There would be ingenutiy in buying and selling, that which
ye call prigging or cheapning, is not good; both buyer and seller should put a
just value upon Wares, and hold there; there is much juggling and falsehood, and
lying when it is other-wayes, see Ephesians. 4. verse. 25. Prove. 20. 14. 6. There
ought to be no taking advantage of another necessity, ignorance, and
simplicity. 7. In a word, we would sell and buy, and do to others as we would
have them do to us, and so we would keep up no fault we know, of the things we
sell, give good measure and good money, etc. All these things come in under
trading and merchandising, and thus one just price should be kept, so far as
may be.

If it were asked here, how we may pitch or settle on a just price? It is hard
to answer this question to full conviction and satisfaction; yet a man would
consider, 1. What he himself, having knowledge of the goods, would give for
such and such, corn, cloth, beasts, or whatever it be, if he has or had use
for them, or were to buy them. 2. What men of knowledge do judge such a thing
to be worth, and what may be the price of it (if the price be by Authority
regulated, it sets it self.) 3. What such a thing does generally cost
amongst those that are judicious and conscientious. 4. What he would give for
the like possibly again, when this is away, allowing fit gain. In sum, there
are th^ee sorts of prices; the 1. Is rigid, when men must have what they will
for their Ware: The 2. is e^sie, this is only at some times when it is called
for, but it is not always necessary, and selling thus, in such cases, is an
honest giving, which men are not always at least obliged ^o. The 3. is pretium
medium, or the middle or modest price, which is betwixt the two, and in no
extreme; yet when any question is, whether this much or that much is to be
taken? It is safest carving on the side that lies next our selves. 5. A man
would consider how he would proceed in that bargain, so as he might have peace,
if he were just now to die, and what he durst adventure on in that case, let
him do the same in all his bargains.

Amongst the many and great uses of riches, some of them concern our selves,
some of them others, and there lies no less necessity upon us to show mercy
for the supply of others, then to pay our debt, or supply our selves, and to a
man in case for it, God has not left the one indifferent more then the other.
For clearing of which, we would consider that God, who is the great owner and
absolute proprietor of the Creatures, and who distributed them to men according
to his pleasure, has distributed riches to some, as it were to Stewards, to be
made use of for his household, as may be gathered from Luke 16. 10, 11, 12.
Hence it is not left arbitrary to men to give alms, or not, as they think meet,
but it lies on them as an absolute duty: Hence also we may see what a sin it
is to be altogether neglective of it, or deficient in it; 1. It is a stealing
and theft, as is employed, Ephesians. 4. 28. 2. It is perfidiousness and
unfaithfulness in a trust committed to us, Luke 16. 9. etc. 3. It is cruelty
and murder, and hating of our brother, 1 John 3. verse. 15. and 17. compared;
and indeed, if it be intolerable in a man's Steward entrusted with that which
the family should be provided with, to apply to his own use what should
entertain them, or to spend it on himself, it being both stealth,
unfaithfulness, and cruelty; so is it no less intolerable in this case, see
Prove. 11. 14. 25. This giving of ^lms rightly qualified, is highly accounted of
in Scripture, and assigned as the mark of a righteous man, Psalm 119. 9.
noticed and commended in a special manner at the day of Judgment, Matthew. 25 30.
etc. commanded as a duty, Dout. 15. 7* 11, 14. 21. and 26. 11. etc. and much
pressed and insisted on, 2 Cor. 8 9. and scarcely will we find in all the
Scripture one particular duty about which two whole Chapters together are
spent, but this, which holds out the great complacency the Lord has in the
single and suitable practice of it, it being there deservedly set down and
insisted upon as a sure evidence of the reality of our professed subjection to
the Gospel.

Let us see then 1. wherein it consists? 2. who is the object of it, ^3. who
is to give, 4. how for manner and measure it is to be given? 1. Alms, is not
every, giving, for that may be of debt, or it may be to a rich man, or one that
has no need, out of pride, or for the fashion; but 1 there is a needy object
from which, we can expect nothing again, to this we are to give alms; 2. There
is a doing it upon the account of the Command, as thereby honoring our Maker,
and testifying our love to Christ, which is to do it to a Disciple, in the name
of a Disciple; Matthew 10. 41, 4^. it takes in all supply, as meat, drink*
visiting them, vindicating them comforting them, by lending, giving, forgiving
of any thing that is owing, etc 2. The object, neighbor, is large, but it is
the needy one only that is to be looked to, Ephesians. 4. ^8. and Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
And the poor ones, who may be considered, 1. As to the degree of their need
three ways, 1. Need that is common, and such as folks may fend with it; 2.
that is pinching, when they fend with difficulty; 3. that is extreme, when they
cannot subsist; In the first cafe, men are to give out of their abundance, 2
Cor. 8. 14. and need not straiten themselves for the supply of such poor; In
the second they ought to straiten themselves, that they may be in case to
supply others, as when they have two coats, give one, Luke 3 verse. 11. In the
third, they would straiten themselves, though it were to sell all, and divide
it, which the Apostle calls, 2 Corinthians. 8. 3. a doing beyond power, which is
not always called for.

2. Consider them either as able to work, and by idleness occasioningt heir own
need, as many beggars and loiterers, though of better rank, do; these are not
objects of Charity, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11. it is their own fault they want* or 2. as
having able and rich friends, such as Parents, Children, Kinsfolk, etc. The
Church, and proportionally, particular persons, ought not to be burdened with
these, 1 Timothy 5. 16. or 3. as wanting all comforts, and as weak, Levit. 25. 47.
the Apostle calls them desolate, 1 Timothy 5. 10. -- These are proper objects of
Charity and Alms.

3. Consider them either 1. as of kin and related to us, and nature teaches us
to begin here first, and to supply the necessity of these; or 2. as gracious;
or 3. as our flesh, and as men, here we should do good to all, though
especially to the household of Faith, Galat. 6. 10. proportioning
notwithstanding our charity according to our ties; for a man may give a natural
and unregenerate Child more then a regenerate neighbor, yet he is to supply
both if he be able.

3. But who should give? Answ. All having a competencie of their own, and power
of it; those who have nothing, are not called to it, neither also Children and
Wives, they being in some respect not in power or capacity to distribute,
except so far as the allowance of their station goes; for the relation of
Wife, Son, etc. gives some latitude in some things, wherein it is supposed
that the Husband or Father cannot be averse: But particularly we say, 1. Rich
folks are obliged to give, even although they be wicked, for unfaithful
Stewards are obliged to distribute, even a Nabal as well as others, and they
may in some cases, when uncivilly refusing, be put to it. 2. Folks that have
little are obliged to give, though it should be the less, as the poor widow
gave her two mites, Luke ^1. 2. etc. and so Christ speaks of giving a Cup of
cold water, Matthew. 10. 42. 3. Folks that may and can work, should work, for
this very end, that they may have to give, and that although they themselves be
no other ways entertained but by their work, Ephesians. 4. ^8. O! how little
conscience is made of this? how few work, or work somewhat harder for this end?

4. Consider how, as to the manner and measure, Charity or Alms is to be
distributed: It would be 1. liberally, 2. cheerfully; it is dragged from some,
as if it were a cross and burden to them; 3. seasonably, so that when there is
need, there would not be so much as a nights delay, Prove. 3. 28. 4. Prudently
and tenderly, so as not to shame the poor, and to make them scarr at it; thus
Boaz commanded to let fall some handfuls to Ruth, that she might gather the
more; 5. judiciously, according to need, and where there is most need: 6.
humbly and denyedly, not letting the right hand know what the lest does, Matthew.
6. 3. and not being puffed up so as to slight and contemn those we give our Alms
to.

For general rules to direct in this matter, I propose these: 1. Lay by such a
quota of your estate or gain, and let that be dedicated to the use of Charity,
that ye may have it to bring forth when particular occasions shall offer; men
would not always stay till it be sought, but would have, as it were, a poors
box, or a box for the poor by them, so the Lords appointing a certain Tithe
under the Law for widows, fatherless, etc. Deuteronomy. 14 22. etc. and Deuteronomy. 16. 12.
with Numb. 18. 21. insinuates that there should be a proportion of our estate
laid aside for charitable uses; and that direction of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 16.
1. for every man to lay by him, etc. does confirm this, the doing of this would
help a man to discern the proportion best of what he is able to spare, to be
thus employed, which he cannot do in particular occasions, because he knows
them not; but in the general he may proportion what he may spare to all in
common, and thereafter subdivide wisely upon considerations and
after-emergents; yet so, as when necessity is extreme, he go beyond that which
is his ordinary allowance; this also would prevent all temptations having any
tendency to the dissuading of us from any thing for that use, if some what were
set apart for it, and it would also ease the mind and conscience of such who
were tender, if in some particulars they failed, to be clear that they did not
hold it in for their own advantage, but that they were forthcoming according
to their ability.

2. This would be done monthly or weekly, as the Apostle has it, 1 Cor. 16. 1.
because it is reasonable that every week or month should have somewhat
allotted for that use, and it will be spared with less grudge then when it
comes to somewhat considerable, being put together.

3. Folks would not delay giving till the needy person seek; they are often the
greater objects of charity who seek not; poverty is no reproach, but Vagabond
begging, and floathful idleness, when men are able to work, has ever been so,
and should not be tolerated amongst Christians; but these who are right
objects of Charity should be provided for, and as it is in Nebem. 8. 10.
p^rtions should be sent to them.

4. Hence there should be some wise mutual way of inquiring into folks
necessities, and the fairest way taken of conveying our Charity to them, such
as may be least burthensom to their ingenuity, as Boaz did with Ruth, in
private commanding his Servants to let fall some handfuls; this some may ^o,
who may have more access to, and dexterity in, doing things of that nature,
then others, therefore friendly associations for this end, that some might
give, and others distribute, would be suitable.

If it should be here more particularly inquired, What may be the qu^ta of this
that is to be bestowed* which must be understood of ordinary cases (for
extraordinary cannot be stinted.) It is hard to fix particular rules, because
it must vary, 1. according to the givers estate, 2. according to their need who
receive, 3. according to the several burdens of the givers, who are to extend
their Charity less or more accordingly; for it may be that they have their own
poor children or friends, whom they must furnish, and ^o cannot give so much as
others, who are free of the like burdens. Look therefore to these general
Rules; 1. That Charity be liberal and in bounty, not in covetousness; too
little is a fault, and too much also may be one, though not so great as the
other; see 2 Cor. 8. 12. 2. Let it be by Christian prudence, in a conscientious
deliberation determined, as 2 Co^int. 9. 7. ^s every man purposes in his
heart, etc. If a man will put it to a conscientious deliberation, he does well,
and it will not want fruits: I think many could not judge their way to be
conscientiously charitable and communicative, if they would thus simply and
unbyassedly put it to the trial. 3. Folks would judge it by an equality, as it
is 2 Cor. 8. 13. 14. for one man cannot fully supply all. Now it is somewhat
proportionable, if a man, considering the state of poor ones and other
occasions, can discern so much to be useful and needful to them, and that his
part of that would come to this much, and accordingly to give (even as all gave
their proportion of tithes under the Law) whatever others did, only this sa^eth
that men would even go beyond their power sometimes, when others fail. 4. Folks
would set aside the half of their needless superfluity, that they may be able
to give out of their abundance, that is, when men's families are competently
provided of meat, clothing, and estate, if there be still more, let there be
as much laid aside to this use; For 1. this cannot burden them; 2. Less cannot
be admitted of before God, then to bestow as much on the necessities of others,
as on our own superfluities; and 3. this would amount to much, if so much were
bestowed on Charity as we bestow on the superfluities of meat, wine, building
of houses, household plenishing, vain apparel, laces, and other dressings of
that sort. 5. The Lord in the Law stinted the people to a tenth, or thereby;
for Numb. 18. 21. there was one tenth to the Levites alone, who were to give
the tenth of that to the Priests, this might be eaten any where. Again, Deuteronomy.
14. 22. and Deuteronomy. 26. there was a second tenth to be eaten for two years before
the Lord, by the man and his household, as well as by the Levite, fatherless and
widow, etc. but every third year was for them only. Now (not to be peremptory)
by this proportion it would seem that the Lord calls for a considerable part,
near or about, the tenth of our free rent or gain, which he would have us to
employ thus, and this would be found no great burden, and it might be waited
with Gods blessing upon what remains.

It is then, you see, no little part of wisdom to walk rightly in the things
of the World, yet as holiness is no friend to covetousness, so neither is it to
prodigality, there is a midst betwixt these two, which is called frugality,
this is well consistent with piety, for it neither carkingly gathers, nor
carelessly neglects, nor prodigally wastes or casts away, but is a sparing
and spending, a gaining and giving out according to right reason. But for the
further explication of it, I shall put you in mind of these following
Scriptures, which have so many properties, qualifications, evidences, or
commendations of frugality. 1. It provideth for things honest before God and
men, 2 Corinthians. 8. 21. Romans 12. 17. 2. It makes a man look well to his herds
and flocks, and in a gainful sinless calling is diligent, Prove. 27. 23. and not
sloathful in business. Romans 12. 11. -- 3. It is not vain and lordly, so a
frugal woman is described, Prove. 31. 10. etc. by being honest in her carriage,
honest in her family, providing for her husband, children, and servants,
clothes, fare, etc. yet not vain, she makes her own cloth, and her family is
provided for, in an honest thrifty way, without great cost. 4. It is provident,
though not covetous, like the Ant laying up in Summer, Prove. 6. 6. And the
virtuous woman sees and considers a field, and purchases it, Prove. 31. 16.
5. It is taken up about things necessary, not superfluous, John 13. 29. the
Disciples thought Judas had been sent out to buy what was necessary, not what
was superfluous. 6. It puts nothing to unthrifty uses, nor suffers any
thing needlessly to perish, according to that Word of our Lords, Joh. 6. 12.
Take up the fragments that remain, that nothing, be lost. 7. It moderateth its
gifts, that they be neither of covetousness nor prodigality, but as it is Psalm
112. The good man guides his affairs with discretion. 8. The frugal man his
conquest is in that which hurts not others, and rather by his own industry
then others simplicity; It lies rather in his diligence and dexterity, then in
his slight and cunning, in duty to satisfy conscience, and not in sin to raise
a challenge. It is in a word, a following of riches with Gods blessing, seeking
them both together, it being, the blessing of the Lord which only makes rich,
Prove. 10. 21. and he adds no sorrow therewith; all other riches without this,
have sorrows multiplied on them, 1 Timothy 6. 10. the good man, and truly frugal,
seeks first the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 6. 33. and the one thing necessary,
and allows not himself to be cumbered about many things, as Martha was, Luke
10. 41. he chooses the right time and season, and is not inordinately bent
upon gathering, he knows there is a time to scatter, as well as to gather, as
it is Eccles. 3. 6. He knows when to be liberal, and carries Charity along
with him, and wrongeth it not.

Before we pass this Command, we may consider the punishment of the breach of
it, and that in a threefold consideration; 1. Before God (or in for^ poli) and
so there is no question but it secludeth from the Kingdom of Heaven; the
covet^us and others are, 1. Corinthians. 6. 10. particularly debarred, yea, it is a
sin which the Lord abhors, Psalm. 10. 3. 2. Consider it in fore
ecclesiastic^, as to Churchdiscipline, and it seems by sundry places of
Scripture, that the covetous have been thus taken notice of, as 1 Cor. 5. 10,
11. etc. where the covetous are reckoned as contradistinct from extortioners,
in which place we conceive that the Apostle does mean a man, that in the main
of his way hunteth after the world, although he be not chargeable with direct
theft or oppression, this he calls, Phil. 3. 19. minding of earthly things:
and Col. 3. 1. 2. setting the affections on those things which are on the
earth; which certainly may be much discovered by the strain of a man's carriage,
his devotedness, and addictedness to the world, the little time he does bestow
upon Gods service, his little usefulness to others, as Nabal was to David, his
soirdid niggardliness, that he can neither give to others, nor use himself what
he possesses, as it is Eccles. 6. 1. his being defective in other duties from
that ground, his being in his way of living miserable, much within his estate
and station, his taking advantage of every thing that may bring him gain, as of
a trick of Law (and such like) even when it is rigid as to another hurt, or
like the man that is cruel against others, taking them by the throat, saying,
Pay me all that thou owe; distraining and distressing for little things, when
he himself is not straightened, unmercifully treating others, when they are not
able to stand out against him, as Laban did, in changing Jacob's wages ten
times. Gen., 31. 41. and many such characters are there, whereby the covetous
may be tried and discovered, as especially when they come to justify and
defend, and continue in these forementioned unseemly ways of getting gain, and
much more when unlawful shifts are used to gain by? It is like that in such
cases covetous persons have been ecclesiastically reprehended, or at least,
there has been a brotherly withdrawing from them to put a note on them, as was
put on drunkards, extortioners etc. as also 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. the Apostle
commands these persons, who were guilty of the opposite sin of Idleness, to be
marked with a note of shame.

And although it be hard to make out covetousness in particulars, where there
is no sin in the matter; yet generally where there is a person that excessively
is so, there will be both a common account of him to be such in his dealing, by
those who can discern, and many complaints of all, almost against him, and a
hard disesteem of him: From the grounds that have been touched on, it is
somewhat evident that such who generally are called, ^eer, hard, rigid men
though they b^ not properly unhonest, are guilty of this sin of covetousness,
and consequently of the breach of this Command: But however, when covetousness
comes to be scandalous, so as it may be made out, it falls within the
compass of the object of Church Discipline: and certainly seeing covetousness,
even when there is no direct theft or oppression, is often so scandalous and
offensive: It would seem there must have been in the Apostles time some way to
make it out, and that then upon such certain evidence of the scandal, brethren
have spoken one to another about it, in which admonition if they did not
acquiess, it proceeded further, and at least private Christians were to shun
the familiar company of such for their shame, who thus walked disorderly, by
pursuing and gathering riches too eagerly, as well as of others, who fell into
the contrary fin of negligence and idleness, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.

As to the 3. Consideration of the punishment of theft, what it may be in the
Civil Courts of men, or by the Magistrate, we will not insist here without our
sphea^ and line: But to speak here a little to the punishment of direct and
plain theft, which is that commonly noticed and punished among men, certainly
Blasphemy, Adultery, and such other sins are in themselves at least no less, if
not more capittal then this: And those who have observed the Laws and Customs
of Nations assert, That in no place generally theft was punished with death,
till Draco, that bloody prince (whose Laws were written in blood) did it*
certainly the Politic or Judicial Laws of Moses were for tenderness, as
conscientious, for equity, as just, and for wisdom, as profitable, Laws to the
Commonwealth, as ever any since were, or could be, being immediately Divine,
yet find we not death ordained by them to be inflicted upon it, but restitution
to be made double, fourfold, or fivefold, according as the thing was in worth,
and as the neighbor was prejudged by the taking it away, Exodus 22. 1. 2. It is
true, if the man had nothing, then was he to be sold for his theft, to make up
his neighbors loss, Exodus 22. 3. And if in the night one had been smitten
digging through a house, it was not to be accounted murder: If I say, it was
in the night, or before Sunrising, because that by these circumstances it
became a violation of men's common security, and the design of such an atrocious
attempt might be presumed to be against the life or persons of men: And upon
this ground, such Robbers as break the public peace, that men through fear of
them cannot travel, go about their affairs, or live at home; or whose robbery
does carry direct hazard to men's lives with it, these upon that account are
worthy of death; but not so much for sinning against this Command as against
the sixth; the Reason is, because there is no proportion betwixt a man's
wronging another in his goods, and the losing of his life, and in justice,
where circumstances do not highly aggredge the crime, and bring it under some
other consideration, there should be a proportionableness betwixt the crime or
hurt done, and the punishment and retribution thereof, as eye for eye, hand for
hand. etc. otherwise it were better and more safe to thrust out a man's eye,
then to steal his horse or sheep. Hence it is that there was no restitution in
the Law to be made for what marred life, but the person thus offending was to
be punished l^ge talionis, but in other things it was not so.

It now remains that we should speak somewhat of Usury; concerning which, as
there are many words spent in dispute, so no question there are many sins in
practice; by custom the name of Usury is become odious, and may be taken for
unlawful gain, gotten by the mere loan of money, and in that case the Scripture
being so clear, there is no place left for questioning of its sinfulness.

If we abstract from the word, and consider the thing in it self, viz. if it be
lawful for the mere loan of money to compact for some advantage, it will be
another question: And here indeed, in respect of men's corruptions, who can keep
no bounds, there is great hazard of miscarrying; yet we conceive, in answer to
it, there are two extremes to be shunned, so that we can neither say that
simply it is lawful in all cases, nor simply inlawful: Not simply lawful,
because there is some such sin committed, directly condemned in the Law, Exodus
22. 25. Deuteronomy. 23. 19. Nor simply unlawful, so as in no case it is to be
allowed; for suppose one that is unable to labor, have only some money, and no
land or other visible estate; or suppose men to have Orphan-childrens means
committed to them; may not that person, or the tutors of these children lend
the money to such as are in ^^pacity to make gain by it, and receive some
proportionable advantage for the lo^n o^ it, we conceive no ground can
altogether con^^^^ it as contrary either to the roles of equity or charity.

It is not contrary to the rules of equity, that when one is so much benefited
by the estate of another, that the person whose the estate is, should
proportionably share of that benefit, which without him and his money, the
other h^d not reaped: Not is it contrary to the rules of charity, for although
Charity command ^s to lend for our neighbors necessity, yet not for hi^^^m and
the i^^^ching of him; and it would seem strange that aman* having nothing but
money, should be obliged to lend it freely to rich men, who making conqueish
thereby, should (...) the benefit, and yet he get nothing. The law of equity,
That (...) should do to others, a^ we would have them do to us, will not infer*
but that if a man, by possessing another man's money, did either make conqueish
of so much rent by it, or did ^^tain so much, which otherwise he could not do
he is obliged to make the lender proportionable sharer with him of the gain;
for it is hard to say, that a man ^igh^huy such a piece of land with my money
from another* and in buying of it gain so much, and yet by letting him keep
hoth my money and the land, I he warranted to ask nothing at all. Sure, were I
the borrower and b^^er, I should think otherwise, and judge it equitable, that
the lender should be a p^^^^^er of the profits arising, in some respect* from
his own money.

If we will consider this of Usury a little further, we will find. 1. That all
the Commands strike against the injury of exacting it from (...) object of
mercy, such as the poor brother, or even a poor stranger, for in this case our
money is to be lent freely, and sometimes we are obliged to give it freely, and
neither to look for stock nor annual, as we may* see Luke 6. 34* 35. etc.
Moreover, as the Command is not to exact usury from the poor brother, so it
commands also, not to exect just debts, Deuteronomy. 15. 1. 2. 3. from him when he
is poor, yet none I suppose, will argue from that, that no man might ask his
own, even the principal sum from others, who are able to pay it.

2. The Lord allowed gain of lent money to be taken, from strangers, Deuteronomy. 23.
20 and yet it cannot be said that he did allow them any thing toward
strangers, which is in it self contrary to the Moral Law or light of Nature, or
which is sinful in it self. It is true, as to poor strangers, God made one Law
for his people and for them, Lev. 25. 35. 36. and further he enjoined that the
stranger should not he oppressed amongst them almost every where, and therefore
this other allowing the taking of usury from strangers, if rich is the more
binding.

But to speak to this point a little more distinctly, I suppose that something
commanded in it may be found peculiar to the Estate and Commonwealth of
Israel, and therefore referrable to that part of the Divine Law which is
commonly called Judicial, and in its direct authority only intended by the Lord
for that people, and something common to all men, as flowing from the
principles of equity and charity, held forth in the eighth Command; that which
I conceive to be common, is the rule given for lending to the poor, which
therefore we see is made binding by the Law of God, both toward an Israelite
and a Stranger, and does certainly import that we should lend to such freely,
without regard to our own profit, and only for their supply and relief in
charity, permitting a free use of our money; and as for the security of our
repayment, minding it with that fair temper of equity and moderation, which we
our selves would expect if necessitated to borrow: Besides, the rule should
also influence our continuing and manner of exacting the debt, that all he done
without rigor, and with that goodness, that even the loss of the principal, if
so it should fall out, should be no grudge or disappointment. But the thing
which I take to be peculiar to that people, is, that I think the trade of
leading, or lending for profit, was absolutely to them prohibited among
themselves, which is clear from Deuteronomy. 23. 19. and the distinction there made
betwixt an Israelite, from whom usury might not be taken, and a Stranger from
whom profit is permitted. And the reasons of this Command might not only be the
better prevention of rigorus loaning and exacting, the stirring up of all to
honest and diligent labor (from which the hope of borrowing, as well as the
profit of lending does often keep back) and other such considerations too much
neglected in all States and Polities, but also it might flow from other things
particular in their condition, such as the equal distribution of their Land,
secured to perpetuity by the recourse of their Jubilees, and it may be that the
riches and convenience of its situation for foreign traffic, with something
peculiar in the rigid and covetous temper of that people, might also have
occasioned this precept; certain it is, that this prohibition of the trade of
loaning, and that Statute of the Seventh year of Release, have a manifest
consonancy. But as to us, and all other people, to whom the Lord has not so
commanded, and who are clearly under another polity, and in many other
different circumstances, I do not see why this loaning for profit in a
righteous and equitable manner, should be accounted prohibit, and because that
loaning of money for profit, and taking of profit for money in other forms of
bargaining, are of their own nature very like, and by use much confounded: We
shall speak to both, what may be pertinent and edifying, without observing any
more curious then useful distinctions; and it is known that the Schoolmen from
equity grant, that in some cases a man may make gain by lending his money; As
1. when it is lucrum cessans ^o him, that is, when by such aloa^ he prejudgeth
himself of some benefit he might make by it: 2. When there is (...) or any loss
accresseth to him by it: Or 3. when his money ^^oreth so much more useful at
such a time to such a person, but it is to be estimate according to its present
circumstantiate case; 4. They suppose one to advance the money before he
actually receive the thing which he has bought or purchased, and in that cast
they allow that the seller, in respect of his retention of the fruits, get a
smaller price, and less advantage; or suppose the seller to lie out of his
money so long after delivery of the thing sold, and they allow him to take the
more* and what is that, but taking so much for want of their money? Again* some
of them dispute* that though money in it self be not apt to increase (which is
their great argument) yet considered as the instrument of trade and mean of
negotiation, it is as apt to increase more money, as corn sown is to grow to a
greater increase.

4. It is not for naught that our Lord uses the parable of the talents,
wherein certainly he intends no unlawful way of trading, but that which was
commendable in its proper circumstances.

5. In matter of communicating and charity, the Apostle requires an equality,
2 Cor. 8. 13, 14. and that one should not be burdened and another free: Now
suppose one of a lesser estate to have only money, shall he be obliged to the
pinching and burthening of himself to lend more, and that freely (upon the
account of charity, for there is no other meant here) then a man of a greater
estate is, because he has it not in money, where is the equality?

6. Right reason agreeable to Scripture will clear this; suppose one gives
another so much land for so much money, and the buyer desires to retain a part
of the money, shall the seller be incapacitated to receive now any thing less
of his estate when in money, then formerly when it was in land? Is it not still
his estate and of the same value? and therefore may it not yield that same
equivalent by moderate usury or interest?

7. If it were absolutely denied, then these absurdities would follow, 1. That
some estates would be useless to their masters or owners, and others not: 2.
That some, for instance, Ministers, Orphans, and persons unable for trade,
should be incapacitated to make any use of their estates, or any provision for
their families merely on this account, because either they are in such
stations, or have their estates in such a condition: 3. Then should one get no
payment of money, no not the principal, suppose the person owing could not
repay the principal without selling some part of his estate (seeing we ought
not to seek in the principal d^bt more then its increase to his hurt) because
then (according to their principles) we continued not to lend freely. Then we
ought not to turn our estate from money to land, because in doing so we
disinable our selves to lend freely. Then also there needed not, nay, there
ought not to be any selling of land or buying amongst neighbors (as in some
respect it was not amongst the Jews, but to the year of Jubilee) because 1. If
men get money freely, they might still, and no doubt would still keep their
estates, and not pay their debts: 2. If men could not take any increase for
money it self, then could not a man buy another man's possession, which can
yield him afterward that same principal sum, and also yearly so much more, for
this does infer an increase also: And beside, if this did hold true, then what
rule were to be kept in lending? If it be said charity, that is granted, but so
long as a man's estate is better then mine, can any say I am in charity obliged
to give him, or lend him, and get nothing again? If any say equity should be
the rule; none will say it is equity the borrower should possess his own
estate, and mine also, and give nothing to me, when by my loan benefit
accresseth to him: And if one may give money for land, and then exact rent, why
may not one give that same money to another, and suffer him to possess the land
bought with it, and expect so much rent from him? when he accounts the having
of the money at such a rate of increase and benefit, the land, possibly in his
account, being beyond the rent or the worth of that money: And if there could
not be any interest taken, men should never, nor could never expect borrowing
or lending for furthering their profit, but for mere necessity, and by that
means the great benefit of humane trading would be interrupted.

Add that men are called to equity and charity, not so much according to the
quality of their estates, as to the quantity or value, that there may be an
equality. And if a man that has money be obliged to lend freely, is not a man
that has land obliged to sell it, that he also may be in a capacity to do it?
Certainly when necessity so requires, he is obliged to give, although he
should sell his land for that end. And considering that money is so useful (for
it answers all things, as Solomon says Eccles. 10. 19.) and that in reason
it cannot be supposed that a thrifty and frugal man will have a sum any
considerable time, but either by trading or buying land, or otherwise, he
shall benefit himself by it, there is no such reason to cry out on the iniquity
of this simply considered; yea, considering that some have money, others have
access to improve it, which they have not by dexterity, health, occupation,
etc. yet wanting money, the exercise of all these is impeded, it would seem
that if the money of the one make the skill of another profitable to him, that
then the dexterity of that man should make the others money profitable to both,
according to the due proportion; so that as the one could not use the others
labor without him, so neither the other his money, that so there might be
equality.

It is questioned mainly, if one may covenant or contract for so much liquidat
increase of his lent money; (seeing some will say, if one will bide the hazard
of another trade there is no question) and how much this may be?

Answ. That there may be such a contracting and covenanting cannot be
questioned, more then it can be in selling land or houses (though the money
lent may possibly be trusted to the borrower, without any antecedent, contract,
or covenant, and the increase thereafter proportioned to the gain of the
borrower) it is true that this would be moderated, and within the gain that
otherwise with hazard might be expected, because the lender is free of hazard,
and we conceive the How much may by these rules be tried.

1. A man may covenant for as much as by a free bargain his money would
otherwise yield him; as suppose one by bestowing that sum on land, would with
as much certainty as can be in such matters, obtain so much land-rent, why may
he not let his money for that, seeing it can be no filthy or dishonest gain;
that being properly Usury, that by lending gains inordinately, or more then
lawfully, otherwise it might or would, and that to another prejudice.

2. If the party borrower has certain gain by it, for instance, if he do
purchase so much more rent, or if he be enabled to retain so much unfold, which
without that money he could not do, he loses nothing.

3. When a man may without extraordinary sagacity or pains by trading, compass
and make more gain then the proportion he pays for the loan amounts to, so
that to make it certain he has the hazard of so much more: Thus the taking of
five or six in the hundred per annum has never been accounted Usury, because
any thrifty and frugal man may increase it to more in a years space. As Exodus
^1. 19. there is a compensation to be given for time, which certainly must be
so much as may be thought the loss of that time has prejudged the other of, or
what in reason it might be thought he would have advantaged himself if he had
had that time; the one goes upon the ground of lucrum cess^ns (which
Schoolmen grant) the other of d^mnum emergens.

But certainly the fault is much oftener and more ordinarily in the other
extremity in taking too much, as the frequent reproofs of the Prophets, and the
little conscience that is every way made of it, make evident: We would
therefore take the pleaded for allowance, with these caveats. 1. That the gain
never be beyond the allowed increase by the Law, we may, and sometimes should
be below, or within it, but never above or without it. Yea, 2. the rules of
charity and equity are not to be broken as they are, when either the poor are
not let unto for the supply of their necessity, or only on the same terms with
the rich; this is against the Law, Exodus 22. Deuteronomy. 15. and what the Lord says,
Luke 6. 34 35. commanding to lend without expectation of any thing, when the
borrowers case calls for it. 3. No increase would be exacted from these that
neither gain by increasing or retaining their own portion, but when what is
gained is employed for their necessary sustentation; or when without their
desire, and not by negligence, they are put to straits, or cannot command their
own, or their own is but little, and will not bear their giving of increase,
and sustain themselves too, in this case it is their life and bread, nothing is
to be exacted, as it is Deuteronomy. 23. 4. Folks would not so empty their hands by
lending to rich Folks all, (if they may spare any) as to be incapacitated to
lend freely to the poor, for so men may frustrate the great end of this
Command, and fail against the rules of Charity. 5. There is unlawful Usury, and
to be guarded against, when men consider not what use the Borrower makes of
money, how he debaucheth and spends it, if so be their increase be sure, or
consider not if by emergent providence the borrower, without his own fault,
lost much; for equity faith that consideration ought to be here, and we should
not be swayed only by our own gain. 6. Folks would not make a trade of this
ordinarily (which is but for necessity) either to enrich themselves, or to keep
themselves idle, and to prejudge lawful Callings; It would be either when
another necessity calls for it, or our inability other ways to trade,
warranteth it, as if it be by weakness, or under-age, and the like, as is that
of Orphans, Widows, Ministers, and others, who by their stations are kept up
from other tradings, and yet allowed to provide for their families; who may
otherwise do, may not, cannot so plead for exception. 7. Folks would be swayed
to lend or not lend, not according to their own security only, but also
according to the borrowers necessity, and their own duty, as the Lords Word,
Luke 6 35. plainly holds forth.

The Ninth Command.
Exodus 20. 16. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.
THe Lord having in the foregoing Commands directed us how to walk with others
in reference to their honor, life, chastity, and estate: Now because men and
humane Societies are greatly concerned in the observing of truth and ingenuity,
he comes in this Command to direct us how to be tender of this, that by us our
Neighbor be not wronged in that respect, but that on the contrary all means
may be used to preserve truth for his good, to prevent what may load his name,
and to remove what lies on it. The scope of it is the preservation of verity
and ingenuity amongst men, Coloff. 3. 9. L(...)e to another, Ephesians. 4 25. Speak
every man the truth. etc. and verse. 15. Speak the truth in love: because if
otherwise spoken, it is contrary to the scope of this Command, which is the
prefervation of our Neighbors name from a principle of love: The sin forbidden
here is expressed by false witness bearing, which is especially before Judges,
because that is the most palpable gross way of venting an untruth, under which
(as in other Commands) all the lesser are forbidden.

Although there be many forts of sins in words, whereby we wrong others, yet we
think they are not all to be reduced to this Command, for injurious and angry
words belong to the sixth Command, and filthy words to the seventh; but we take
in here such words as are contrary to truth, and fall especially under lying or
wronging of our Neighbors name: Now truth being an equality or conformity of
men's words to the thing they speak, as it is indeed, and in it self: And lying
being opposite thereto, we may consider it two ways, 1. In reference to a man's
mind, that is, that he speak as he thinks in his heart, as it is Psalm 15. 2.
This is the first rule whereby lying is discerned, if our speech be not
answerable to the inward ^onception which it pretends to express, and this is
that which they call f^r^^le (...) or a formal lie, which is an expressing of a
thing otherwise then we think it to be, with a purpose to deceive. Then 2.
there must be a conformity in this co^^^ption to the thing it self, and so men
must be careful to have their thoughts ofthi^gs suitable to the things
themselves, that they may the more safely express them, and thus when there is
a disconformity between men's words and the thing they seem to express, it is
that which they call materiale mendacium, or ^ material lie, and a breach of
this Command that requires truth in men's words, hoth as to matter and manner.

That we may sum up this Command (which is broad) into some few particulars, ^e
may consider it first, as it is broken* 1. in the heart, 2. in the gesture, 3.
in written 4. in word.

First* in heart a man may fail. 1. By suspecting others injustly, this is
called evil sur^^izing, 1 Timothy 6. 4. or as it is in the original, evil
suspicion; which is when men are suspected of some evil without ground, as
Potiphar suspected Joseph, or it is jealousy, when this suspicion is mixed with
fear of prejudice to some interest we love, so Her^d was jealous when Christ
was born, and the neighboring Kings when Jerus^lem was a building. There is, I
grant, a right suspicion, such as Solomon had of (...) and wherein Gedalia^
failed, in not crediting Jo^annans information anent Is^^els conspiracy against
his life. 2. By rash judging and unjust concluding concerning a man^ state, as
Jo^s friends did; or his actions, as Eli did of Hanna^, saying* that she wa^
drunk, because of the moving of her lips: or his end, as the Co^i^t ^i^^s did
of Paul, when he took wages, they said it was covetousness, and when he took
not, they said it was w^nt of love, see Romans 14 4. and 2 Corinthians. 11. 41 etc.
3. By b^^^y i^dging, too soon passing sentence in our mind from some seeming
evidence of that which is only in the heart, and not in the outward practice,
this is h^t to judge before the time, and hastily, Matthew. 7. 1. 4. There is
light judging, laying the weight of conclusions upon arguments or midses that
will not bear it, as Johs friends did, and as the Bar^a^ians suspected Paul,
when they saw the Viper on his hand, to be a (...) Acts 25 4. Thus the King
Abasuerus trusted Hamans calumny of the Je^s too soon. 5. The breach of this
Command in the heart may be when suspicion of our neighbors failing is kept
up, and means not used to be satisfied about it, contrary to that Matthew. 18.
15. If thy brother offend thee, etc. and when we seek not to be satisfied, but
rest on presumptions, when they seem probable.

Secondly, in gesture this Command may be broken, by nodding, winking, or such
like (and even sometimes by silence) when these import in our accustomed way
some tacit si^istrous insinuation, especially when either they are purposed
for that end, or when others are known to mistake because of them, and we
suffer them to continue under this mistake.

Thirdly, by writing this Command may be broken, as E^ra 5. 6. Neb. 6. 5. where
calumniating Libels are written, and sent by their enemies against the Jews and
Nehemiah; in which respect many fail in these days.

Fourthly, but words are most properly the seat wherein this sin is subjected,
whether they be only or merely words, or also put in writing, because in these
our conformity or disconformity to truth does most appear.

2. Lies are commonly divided into three sorts, according to their ends: 1.
There is mendacium perniciosum, a malicious or pernicious lie when it is
hurtful to another, and so designed, as were the lies of those that bare
witness against Christ and of Ziba against Mep^ibo^^eth. 2. There is
efficios^^^ mendaci^^, or an officious lie, when it is for a good end, such was
the Midwives lie, Exodus 1. 9. thus the denying of a thing to be, even when the
granting of it would infer hurt and damage to another, is contrary to truth,
and we oughtnot to do evil that good may come of it, and it overturneth the end
for which speaking was appointed, when we declare a thing otherwise then we
know or think it to be; and as no man can lie for himself for his own safety,
so can he not for another; thus to lie even for God is a fault, and accounted
to be talking deceitfully and wickedly for him, when ^o keep off what we
account dishonorable to him, we will assert that he may, or may not do such a
thing, when yet the contrary is true, Job 13. 4. 7. 3. There is j^cos^m
mendacium, when it is for sport to make others laugh and be merry, which being
sinful in it self can be no matter of lawful sport to make others laugh. 4. We
may add one more, and that is mendacium temerarium, when men lie and have no
end before them, but through inadvertency and customary looseness, speak
otherwise then the thing is, this is called the way o^ lying, Psalm. 119. 29.
and is certainly sinful: as when they told David when A^non was killed, that
all the Kings sons were killed, being too hasty in concluding before they had
tried.

3. Consider lies or untruths, either in things doctrinal, or in matters of
fact: In things doctrinal, so false Teachers and their followers are guilty,
who teach and believe lies, so such Teachers are said. 1 Timothy 4. ^ to speak
lies, and so when they foretell vain events, this is a high degree of lend lying
on the Lord, to say he means or says another thing then ever he thought, or
then ever came into his heart, and to pretend a commission from him when he
gives no such commission. In matters of fact, men are guilty when things are
said to be done when they are not done, or otherwise done then they are done
indeed.

4. We may consider this sin in men's practice, either in reference to God, so
hypocrisy and unanswerableness to our profession is lying* Psalm. ^8. 36. and
Isa. ^9. 13. or we may consider it as betwixt man and man, which is more
properly the scope here: Again, we may consider the wronging of a man three
ways, 1. By false reports, speaking what is indeed untruth; 2. By ^ai^
reports, which tend to his shame; so Deuteronomy. 5. 20. this Command is repeated in
these words, Thou shall not take up any witness (as it is in the original)
against thy neighbor. 3. When the reports are malicious, whether they be true
or false, and intended for that end, that our neighbor may lose his good name.
Further, consider it in reference to the person guilty, either as he is 1. the
raiser or carrier of a tale, true or false; yet tending to the prejudice of his
neighbor; thus he is the maker of a lie: or 2. as he is a hearer or receiver
of tales, Prove. 17. 4. Thus he is to lying as a resetter is to theft, and would
not men hear tales, few would carry them, whereas when men will hearken to
lies, especially great men, all their servants ordinarily become wicked
tale-bearers and whisperers: or 3. as he is the sufferer (albeit he be not the
venture) of a lying tale to pass on his neighbor, (so he loves a lie, as it is
Revel. 22. 8.) or but faintly purges him of it, but lets it either lie on
him, or possibly takes it up and repeateth it again, which is condemned, Psalm
15. 3. where a man that takes up an evil report of his neighbor, even when
others possibly have laid it down, is looked upon as a person who shall never
dwell with God: Thus one inventeth alye, another venteth and outeth it, and a
third resetteth it, like coyners, spreaders and resetters of false money; for,
that one said such a thing, will not warrant our repeating of it again.

5. We may consider wrongs done to our Neighbor by words, as unjust and
without all ground, and so a lie is a calu^^ty, as was that of Z^ba, made of
his Master Mephibosheth, this is in Latin calumnia: or when there is ground,
yet when they are spoken to his prejudice, this is convitium, if especially in
this they suffer for the truths sake; or, if after repentance, former faults be
cast up to a person, as if one should have called Paul a blasphemer, shall even
after his conversion and repentance, of this was S^imei guilty by railing on
David.

6. Both these sorts of lies are either spoken or received, and not afterward
rejected, as David too hastily received that false report made of Mephibosheth
by his servant Ziba, and thinking it not unlikely, because the reporter made it
seem to be so, did therefore conclude it was truth, and did not reject it
afterward; or when at first received, yet after upon better information it is
rejected.

7. Again, this wronging of our neighbor by words is either of him when
absent, and this is backbiting, which often is done under pretense of much
respect (that the report may stick the faster) in such like words as these; He
is one I wi^h well, and should be loath ^o have him evil reported of, but this
is too evident, this is the truth, etc. this is susurrare, to whisper. Or, it
is of him when present, so it is a reproach and indignity, or upbraiding.

8. Again, this backbiting and reproaching is either direct, so that men may
easily know we hate such persons, or it is indirect, granting some what to his
commendation, and using such prefaces as in show bear out much love, but are
purposely designed to make the wound given by the tongue the deeper, such
persons are as butter in their words, but as sharp swords in their hearts, this
is that dissembling love which David complains of.

9. Sometimes this reproaching and slandering of our Neighbor is out of spleen
against him, and is malicious; sometimes out of envy to raise and exalt ones
self on the ruins of another (this is grassari in famam proximi) sometimes it
is out of design, thereby to insinuate upon them whom we speak unto, as to
signify our freedom unto them, to please them, or praise them, by crying down
another, that is to serve the itching humor of such who love the praise of
others, when it may be we know no faults of those we speak to, yet never open
our mouth to them of one of these, nor are we free with them anent them if the
things be true.

10. We may break this Command by speaking truth, 1. For an evil end, as Doeg
did Psalm. 52. 2. 2. by telling something that is truth out of revenge. 3 When
it is done without discretion, so it shameth more then edifieth. Christ's word
is, Matthew. 18. 15. Tell him his fault betwixt thee and him alone: and we on the
contrary make it an upcast to him, this certainly is not right. 4. When it is
minced, and all not told, which if told might alleviate; or construed and
wrested to a wrong end, as did the witnesses who deponed against Christ

11. We may break this Command, and fall in the extremity of speaking too much
good of, or to, our neighbor, as well as by speaking evil of him, if the good
be not true; and here comes in, 1. excessive and rash praising and commending
of one, 1. beyond what is due, 2. beyond what we do to others of as much worth,
this is respect of persons; 3. beyond what discretion allows, as when it may
be hurtful to awaken envy in others, or pride in them who are thus praised: 2.
praising inordinately, that is before a man's self, or to gain his affection,
and that possibly more then when he is absent and hears not; much more is it
to be blamed when spoken groundlesly, this is flattery, a most base evil, which
is exceedingly hurtful and prejudicial to human Societies, yet exceeding
delightful to the flattered: 3. we fail in this extremity, when our neighbor
is justified or defended, or excused by us in more or less when it should not
be.

12. Under this sin forbidden in the Command, comes in all beguiling speeches,
whether it be by equivocation, when the thing is doubtfully and ambiguously
expressed; or by mental reservation, a trick whereby the grossest lies may be
justified, and which is plainly aversive of all truth in speaking, when the
sentence is but half expressed; as suppose one should ask a Romish Priest, Art
thou a Priest? and he should answer, I am no Priest; reserving this in his
mind, I am no Priest of Baal: for by giving or expressing the answer so, an
untruth and cheat is left upon the asker, and the answer so conceived does not
quadrat with the question as it ought to do, if a man would evite lying.

13 This falsehood may be considered with reference to things we speak of, as in
buying or selling, when we call a thing better or worse then it is indeed, or
then we think it to be; ah! how much lying is there every day this way with
many.

14 Under this sin forbidden in this Command are comprehended, 1. railing, 2.
whispering, 3. tale-bearing (spoken of before,) 4. the tatling of busy bodies,
that know not how to insinuate themselves with others, or pass time with them
but by telling some ill tale of another; 5. praevarication, which is the sin of
persons who are unconstant, whose words go not all a like, saying and
unsaying; saying now this way, and then another way, of the same thing, their
words clashing together, and they not consisting with themselves.

15. Consider falsehood or false-witness bearing, as it infers breach of
promise, which is forbidden, Psalm. 15. 4. when on performs not what he
promises, or promises that which he intends not to perform, which is deceit
and falsehood.

16. As we may sin in speaking against others so we may in respect of our
selves many ways: 1. When we give occasion to others to speak evil of us, 1.
Cor. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 3. 2. When we are not careful to entertain and maintain a
good-name, and by suitable ways to wipe away what may m^^t the same: It is
generally observed, that while men have a good name, they are desirous and
careful to keep it, and when they have lost it, they grow careless of it; we
ought not to be prodigal of our names more then of our lives or estates, for
the loss of them incapacitateth us much to edify others. 3. When we vainly
boast of our selves, and set forth our own praise, that is, as if a man should
eat too much honey, Prove. 25, 27. 4. When we will not confess a fault, but
either deny, excuse, or extenuate it; this Joshua exhorts Achan to eschew. 5.
When we say that things are worse with us then indeed they are, and deny, it
may be even in reference to our spiritual condition, somewhat of Gods goodness
to us, and so lie against the Holy Ghost. 6. When we are too ready to entertain
good reports of our selves, and to be flattered, there is (if to any thing) an
open door to this in us; and as the Heathen Seneca said, Blanditi^ cum
excludu^t^r placent, so may it be ordinarily seen that men will seemingly
reject what they delight should be insisted in; there is in us so much
self-love, that we think some way* that men in commending us, do what is their
duty, therefore we often think them good folk because they do so, and men that
do not commend us we respect them not, o^ but little or at least less then we
do others; because we think they are behind in a duty by not doing so, and
which is very sad, and much to be lamented, few things do lead us to love or
hate, commend or discommend (and that as we think not without ground) more then
this, that men do love and commend, or not love and commend us.

17. We also may by with*holding a testimony to the truth, and by not clearing
of another when it is in our power to do it, be guilty of this sin.

But especially is forbidden here public lying and wronging of another
^udicially, either in his person, name, or estate, and that* 1. By the Judge,
when he passes sentence, either rashly, before he hears the matter^, and
searches it out, which Job disclaimeth, asserting the contrary of himself, J^^
19. 16. or ignorantly, or perversely for corrupt ends, as being bribed to it, or
otherwise. 2. By the Recorder, writing grievous things, Isa. 10. 1. or making
a clause in a decree, sentence, or write* more favorable to one, and more
prejudicial to another then was intended: 2. By the Witness^s* who either
conceal truth, or express it ambiguously, or refuse to testify, or assert what
is not true. 4. By the Advocat, by undertaking to defend or pursue what
righteously he cannot; or by hideing from his Clyent that which he knows will
prejudge his cause; or by denying it when he is asked about it; or by not
bringing the best defenses he has. And as to the first point here about
Advocates, it is to be regrated (as a great Divine in the Neighbour-Church has
most pathetically, according to his manner, lately done) as a sad matter, that
any known unrighteous C^^^e should have a professed Christian in the face of a
Christian Judicatory, to defend it; but incomparably more sad, that almost
ever^ unjust Cause should find a Patron: and that, no con^en^^ous malicious
person should be more r^^dy to do wrong, then some Lawyers to defend him for a
(dear bought) see! I speak not here of innocent mistakes in cases of great
difficulty* nor yet of excusing a cause bad in the main from unjust (...) b^t
((...) that great man) when money willhire m^^ to plead for injustice, and ^o
use the (...) to (...) the righteous, and ^o spo^l his Cause* ^and vex him with
delays for the advantage of their unrighteous Clyents, I would not have the
conscience of such for all their gains, not their account to make for all the
World: God is the great Patron of innocence, and the pleader of every righteous
Cause: and he that will be so bold as to plead against him, had need of a large
fee to save him harmless. 5. By the Accuser or Pursuer, when unjustly he
seeks what does not belong unto him, or charge another with what he should
not, or justly cannot. 6. By the Defender, when he denies what he knows, or
minceth it, etc. And by all of them, when business is delayed and protracted
through their respective accession to it, as well as when justice is more
manifestly wronged; this is the end of Je^^ros advice to Moses, Exodus 18. 23.
that the people may return home, being quickly, and with all convenient
diligence dispatched; which, to their great loss and prejudice many ways, the
unnecessary lengthening of Processes obstructeth, and makes Law and Lawyers,
appointed for the ease and relief of the people, to be a grievous and ^exatious
burden to them; for which men in these stations and capacities will have much
to answer to God, the righteous Judge of all the Earth, when they shall be
arraigned before his terrible Tribunal, where there will be no need of leading
witnesses to prove the guilt, since every man's conscience will be in place of a
thousand witnesses, neither will the nimblest wit, the eloquentest tongue, the
finest and smoothest pen of the most able Lawyer, Judge, Advocate, Notary or
Litigant that shall be found guilty there, be able to fetch himself fair off.
O* then all the fig leaves of their fairest and most flourishing, but really
frivolous pretenses, wherewith they palliate themselves, will be instantly
blown away by the breath of that Judges mouth, and so be utterly unable to
cover the shame of their nakedness in the manifold breaches of this Command;
then the greatest stretches of Wit, and highest strains of Eloquence made use
of to the prejudice of truth and justice, will be found and pronounced to be
poor, filly, and childish wiles, yea, very fooleries and bablings; after which,
they will not speak again, but laying their hands on their mouths, eternally
keep silence; It will therefore be the wisdom and advantage of the guilty in
time to take with it, and resolving to do so no more, to betake themselves, for
the pardon of it, to that Advocate with the Father, even Jesus the Righteous,
who thoroughly pleads, and without all peradventure or possibility of loosing
it, does always carry the Cause he undertaketh to plead.

In sum, that which in this Command in its positive part is levelled at as the
scope thereof, is the preserving and promoting of truth, honest simplicity and
ingenuity amongst men; a sincerely and cordially loving regard to the repute
and good name of one another; and a sweet inward contentation, joyful
satisfaction and complacency of heart therein; with a suitable love to, and
care for our own good name.

The Tenth Commandment.
Exodus 20. 17. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house, thou shall not covet
thy Neighbors Wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ^x, nor
his ass, nor anything that is thy Neighbors.
Unto all the other Commands the Lord has subjoyned this, for man's humbling
and deep abasement in his fight, and it reaches further in then all of them,
being (as the words bear) not about any ^ew object, (for it is concerning wife,
house, etc.) but about a new way of acting in reference to that object, and
condemning directly a sin, not so condemned in any other of the foregoing five
Commandments, so that it also seems to be added to the other as a full and more
clear explication of that spiritual obedience that is required in all the rest.

In it we have to consider, 1. the act, 2. the object: The act is not to co^et,
the Apostle expresses it, Romans 7. 7. Thou shall not lust, which implies an
inordinateness in the heart, as being dissatisfied with what it has, and so
the positive part is contentment and satisfaction with a man's own lot, Hebr.
13. 5. Let your conversation be without covetcusness, and be content with such
things as ye have: so that whatsoever motion is inconsistent with contentment,
and inordinately desires or tends to a change of our condition, falls in
as condemned here.

The object is instanced in some particulars generally set down, such as our
Neighbors house, his wife, then his servants, etc. under which (as the general
following clears) are comprehended all that concerns him, his place and
credit, or any thing that relates to any of the former Commands.

Thou shall not grieve that he is well, nor aim at his hurt, nor be discontent
that thy own lot seems not so good. And as for the reason why this Command is
added, its scope holds it forth, which seems to be this, I not only
require you (as if the Lord had said) not to steal from him, and not to let
your mind run loose in covering what is his, as in the eighth Command, not only
to abstain from Adultery or determined Lust in the heart, as in the seventh
Command, and not only the abstaining from wronging of his life, as in the
sixth Command, and of his name that way spoken of in the ninth Command, or
wronging of them that are in place and power by such heart lusts in us as are
forbidden in the fifth Command; but I require such holiness that there be not
any inordinate lust or motion entertained, not having a being in the heart,
although it never get consent, but on the contrary, that in reference to all
these Commands in your carriage toward your Neighbor, there be in you a full
contentation with the lot that God has carved out to you, without the least
inordinate motion or inclination to the contrary, which may either be
inconsistent with love to him, or with contentment and a right composure of
spirit in your selves.

From this we may see that this Command is unreasonably and unjustly divided by
Papists into two Commands, the one relating to the Neighbors house, the other
to his wife, and what follows: For, 1. this concupiscence or lust looks not
only to the seventh and eighth, but to the fifth and sixth, and ninth
Commands, there being an inordinate affection toward thy Neighbors life and
honor, or estimation also; and it is instanced in these two, because they are
more discernible and common: This then shows that God takes in this
inordinateness of the heart, under one Command, in reference to whatsomever
object it be, otherwise we behoved to say that either the Commands are
defective, or that there is no such inordinateness to other objects of other
Commands (which is absurd) or by the same reason we must multiply commands for
them also, which yet the adversaries themselves do not. 2. The Apostle, Romans 7.
7. comprehends all inordinateness of heart toward whatsomever object it be
in that Command, Thou shall not lust, which is, as Thou shall not de^i^e his
wife, so nothing else what is thy Neighbors. 3. The inverting the order which
is here, in Deuteronomy. 5. 21. where the wife is put first, not the house, shows
that the Command is one, otherwise what is ninth in the one would be tenth in
the other, and contrarily, and so the order of these ten words (as they are
called by the Lord) would be confounded. But the great thing we are mainly to
inquire into, is the meaning of this Command; in which Papists being loath to
acknowledge corrupt natures case to be so desperate as it is, and designing to
maintain perfection of inherent righteousness and justification by works, do
make this sin of Lust, forbidden in this Command, a very general thing, and all
of us ordinarily are apt to think light of this sin.

We would therefore say, 1. That we are to distinguish Concupiscence, and
consider it as it is, 1. Spiritual in a renewed man; for there are motions and
stirrings called Lustings of the Spirit against the Flesh, Galat. 5. 17. 2. As
it is partly natural to man to have such stirrings in him, as flow from the
natural faculty and power of desiring, so Christ, as man, desired meat and
drink: and this being natural, was certainly in Adam before the fall, and as
the will and understanding are not evil in themselves, so is not this: It is
neither of these that this Command speaks of. 2. There is a sinful
Concupiscence, called evil Concupiscence, Coloss. 3. 5. and the lusting of the
Flesh against the Spirit, it is this that is here spoken of, the inordinateness
of that Lust or concupiscibleness, or concupiscible power, turning aside out of
its natural line to that which is evil. It is this which God forbids in this
Command, and sets bounds to the desiring or concupiscible faculty.

2. We say there is a twofold consideration of this sinful Concupiscence. 1.
As it is in the sensual part only, and the inferior faculties of the soul, as
to meet, drink, uncleanness, etc. Or, 2. we may consider it as it reaches
further and rises higher, having its seat in the heart and will, and running
through the whole affections, yea, even the whole man, who in this respect is
called Flesh in the Scripture, Galat. 5. 17. and there is Heresy and other
evils attributed unto it, verse. 19. 20, 21. which will not agree to the former,
so Romans 7. 23, 24. it is called the Law of the Members, and the body of death,
and has a wisdom, Romans 8. 7. that is enmity against God, corrupting all, and
inclining and by-assing wrong in every thing, so that a man because of it, has
not the right use of any faculty within him: This Concupiscence, which is
seated not only in the sensible, but in the rational part of the soul, is that
which is intended here, which is the fountain and head-spring of all other
evils; for, from the heart proceed evil thoughts, etc. Matthew. 15. 19. it is the
evil treasure of the heart, Matthew. 22. 25.

3. We may consider this Lust, 1. As it is habitual, and is even in young ones,
and in men when they are sleeping, whereby there is not only an indisposition
to good, but an inclination to evil, it lusts against the Spirit, Galat 5. ^
and is enmity to the Law of God, Romans 8. 7. and lusts (...) James 4. 5. and
(...) sin, James 1. 15. This is the sad fruit and consequent in all men by
nature of Adams first sin, and has a disconformity to the Law of God, and so
is called the Flesh, Romans 7. 5. and the law of sin and death, Romans 8. 2. In the
first respect, this sin is a body and a person as it were, an old man, Romans ^.
6. and in the other, it has (...) in particular, to which it gives Laws,
requiring obedience. 2. We may consider it as ^^ting and stirring in its
several degrees; And 1. we may say it stirs habitually, like the raging sea,
Isai 57. penult. and as grace tends to good, or as fire is of an heating
nature, so is this Lust still working as an habitual distortion, crook or
bending, upon somewhat that should be straight; or as a defect in a leg, which
possibly kytheth not but when one walks, yet there is still a defect; or
rather it is a venom which is still poisonous; thus Romans 7. 5. it is called
the motions of sin in the Flesh, 2. The more actual stirrings of it are to be
considered, either in their first risings, when they are either not adverted
into and without direct hatred, or actual and formal approbation; or as they
are checked and rejected, as Paul did his, Romans 7. 15. and 2 Corinthians* 1^. 3. or
as they are delighted in, though there be not a formal consent, yet such a
thing in the very mind is some way complied with, as desirable and pursued
after, this is called mor^sa delectatio; or as they are resolved on to be
acted, and when men seek means and ways how to get the sin committed, after
that inwardly approving complacency and liking of the thing has prevailed to
engage the mind, to conquish (for instance) such an estate unjustly, or to
compass and accomplish the act of filthiness with such a woman.

3. It may be considered in general, either as the thoughts are upon riches, or
covetousness, or filthiness, without respect to any particular thing or person,
or as they go out upon them in particulars.

4. We say we would put a difference betwixt tentations objectively injected by
the Devil, as he did on our Lord Jesus, Matthew. 4. 1. and Lusts rising from an
internal principle, which are most common, see James 1. 14. The first is not
our sin of it self, except it be 1. entertained some way, or 2. not rejected,
or 3. not weighting and grieving us for the ill scent it leaves behind it; for
we having such conbustible matter within, hardly comes a tentation in, even
from without, but it fireth us, or rather we having the kindling within, the
Devil comes but to blow on it, and stirs that which is in us, hence it
comes, that seldom there is a temptation assaulting, but some guiltiness
remains, because there is not a full abhorrence of these abominable strangers
that come into the heart.

5. This Lust may be considered, either as it is in natural men, where its shop
is, and so it is called reigning sin, and the dominion of sin, it is a yielding
to sin to obey it in the Lust thereof, to obey it willingly, as a Servant does
his Master, Rom 6. 12, 13. or as it is in the renewed and regenerate, so it is
indwelling sin, without dominion, and endeavored to be expelled, a law in the
Members, and that continually is acting, but counteracted by a contrary
lusting, Romans 7. 23, 24.

Now let us clear 1. what Concupiscence falls in under this Command; and so
2. how this differs from other Commands which are spiritual, and reach the
heart also; 3. we may consider the sinfulness of this Lust, and give some
advertisements concerning it in its acting, stirring, etc.

1. Under this Command we take in habitual Lust, even as it disposes and
inclines to ill in the root of it, though not principally, yet consequently;
because its streams and branches that do flow from, and clear this ^o be the
fountain and root, are primarily understood; and the reasons why it must be
taken in here, are 1 Because habitual Lust in the root is sin (for so it
conceives sin, James 1. 14. 15.) and if it be sin, it must be against some of
these Commands, which are the substance and matter of the Covenant of Works,
which prescribes all duty, and forbids all sin. 2. If this Law require
absolute purity, then that inclination must be condemned by it, but it
requires absolute purity and exact holiness, even according to Gods* Image;
therefore that inclination inconsistent with it must be condemned here, seeing
in the other Commandments, acts that are resolved and fully consented to in the
heart, are forbidden. 3. If the rise of this habitual Lust was by this Command
condemned and forbidden to Adam, in looking to the fruit; and in entertaining
that motion, or the indisposing of himself by it to walk with God; or if this
Command did forbid him his fall, and the bringing upon himself that Lust; and
when it was in him if it was a breach of this Command, then it is so to us
also; but certainly Adam was enjoined by this Command to preserve himself free
of the root of such evils, if the fruits themselves be evil, which is
undeniable. 4. If this ill be (...)* or a transgression of, or disconformity to
the Law, then it must belong to some Command reductively at least; but the
former is certain, and it cannot so properly be reduced to any other Command as
to this, therefore it is here condemned as sin. 5. If it lies in the heart,
and gives the first sinful rise to actual sins, then it must be forbidden in
this Command (for as we now consider it, it preventeth determination, and may
be where actual sin is not) but the former is truth, that it conceives other
actual sins as the mother of them (as it is James 1. 15.) therefore it must be
forbidden here. 6. Add our blessed Lord Jesus in his utter want of, and freedom
from, all corruption was conformed to the Law, and it was a part of his
conformity to it, and to this Command rather then to any other, that the Devil
had nothing in him, no, not so much as a mo^us primo primus (as they call it)
to sin, nor any root from which it should spring.

If it be objected, 1. That this Lust is in men antecedently, not only to any
formal will of their own, but to all power and ability to help it, or so much
as not to will it, and so cannot be supposed to be forbidden to them.

Answ. 1. There are many things forbidden them, which now after the fall are
not in their power to prevent. 2. This Law is to be looked on as given to man
in his innocence, which therefore required of him the keeping int^re and
undefaced the Image of God, according to which he was created; and now
condemns him for the want of it, the scope of the Law being to point out
perfect holiness, without respect to a man's ability, or his present condition,
but to his duty, for the performing of which he got a power from God ut first,
but through voluntary transgression of the Law lost it, and none will deny but
if it be a sin to have such a pollured nature, the Law must require it to be
otherwise.

But 2. if it be said that it is involuntary. Answ. It is true it is not
deliberate, but voluntary it is, as having its seat and rise in the will, as
well as in other faculties, and therefore the will cannot be thought free.

3. If it be said that this sin is greater then any sin forbidden in any other
of the Commands, therefore the Command forbidding it ought not to have been
last.

Answ. In some respect it is greater, to wit, in it self, yet in respect of its
palpableness and obviousness it is less; also this Command forbidding it,
presses a further degree and step into all that goes before, and therefore is
well subjo^ned.

2. We comprehend under this Command all first motions rising from that
habitual Lust, in reference to more complete acts, although they be instantly
checked and choked, and that whether they be in reference to particular
objects, or whether they be vaging unsettled motions of any Lust in it self
sinful; and that whether there be a delectation or staying on that forbidden
object or not, or consenting to it, or resolution to follow it or not, as is
evident in Paul, Romans 7. For, 1. such motions are the births of a a sinful
mother, habitual lust: 2. They have sinful effects and tendencies, they are
incitements to sins: 3. They are sinful in their nature, as being disconformed
to the holy Law of God, and though they should presently be strangled, yet it
is supposed that once they were; and if they were, they were either good or
ill; if good, they should not have been strangled; if evil, then they had this
inordinateness here forbidden, and that from our own hearts or inventions that
gave them being, and therefore they must leave a guilt behind them. 4.
Otherwise these evils forbidden here, would not differ from the spiritual ills
forbidden in other Commands that forbid Lust with consent and delight. 5. Our
blessed Lord Jesus could be capable of none of these, and therefore the having
of them must be unsuitable to his Image, who was like us in all things except
sin. 6. Paul's assertion, Romans 7. 7. that he had not known this sin of Lust but
by the Law, makes it evident that the Command speaks of ^ust not easily
discernable (yea, that he himself discerned it not till he was renewed (and so
it spoke of such Lusts as after regeneration, to his sense and feeling, a
bounded most: Now none can say there were either in him more resolutions to
sin, or more delight in them then before, but a quicker sense of these sin^^^
stirrings and irritations then he had formerly.

3. We take in here morosis delectatio, or the entertaining of extravagant
Imaginations (as of honor, greatness, lust; pleasure, etc.) with delight,
where the heart frames such Romances, and pleases it self with meditating and
feeding on them, which Eccles. 6. 9. is called the wandering of the desire, and
in other places of Scripture, the imaginations of the heart of man (which even
nature it self may teach to be sinful) this properly comes in as alegg (to say
so) or member and degree of this sin, and as an evidence of one actually
discontented with his own lot (contentedness with which is the positve part of
this Command) and is a whoring of the heart after vanity, in a palpable degree,
to satisfy it self in its fantasies and notions; and this is not only when
the heart runs upon sinful objects, but also vain objects, which David
hated, Psalm. 119. 113. for this reilling and roaring of heart is ever upon some
other man's portion, at least upon what is not ours, and tends ever to the
imagining of some thing which is not, as an addition to our good which
supposes discontent with what we have.

4. We take in here such Concupiscence, as though it approves not unlawful
means to prosecute its inordinate designs, yet it is too eager in the pursuit,
and discontent when it falls short; as for instance, when Achab would buy
Naboths Vineyard and pay for it, or a man would marry such a woman lawfully,
supposing she were free, and there were consent of parties, etc. the one is not
stealing, nor the other adultery, yet both of them suppose a discontent, when
the desire of having is too eager, and when there is an inordinateness in the
affection or desire after it; as when one comes thus peremptorily to desire to
have such a thing*, or to wish that such a thing were, I would fain have this
or that* O that this or that were, even as David longed for a drink of the Well
of Bethlehem: In a word, we take in all that is opposite to, or inconsistent
with satisfaction in our own lot, and love to our Neighbor, under which this
Command, as the rest is comprehended, Romans 13. 9. even the least ^^^^ngs of any
thing tending that way, or that inclines to coffeehouse in our selves. It
is true, every desire to have something added to our lot, or amended in it, it
not to be condemned, but when it is inordinate; as 1. when the thing is not
needful; 2. when the desire is too eager; 3. when the thing too much affects,
and even discontenteth till it be effected and done.

Now this being the scope and sum of this Command, it may be gathered of how
broad and vast extent the breaches of it are: Is there one hour wherein there
are not multitudes of these evil thoughts flowing, running, and roving through
the heart? Ah! what discontents with providence, grudgings, vain wishings,
etc. are there? and although all these, as they reflect on God, are against the
first Command; yet as they imply discontment in us with our lot, or as they are
risings of heart to evil* (though wrestled against, and wherein the
Spiritgetteth the victory) they are against this Command; so that not only vain
Imaginations that are formed with delight, but even those that are scarce
suffered to breath, yet having once a being, are against this Command, and
sinful: For, 1. they break a Law, and are disconformed to that which we should
be; 2. In Paul, Romans 7. (who yet gave not way to these) they are called sin and
the body of death: 3. He wrestleth against them, and cries out under them,
desiring to be quit of them, verse 24. now if they were only penal, such
outcries and complaints were not so like him, whom a complication of sharpest
afflictions could never make once to groan* but this body of death made him to
cry out: 4. They lust against, and oppose the Spirit, G^l. 5. 17. and so are
against the Law of God, Romans 7. and tend to obedience to the Law of Sin, and
further the execution of its decrees: 5. These are of the nature of Original
sin, and a branch growing of that root, and so what is born of the flesh is
flesh, the branch must be of the nature of the root, if the tree be corrupt,
the fruit must be so: 6. These make way for other sins, and keep the door open
for temptations to grosser evils, and give the Devil access to blow up the
fire: 7. They keep out many good motions, and obstruct many duties, and
indispose for them: 8. They mart communion with God, who should have the ^ll of
the soul, heart and mind; and sure, if he had his due, there would be no place
for these, as there will be none for them among the spirits of the just men
made perfect: 9. These sinful risings in the heart are a great burden to a
tender walker, who groaneth under that habitual lightness and vanity of his
mind in the gaddings* whorings, and departings of it from God; for because of
it he cannot get his whole delight u^interruptedly set on him, and though he
delights in the Law of God after the inner m^n, yet he cannot win up to full
conformity to it in his practice, or when he would and resolves to do good,
yet, (ere he wit as it were) ill is present with him, and his heart is away and
on the pursuit of one foolish ^oy and vainity or another: 10. Paul speaking of
these lustful stirrings of the heart, does make it evident, Romans 7. throughout
the Chapter, that this Command speaks of such Lusts which he had not known*
except the Law had said thou shall not lust. Now men naturally know that inward
assent to sin, even before it be acted is sinful; yea, Paul knew he had such
things as these corrupt motions in him, but he knew not that they were sinful,
but from the Law, and that after its spiritual meaning was made known to him;
and from this it is that such who are regenerate see more sins in themselves
then ever they did while unregenerate, not simply* because they have more, but
now having the spirit, and a contrary principle with in, they discern that to
be sinful, which they took no notice of as such formerly: 11. The frequency of
this sin of inordinacy in the first stirrings and motions of the heart is no
little aggravation of it* for what hour of a man's life, when waking, (yea, even
when asleep, in dreaming a man may be guilty of it, as Rivet upon this Command
acknowledges) or half an hour is free of it? Is ever the mind quiet? and does
it not often yield consent to these motions? and how few good purposes are
often followed forth? Alace! but seldom: 12. The extent of it is great, one
may sin this way in reference to all the Commands, yea, to as many objects as
his Neighbor or himself has things of which they have the possession; yea, to
Imaginations about things that have no being, nor, it may be, possibility of
being, but are meet Chimera's: 13. The occasions of it, and snares to it, are
rife and frequent, nothing we see, but readily it does, as fire, inflame this
Lust, so that we have need continually, as it were, to cast water on it; yea,
what thing is there that is in it self lovely and desirable we hea^ or read of,
that we are not ready inordinately to be stirred toward the desiring of it.
14. Its pretexts and cloaks to hide it self are many, and sometimes specious,
so that men are seldom challenged for it, if it come not to the length of being
consented to, or at least of a delectation: How often are there wishes in our
mouths, and oftener in our hearts, that break this Commandment which we observe
not? especially, if they be for knowledge or some good thing in another, or
some good thing done by another which commends him; for then, O if we had it!
or, O if we had done it! is often the language of the heart, and so there is a
secret discontent against our Neighbor, which often runs to envy, or at
least to a discontent that it is not so with us, and that we are behind in
that; but especially in spiritual things we take liberty for these discontented
wishes, also grudgings, that another is free and we are crossed, come in under
the sin here forbidden; as also that which is spoken of Eccles. 12. 12. of much
reading and making many books, when one is desirous inordinately, either to
have, or to make many books to vent his knowledge by, especially when it
levelleth at what others have done.

This inordinacy that is in the motions of the heart, appears much, 1. In the
beginnings and stirrings of passions and discontent which often never come
abroad, but yet are deep breaches of this Command, either as marring that
loving and kindly frame which we ought to carry toward others, or as
inconsistent with that inward serenity and tranquillity that we should conserve
in our selves, that dumpishness (which is ordinarily to be seen in passionate
and discontented persons) often proceeding from, or tending to one of these
two, passion or discontent.

2. It appears in bargains, as when we hear of a good bargain or good
marriage which another has gotten, or some good event or issue he has had in
such or such an undertaking, there is a secret grudge that we have not got it,
or that we have not had such success.

3. That thoughtiness and anxious carefulness which often is in bargains
making, how they may be sure and most for our advantage, is we conceive
especially pointed at here, there is a suitable carefulness, which simply, and
in it self is consistent with lawful diligence, but this anxiety sinfully
accompanies it through our inordinacy in it.

4. It shows it self in those many ruings and repentings which often are
after things are done, and wishings they had not been done, which are not
simply sinful when there is reason for them, but as they are carking and
inordinate, as for most part they are in us. We ought to grieve with
after*grief and sorrowful sharp reflection for the sin of what we do in all
these above said, and others such like; but its repining against God, and his
infinitely wise government, to grudge at dispensations, events, and
consequents, which are mere providence.

5. This inordinacy of heart motions does much appear in the vexing
afterthoughts of, and reflections upon any thing we have done, not so much
because of its sinfulness, as because of its bringing shame upon us, or because
of its unsuitableness to what our humor aimed at; and upon this account we are
discontented, and have an inordinate and unsatisfied desire of having it other
ways done, and so discontent is the proof and evidence of this Lust,
discovering it where it is, for because our desire (though possibly it be
confused and for any good, as it is Psalm 4. 6.) is not fulfilled, therefore is
heaviness and discontent, whereas if it were satisfied, there would be
quietness.

So then we conceive this Command, as to its positive part, does 1. Require
love to our Neighbor, and complacency in his prosperous condition, and all
such motions as are inconsistent with it, are here forbidden, though they never
come to act, and being such as we would not have any others entertaining
toward us. 2. Cont^ntinent so that discontent, discouragement, fainting
heaviness, anxiety, disquietness and not resting satisfied with our own lot,
which is forbidden. Hebr. 13. 5. are condemned here. 3. A holy frame of heart,
a delight in the Law of God, and conformity to it, Ram. 7. 22. Hence these
motions are counted opposite to it which were in Paul (although he wrestled
against them, as was said) and are the Imaginations of men's hearts, but the
serenity and tranquil composure of the heart having every thing subject and
subordinate to the Law of God, is called for here. 4. It requires complete
conformity to the Law of God, and exact and perfect love to, and delight in
him. Thus this Command is broken, when there is any stirring of heart
inconsistent with perfect love to him and his Law: But obedience is given to it
when we put off the old man, and put on the new man*created after God, etc.
Col. 3. 9. 10. and attain unto a stayed, composed, established, and fixed
heart, so much commended in Scripture. For the difference of this Command from
the for mer Commands, is not in the object, but in the act lust, for
determinate lust, for instance, looks to the seventh Command, but here a sort
of vaging unsetledness in the thought that cannot be called adultery, as not
partaking of that name, yet really is Lust, is forbidden, and so also vain
wanderings upon Ideas and notions come in here under the name of Lust, and are
sinful, being inconsistent with a composed frame of heart.

To close up all* let us consider a little these words, Romans 7. 7. I had not
known lust except the l^w had said, then shall not covet: I shall only premit
this one-word, that it is something peculiar to this Command, that men in nature
come not the length of taking it up. Paul before conversion knew that the
consented*to desire of an unlawful thing was sin, but be knew not this narrow
bounding of men to be intended in this Command.

In the words then you may take up these three, 1. That there is a great
sinfulness and inordinacy in Folks hearts, even in the least things, which
oft-times they take no notice of. 2. That generally men in nature do not advert
to this, and are never thoroughly humbled under it. 3. That there is such an
indwelling lust as this, which is spoken of here even in the heart of the
Believer, and obedience to this Command will be as seriously aimed at by him,
and he will be as much troubled and affected with the breach of it, as of any
of the other Commands.

As to the first, I shall first interrogate you a few things, 1. How often is
your mind stirring and reeling like the raging Sea? 2. How often, or rather how
seldom, can ye say that these motions and stirrings are conform to the Law of
God, or consisting with true love to God, and delight in him and in his Law?
Are there not in your hearts wonderful swarms of vain Imaginations that ye
cannot give a reason for, and cannot tell how they come in, nor how they go
out? which yet are all breaches of this Command. 3. How often do ye take notice
of them, or are suitably affected with them? 2. For further conviction of the
sinfulness of this, consider the extent of the Command. 1. A man by the
breaking of this Command may be guilty of the breach of all the rest: 2. Its
extensive, in respect of the occasions a man has to break it, his eye will
look to nothing but this lust will take occasion from it to sin, the hearing of
such and such a thing, will by means of this waken a desire to be at it, though
the impossibility of acting it may impede his determination: 3. It is extensive
in respect of the continual bad posture the heart is in, so that hardly can a
person take a look of it, but he will find this sin of inordinacy in the
thoughts in it, and some plagues as effects following on it. 3. For yet further
conviction, consider the greatness of the sin, 1. In that it not only runs
after particular objects, the coveting whereof is against the other Commands,
but fore-seeth and inventeth objects in the brain, and so this Lust is broader
then a man has existent objects to it, as when he desires to be rich, but
knows not how: 2. We may gather the greatness of this sin, partly from the
nature of it, called in Scripture, enmity against God, Romans 8. 7. party from
the brude and product of it, called the fruit of the flesh, partly from the
fruit that it brings forth, and that is death, it begets other sins, not
only by indisposing to duty, but by actual inclining and disposing to evil, so
that when the Devil comes to tempt, he has no more to do but to blow up this
fire of Lust that is within, and needs not bring new fire to kindle it. Our
scope in all this is to bring you to know that such a thing as this inordinate
Lust is in you, and that it is exceeding sinful; ye cannot deny but the Devil
and Lust stirs as much in you as it did in regenerate and eminently holy
Paul, and yet how is it that ye are as quiet as if it were not in you at all?
such serious and sensible souls as have rightly seen this, will loath
themselves, as being, because of it, most polluted and unclean, and will cry
out, Oh! we are vile.

For the second thing in the words, folks may be a long time ere they take up
this sin, and generally men in nature do not know it: there are many vile sins
in the heart that never were deliberate, nor yet fully consented to, when this
sin is discovered to Paul, he gets another sight of the nature of sin then
he would have believed formerly he could have had; Folks are rarely affected
with Original s^n, that thwarteth with, and is contrary to the Law of God, and
seldom burdened with this habitual Lust, that stirs even in Believers,
because but renewed in part, and so it is but destroyed in part; and it is a
great and gross mistake to think that grace altogether expels it here, and
it is sometimes their guilt that they-fret and are discontented and
discouraged, not so much because of the sinfulness of the sin, as that it
should be in their lo^; for it is one thing to be seriously wrestling against
this Lust, and bemoaning it, and another thing to have a perplexedness about
it; as when there is a fretting that such a thing is not better done, and yet
no serious sorrow, because of the wrong doing of it simply, and in it self
considered* and there is an inordinateness wherein the flesh prevails, even
in complaints of sin, and in desiring good: And so this Command regulateth our
desire, not only in reference to the object, but as to the way and manner of
pursuing it.

As to the third thing in the words, that this Lust or Concupiscence is in the
Believer (as we have just now said) it is uncontrovertibly clear from what the
Apostle asserteth of himself, and most bitterly bemoaneth in that Chapter, and
from the universal experience of the Saints, so that we need say nothing more
particularly of it then we have said; only it may be asked if there be such a
Concupiscence in the Believer, how does it differ from that which is in Natural
men? Answ. 1. Sin not only dwells, but commands and reigns in the
Natural man; but though Corruption dwell in the Believer, and may sometimes
take him captive, yet he does not with the bensel of his sold yield to it. 2.
A Natural man is wholly one, or if there be any warring or dissension, it is
but one lust striving with another, the Believer is t^osome (as they use to
say) he has two parties or sides, and when corruption prevails, grace will
be saying, O that it were otherwise. 3. The Believes discerns his lusts far
better nor he did while unregenerate, and sees themas so many evil spirits
dancing and reeling within him. 4. This indwelling corruption is one of his
greatest weights, yea, it is exceeding weighty, and his most grievous burden,
heavier not only then all outward afflictions, but even, in some respect, then
actual transgressions, for he finds that he is never sooner off his watch,
but his evil inclination sets on him* this is his exercise, this marreth his
peace, and makes him loath himself, when the World sees nothing in his
conversation reproveable: This did much more pinch and afflict Paul then his
persecution, and makes him cry out* What shall I do, O wretched, O miserable
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? All the
outward afflictions and tribulations that he met with, drew never such a word
from him; he could through grace, rejoice, yea, glory in the midst of them, but
this makes him cry out of himself as miserable, it being indeed the thing,
that in it self, and in the esteem of the Child of God, when at himself, makes
him beyond all things in the World look at himself as wretched and miserable,
and if Faith in Christ were not kept up, the Believer in this case would
despair and give it over; but it is neither the Natural man's exercise, nor yet
his burden. 5. The Natural man has not a spiritual sense to favor and relish
the things of God, and as little inward feeling of his corruption that is
opposite to the grace of God, but outward things are only or most sweet to him:
The Believer relisheth spiritual things; but remaining corruption mar^eth his
satisfaction even in outward things, and the more he finds that he is satisfied
with them, he is therefore the worse satisfied with himself; if he take a glut
of satisfaction in them, with more pain he vomits it up again, and it troubles
his stomach, as it were, till he get it cast out; Gods people get not leave to
drink with full satisfaction of the things of the World, as Natural men do; for
the Believer having two parties in him. Grace and Corruption, whereof, while
out of Heaven, he is constituted; what contenteth the one can never content the
other: but the Natural man having but only one party, and being wholly
constituted of Corruption, he has more delight, not only in sinful things,
but also in worldly things then the Believer.

The scope of all is to discover your superficialness and overliness in
examining your selves, to put you to be more serious in that necessary and
useful exercise, and to teach you by what Command ye should most examine your
selves, even by this tenth Command, as being that which will make the clearest
and most thoroughly searching discovery of your selves to your selves, and will
best rid marches betwixt you and hypocrites; to put you in thankfulness to
acknowledge, and with admiration to adore the exceeding great goodness of God,
in providing and giving a Mediator on whom he has laid all these innumerable
Iniquities of all his people, which would have sunk them eternally under the
unsupportable weight of them; to let you see how absolutely necessary, how
unspeakably useful, and stedable he is to so many ways, and so deeply guilty
sinners; and withal to lead you to improve and make use of him for doing them
away, both as to the guilt and filth of them; which when God shall, for Christ's
sake, be graciously pleased to do, will not every believing soul have reason to
say and sing to the commendation of his Grace, Who is a God like unto thee that
pardons iniquity? Bless the Lord, O my soul, who forgiveth all thins
iniquities, who heals all thy diseases; to him that loved us, and washed us
from our sin^ in his own blood, be glory and dominion for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICK TABLE Of the chief Contents of this TREATISE.
A.
ADjuring of men in what cases, lawful and useful. Page 90 Adjuring of Devils,
when lawful, and when not. 91 Adjuring unre^sonable Creatures in what sense
lawful. 92 Advocates their sin in pleading for unjust Causes, and Suits. 267
Adultery, the Evil and aggravations of it. 215 Three sorts of it, and which is
the grossest. 216 How many ways one may incur the guilt of this si^. 218, 219
Alms, what obligation lies upon ^s for giving of Alms, or for works of Charity.
253 How great a sin, when neglected. 254 Wherein this Duty consists. 10 Who
the fitt^st Objects for Alms-deeds. 252 Who are obliged to give Alms. 253 After
what manner, and in what measure should vv^ give our Alms. ibid. General
Rules directing the time, the manner and proportion of Alms. 254 Angels,
visible representations of them impossible and dangero^s. 36 When they were
created. 183 Anger when lawful, and when not. 213 Appealing to God* in what
case lawful. 98 Apparel how to be used. 222 The sinful abuses of it. 223, 224
Asseverations, such as in Conscience etc. whether lawful or not. 81, 82
Attestations when lawful and binding. 90 Of attesting God ^s witness. 98
B.
BAck-hiting, men's sin and subtilty in it. 265 Baptism, the right
administration of it required in the second Commandment. 48 How Parents (...)
before the Baptism of their children, how in the time of the Administration of
it, and how after it. 60 Several ordinary si^s of the administrators of it
enumerated. 61 The ordinary sins of the vvitnesses to it enumerated. ibid. Many
sins of Professors in reference to their own Baptism instanced. 62 Beasts, the
killing of them not forbidden in the sixth Commandment. 109 How one may sin in
striking of them. ibid. Bigamy, how a breach of the seventh Commandment. 217
Blasphemy defined and distinguished. 99 When its against the Father, when
against the Son, and when against the H. Spirit. ibid. Blasphemy against the
Holy Spirit, what it is not. 100 What it is. ibid. In what sense this sin is
irremissible. 101 How many vvayes on may be guilty of blasphemy. 101 What sins
do occasion others, ^specially to blaspheme. ibid.
C.
CAlumny what it is. 265 Caping or plundering of trading Ships, by priva^eers
unlawful even in time of war. 239 Charity, see Al^e^. Chaplains, see Families.
Commandments distinguished. 6 In what sense affi^mative commands oblidge
semper, but not ad semper. ibid. 6. Rules to know when affirmative commands
bind to present practice. 6. 7 10. Rules for the better understanding of each
command. 7, 8, 9 Two mo^e rules added. 10 All these rules summarily contained
in five Scriptures. 11 Why some commands and not others have reasons pressing
obedience, annexed. 16 Why some have promises annexed. 17 Why some have
threatenings annexed. ibid. Concupiscence. How in the se^sible part of the soul,
and how in the rational. 270 Of habitual and actual concupiscence, with the
degrees of the letter. ibid. Habitual concupiscence proved to be forbidden in
the tenth Command. 271 Some objections answered. 272 The first stirrings of
concupiscence, though not delighted in, nor c^nsente^ to, proved sinful and
against the tenth Command. 272, 273 The sin of these first motions held ou^ i^
many particulars. 274, 275 How the inordinacy of these motions discovers it
self. 276 How the sin of these is not sufficiently noti^ed. ibid. That m^n in
the state of nature can^^t take up the sin of these. 278 How Concupiscence in a
b^li^ver differs from what it is in other men. ibid. Confidence in what sense
it may be put in the Creature without sin. 25 Covetousness what it is 247 How a
man may endeavor to increase his estate without the guilt of it 248 Some
discoveries of Covetousness 256 That in the Apostles times it brought men under
Church censure ibid. What coveting is forbidden in the 10 Command 269 The
prohibition of covetousnes^ unreasonably divided by Papists into two Commands.
ib. Covenant, every sin against God as our God in Covenant is against the first
Command, as w^ll as sin against God as God 31
D.
DA^cing the sin of it 225 Days. None can institute ordinary or fixed days
for worship throughout the whole, beside the Sabbath 182 Giving or receiving
gifts ^n New Years day, a sinful superstitious custom 47 Despair, how a breach
of the first Comman^ment 30 Devil, his injections when (...) not 271 Dreams,
see Sleep
Drunkenness, the sin of it showed in diverse respects 226 Rules for preventing
insobriety in drinking, whereby one may also know when in any measure guilty
229. 230 How unbecoming all, and whom more especially 231 Whether ^n may drink
excessively to provoke vomiting for health sake 231, 232 Whether drunk^nness
l^ssen the guilt of sins committed in the time of it. 232 Of Tippling and
four-hour ^ing 233 Of drinking at making of Bargains 234 Of drinking healths
ibid. Of drinking at the birth of Children, and when visiting women in Child
bed 235 Of drinking at Like*wakes or dr^gie^. 236 Of the multitude of Taverns
and Ale house* 237 Du^lls the unlawfulness of them 210 Duties we owe to God by
the first Command, summed up ^8 These required in the second Command, summed up
44 These required in the third Command, summed 78 A summary of the Sabbath
duties 132, 133* 134 Why our duty to Man is as particularly required in the
decalogue as our duty to God 189
F.
FAmil^-worship* wherein it consists 132 That the Scripture holds this forth is
proved at length 133 136, 137. etc. Seven reasons proving the necessity of it
139, 140 That this is required in the fourth Commandment, proved various ways
133, 134 135 That this duty is four ways described in Scripture 141, 142 The
right use, and also the abuse of keeping Chaplains 142 The great advantages of
conscientious going about family duties 143 Fasting, in what sense a part of
Gods worship 69 Se^eral grounds of fasting ibid. Twelve ordinary sins that goes
before fasting 70 71 Twenty ordinary sins in fasting ennumerat^d 71, 72
Thirteen Instances of ordinary failings after fasting 72 Father, how to be
understood in the fifth command 191 Wh^^ Love the Father owes to the Son, and
what the Son to the Father. 104 Whether the Father or the Magistrate should be
obeyed when commanding contrary things. ib. Fornication, the several sorts of
it, with its aggravations 217 Frugality what it is: Eight Characters of it. 255
G.
GAin* when lawful and honest. 250, 251 Several ways of dishonest gain
^nnum^rated 241 G^ds, Who make unto themselves other Gods beside the Lord. 26
Gluttony, how against the 7 Command. 226 Diverse considerations tending to
discover when we sin in eating 227. to 229. Diver's necessary Rules for
r^gul^ting our eating and drinking. 22^
H.
HAtred of God, how a breach of the first Command. 3^ H^^ every sin is
interpreted h^^red, and every ^^en^r a hatred of God. 75. 76 How ^orrupting of
Gods worship is reckoned hatred of God in a special manner. 76 Hair, how
sinfully abused. 223 Honor, what mentioned in the fifth Commandment imports.
192 193 Why Honoring our neighbor is commanded before other duti^s of the
second table* 197 Wh^r^in honoring our neig^bour c^nsists, and what it
imports. ibid. H^w honor differs from love. ibid. Whether outward
expressions of honor be always necessary, ibid. What is centrary to this
^^nour we owe to our neighbor. 198. 199 Whether wicked men may be honored.
199. 200 Whether rich men f^ould be honored. 200 The place Jam, ^. 1, 2.
explained. ibid. How the honor we owe in a good man, differs from that we owe
to others, alike in outward respects. ibid. Whether we may seek our own honor,
and how. 201 How we should prefer another to our selves. 201. 202 Humility
required by the fifth Command, a threefold Consideration of it. How the Pagan
moralists were strangers to it. The advantages of it. In what things its most
necessary. The opposites of it. 205. to 208
I.
IDleness, the sinfulness of it. 181, 182 Idolatry, 7. distinctions of it. 19,
20 Five ways of more subtle heart idolatry. 20 How to discover each of these.
20, 21 The ordinary objects of this great idolatry Instanced in 11.
particulars. 22 What be the most subtle Idols showed in six particulars. 24 A
Twofold Idolatry, especially forbidden to the Israelites and condemned in them.
34 The Idolatry forbidden in the second command in six particulars. 43. 44
Jealousy, what it imports, and how attributed to God. 72, 73 Ignorance of
the Law. The sad effects of it. 1. 2 How a breach of the first Command. 28
Several distinctions of it explained. ibid. How it ex^useth and how not. 29
Images of any of the 3 Persons in the bl^ssed Trini^^ proved to be unlawful. 35
Objections answered. 35, ^6 The Command forbidding Images, proved to be
distinct from the first. 34 What Images may be ^awfully made. ibid. When are
Images of creatures abused. 36 Images of Heathen Gods, as M^rs, Cupid* etc.
prohibited. 37 Impatience* ^ow it appears, and how a breach of the first
Command. 31 Imprecations; whether lawful or not. 83 Incest, when committed, and
wherein the unnaturalness of it stands. 216
K.
KNowledge of God required in the first Command. 18. See ignorance.
L.
LAw, the excellency and usefulness of it. 1 How the moral Law obliges ^s now.
2 The distinction of the decalogue as a Law, and as a Covenant cleared. 4 How
the Law was given to Adam in innocence, how to Israel, and how is Believers
now. 10 The extent of the Law showed in seven respects. 9 Several ways of
abusing the Law. 11 Some directions for right using of it. ibid. Like-makes and
dr^gies, the sinfulness of them. 47 Lots or Lotting defined. 106 How the use of
them concerns the third Command. 107 Several divisions of Lots, and which of
them are lawful* which not. 107. 108 What is necessary to lawful Lotting. 1 8
Cautions for preventing abuse of them. 108, 109 Lusory Lots proved unlawful.
109, 110, 111 Some objection* an wered. ibid. Love to God, why called the first
and great commandment. 188 What Love may be allowed to the Creature without
breath of the first Command. 25 Whether we ought to Love all man alike. 194 In
what respects may we make a difference. ibid. What are the grounds of a lawful
difference in our Love. 195 How Love to the Godly, differs from common Love
to others. ibid. How we may love wicked men. ibid. What self love is lawful
what not. 196 Lust how early it entered into the world. 214 Several degrees of
unnatural Lusts. 216 See Concupiscence.
Lie, what it is* and when one is guilty of it. 263 Four sorts of Lies. 264 How
many ways we wrong our neighbor by Lying 264. 265 Of Lying in Court of
Justice, how the Judge and how the Advocate may be guilty as well ^s a false
witness. 267 Life, the taking away of our own, cleared to be forbidden in the
sixth Command. 209 How many ways one may be guilty of this ibid. How we may
sin against the bodily Life of others. 210 How against the Life of their souls.
210, 211 How against their Life of contentment. 211
M.
MArriage, how many ways men sin in Contracting of it. 218 How one may sin
against the seventh Command, even in a Married state. ibid. How one may sin in
dissolving of Marriage. 218, 219 Mother, why mentioned in the first Command.
192 Moral, all the precepts in the decalogue not moral in the same sense. 5 See
Sabbath.
Murder, several distinctions of it. 212 How its committed in the heart, how
i^ words, gestures, deeds. 212, 213 How Magistrates may be guilty of it. ibid.
Self Murder how forbidden. 109 See Life.

N.
NAme, what is meant by the Name of God. 77 What it is to take this Name in
vain. 78 What is necessary to the reverent mentioning of the Name of God. ibid.
Why the taking of this Name in vain, is so peremptorily prohibited. 79 Eight
ordinary ways of taking the Lords Name in vain. 102. 103 How the Name of God
is taken in vain in ordinances and duties. 103 How to prevent this sin in
duties. 104 How ^o^ know when guilty of it. 104 106 Why the taking of God*
Name in vain, i^ so threatened and punished even beyond other sins. 115. 116
How it comes that this sin is so ordinary. 116, 117 Directions for the
prevention of it. ibid. Neighbor to be honored and loved. 191 How we should
love and honor our neighbor. 193. 194 See honor and love.

O.
OAth, five things to be considered in it. 80 How one Oath differs from an
asseveration. 81 That its unlawful to swear by Angels, Saints, or other
Creatures proved. ibid. The difference between promissory and assertory Oaths,
and between promissory Oaths and Vows, showed. 83, 84 A threefold matter of an
Oath, and a threefold occasion of swearing. ibid. Of express or tacit
conditions in all promissory Oaths. 84 W^ there indefinite Oaths, such as these
imposed in Colleges, in Corporations, or such as Soldiers take to their
Officers, be lawful. 85 What does not lose the Obligation of promissory Oaths,
13. particulars instanced. 87. 88 What Oaths are null and of no force. 88 Four
cases wherein the Obligation of a lawful Oath cease. 89 Why wicked men
keep their sinful Oaths much more strictly then they do lawful Oaths. ibid.
What an Oath super adds to a promise. ibid. Obedience. The difference between
obedience to the moral Law as it respects the Covenant of grace, and as it
respects the Covenant of works. 3 See Duties, Command, Law.
Omens and observations when sinful and superstitious. 112 How superstitious
Observations may be made of a Word of Scripture. 113 Oppression showed to be a
sort of rapine, and against the 8. command. 230 Obtestations when lawful and
binding, and how we may also sin in them. 90 91
P.
PErjury, several sorts of it, and several vvayes how one may become perjured
85 Whether one that necessitates another to swear, when he has a suspicion
that other will forswear himself, become Acessory to his perjury. 86 See Oath.
Poligamy, how a breach of the seventh Command. 201 Poverty, how men sinfully
bring it upon themselves, and so violate the eighth Command 247 Punishment of
the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children threatened in the second
Command, proved to mean spiritual and eternal punishment especially. 73 74
Three considerations for clearing how the Lord does th^s punish Children for
the Parents sin. 75. Five ends for which the Lord threatens the Posterity of
wicked men. ibid. How children become guilty of the Parents sin, and what
special need some have to repent of the sins of their ancestors. 76 Praising of
God required in the 2. Command 53 Our ordinary failings before the going about
this duty. ibid. Many failings in the performances of this duty enumerated. 53,
54 Our failings after praising 54 Prayer required by the second Commandment 50
Many sins before Prayer instanced. 51 Many ordinary sins in Prayer. ibid. Many
sins while joining with others in Prayer, enumerated. 52 Many ordinary sins
after Prayer, instanced in. 52 Preface [I am the Lord thy God] a preface to all
the Commandments* but more especially to the first command. 16 Pride, in what
things it appear. 107 ^08 See Humility.
Promises, why annexed to some Commandments rather then to others. 17 Why the
fifth Command is called the first Command, with Promise. 191 What comfort the
Promise made in the second Command, to the thousand generations* etc. affords
to believing Parents, and their children 76 What is the meaning of the Promise
annexed to the 5 Commandment, and how to be understood. 202 What Advantage a
Believer under the New Testament, ^as by such temporal Promises* 203 See Vows.

R.
RApine, what it is. 239 Religion, how concerned in the duties we o^ to others.
190 Riches, ten prejudices that come by them. 25^ Right, whether a wicked men
has it, to any thing here. 202, 203
S.
SAbbath, the observation of it a moral duty. 119 120 Three considerations for
clearing the morality of it* 120 The morality of it proved from the Scriptures
way of speaking of it in general. 121 The Prophesies, Ezekiel 43. 44, 45, 46.
chap. Considered. 122, 123 Matthew. 24. 20. considered. 123 2. Proved that all
the 10. Commandments are moral, and consequently this. 124 This cleared from
Matthew. 5. 19. Jam. 2. 10. 124, 125 3. Several peculiar remarks upon the fourth
Commandment, confirming the morality of it. 127, 128 4. Four Arguments drawn
from Scripture to prove this. 128, 129 Four notable Witnesses to this truth.
129, 130 Objections answered. 130 131 Remembering of the Sabbath imports four
things. 144, 145 How to reckon when the Sabbath begins and ends. 145, 146 What
proportion of it should be bestowed on spiritual duties. 146 Several
Considerations tending to clear, that the fourth Commandment intended not the
seventh, but a seventh day primarily. 147, 148 Six Arguments for Evincing this.
148 to 151 Some objections answered. 152 Several Considerations for clearing
when the Sabbath begins. 152, 153 Diverse arguments to prove that the Sabbath
begins in the morning, and continues till next morning. 152. to 155. 1. That
the Sabbath may be changed from the seventh day to the first* proved not
deregatory from the 4* Commandment. 155, 156 2. That it was convenient, that
the day should be changed, proved. ^56 3. That the change should be to the
first day of the work* proved most convenient. 159 4. That the seventh-day
Sabbath was actually changed to the first day proved. 160 to 166 5. That this
change is not by Humane, but Divine Institution proved. 166. to 168 6. That
this change was made by Christ from the very day of his Resurrection, proved to
be probable. 168 How the Lord did sanctify the Sabbath, and we ^ought to
sanctify it. 169 What works are lawful ^n the Lords day. 169, 170 Eighth
Caveats for preventing the Abuse of what liberty God allows on that day. 171,
172 What is meant by a Sabbath days journey. 170 What resting on the Sabbath
imports, and from what we must rest. 173, 174 That we are equally oblidged to
the sanctification of the Sabbath as they were of old. 174. 175 An Objection
answered. 175 Wherein the peculiar holiness required on the Lords day consists.
176, 177 What preparation is necessary for the Sabbath. 178 Particular
directions for sanctifying the Lords day from morning to evening. 178, 179
What Is to he done when the Sabbath is over. 180 How the Lord Blesses the
Sabbath. 183, 184 Why he has yet apart a day to himself. 184 How Magistrates
are by the letter of the fourth Commandment oblidged to take care that the
Sabbath (...) all that are under them* 182, 183 Six aggravations of the sin of
Sabbath breaking. 185 In what sense Sabbath breaking i^ a greater sin then the
breath of any command in the second table. 186 Several vvayes whereby ^^e
Sabbath is profaned. 186, 187 Some directions for preventing this sin. 187
Sacraments* the right administration of them required in the second Command. 55
Eighth observations concerning the Sacraments in general. 55, 56 Five ends and
uses of the Sacraments. 56, 57, 58 How the Sacraments seal the proposition of a
practical Syllogism, how the assumption, and how the conclusion. 57 How we sin
by saying too much weight on the Sacraments (...) several failings instanced
in. 59 How we sin undervaluing of them seventeen vvayes ennumerated. 60, 61
How we sin in not receiving the Lord's Supper. 62 Many ordinary sailings before
the participation of this ordinance, ennumerated. 63 Many sins on the receiving
of the Lord's Supper instanced. 64 Many sins after partaking of this ordinance
instanced. 65 Whether the admission of scandalous persons does pollute the
ordinance. 65* to 69 Sins forbidden in the first Command. 19. 25* 26 How we
may find out the sins against the first Command. 27 Sins forbidden in the
second Command. 45, 46 Sleep, whether we may not contract the guilt of sin
when sleeping. Answered affirmatively. 12 The difference between the case of
Sleeping*men, and madmen. ibid. Seven arguments to prove the affirmative
answer to the question, 13, 14, 15 Swear, see Oath.
Superstition, see omens and observations, superiors why called Fathers and
Mothers. 192
T.
TAbles of the Division of the Moral Law into two Tables. 5 Three observations
on the Connection of the two Tables. 190 Four criptures that help to understand
the second Table. ibid. Temperance in eating and drinking stands not in an
indivisible point. 226 See drunkenness.
Theft, what that forbidden in the eighth Command* is, with the several sorts
of it. 237 Four sorts of Theft more strictly taken 230, 231 Twent^ five vvayes
of stealing, or wronging the goods of others. 243, to 247 How m^n sin against
the 8 Command* in reference to their own goods. 247 Whether Theft ought to be
punished with death. 256, 257 Threatenings why annexed to some Commands, and not
to others. 17 What the meaning of the Threatening annexed the 2* command. 73 How
the Threatening annexed to the 3. command* is to be understood. 114 See
punishment.
Trading* the lawfulness of it, and how to be managed. 250 Some general rules
for right buying and selling. 250. 251
W.
WOrd, the right hearing of it required in the 2. command. 48 How many ways we
sin before the hearing of the word. ibid. Many sins while hearing the word
instanced. 48, 49 Many instances of sin ^s^e^* the hearing of the word* 50 How
a word of Scripture may be superstitiously abused. 113 Worship of God, the
difference between that enjoined in the first command from what is enjoined in
the 2. command. 33, 34 Worship of Images among the heathen two ^old. 37 Some
distinctions of divine worship. ibid. How religious worship differs from
civil or politic. 38 Worshipping of God by Images, proved unlawful. ibid. The
heathens way of worshipping Images considered. ibid. The place Deuteronomy. 12. 31.
considered. 39 The I^ralites worshipping the Calf in the wilderness* Micas
Images, Jeroboams Calves, the high Places in Juda considered. 40 41 That such a
way of worshipping God, is forbidden in*^he 2. Command* proved by five
Arguments. 42 Exceptions answered. ibid. Will worship prohibited in the 2*
Command. 46 See more in Idelatry* Images.
Unbelief, how a breach of the first Command* 30 Usury how forbidden. 157 All
gain by lending of Money, neither contrary to equity nor charity. 258 Six
considerations for clearing this. ibid. On what grounds Usury might be
forbidden peculiarly to the Israelites. ibid. Several inconveniences that
follow the ass ting the unlawfulness of all profit by lent*mony. 260 Whether
one that lends money may contract for so much gain. 26^ Some Cautions to
prevent abuses in this. 261, 262 Vows not only lawful, but in some cases
necessary, proved. 92 In what cases and what things lawful, and how to be gone
about. 92, 93 How they bind in moral duties, and how in accessory helps to
duties. 93 How and in (...) and for holiness as baptism, or others occasions,
^ind. 93. 94 How the breech of them aggravates sin. 94. 95 Whether these
aggravations render it more eligible not to Vow at all. 95 Whether the simple
(...) of duty be a lesser sin, then the doing contrary to our Vows 96 Whether
one under conviction of failing in performing Vows, can keep up his peace. 96
97 How we may be helped to perform our Vows to the Lord. 97
FINIS.

