ENCOURAGEMENT TO CHARITY. A Sermon Preached at the Charter House Chapel Dec.
12. 1678. at an Anniversary Meeting in Commemoration of the Founder.

By WILLIAM DVRHAM, D.D.

(Sometimes Scholar of that Foundation) and Chaplain to His Grace the Duke of
Monmouth.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Gilliflower, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Westminster Hall. 1679.

Imprimatur,

Dec. 28.78. Guil. Jane R.P.D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.

Heb. 13.16. But to do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.
THis Epistle, whether wrote by S. Paul or S. Luke, was directed to the
Hebrews; that is, to the Jews that were converted to Christianity; and
principally to those of Judaea and Jerusalem; who notwithstanding their
Conversion, by reason of their weakness and infirmity, were for a season
indulged the practice and observance of the Rights and Ceremonies of the Jewish
Church; for which they retained so great an esteem and veneration, as if they
still expected to be justified by them; and so did not as they ought to do,
press on to that Spirituality and Perfection revealed in the Gospel, of which
those Legal Ceremonies were at the best but Types and Shadows.

And therefore the principal design and drift of the Author of this Epistle is
to show, That Christ is the Substance and Foundation of the Ceremonial Law,
which of it self, without relation to him, was of no value: but having
fulfilled it in himself, the force and obligation of it was taken away; and
that those Sacrifices and external Purgations, which were only Shadows of
things to come, were now to give place to the true meritorious Sacrifice of
Christ himself, which he had offered up as a full Propitiation for the sins of
the whole world. And therefore presses all along upon these converted Jews,
that leaving those low and beggarly Elements and Institutions, they would
persevere in the Faith of Christ, and in the Practice of the Gospel, which is
the true and reasonable service of men, much more acceptable to God than the
blood of Bulls or Goats, or the whole Pageantry of the Legal Sacrifices.

And this particularly is the Argument he pursues in this last Chapter, of
which my Text is a part; for in the tenth Verse he plainly says, We (that is,
we Christians) have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat, that serve at
the Tabernacle: that is, that Christ the only Christian Altar, to which we
bring all our Christian Sacrifices, will not be beneficial to them that depend
upon the Law of Moses; which he further exemplifies in the 11, 12, and 13
Verses; and then in the 15 Verse, the Verse immediately preceding my Text,
tells them what sort of Sacrifice they should offer, not that of the Bodies of
Beasts, but the true Christian Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, which they
were not only once, but continually to offer up, in acknowledgment of the
great power and goodness of God. By him therefore let us offer up the Sacrifice
of Praise continually, that is, the Fruit of our Lips, giving thanks to his
Name, Verse 15. And then in the words of my Text proceeds to recommend another
Christian Duty, which God will prefer before any Ceremony or Legal Sacrifice,
which is Beneficence and Liberality. To do good, and to communicate forget not,
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

Do good, that is, to others that need your assistance; as far as you can,
endeavor to be beneficial to them. And communicate, that is more particularly,
let those that want partake of your plenty, for the relief of their
necessities. For with such sacrifices God is well pleased, that is, this is a
Duty which God particularly requires of you under the Gospel; the performance
of which will be more acceptable to him, than any Sacrifices under the Law.

The subject of my ensuing Discourse from these words shall be to show,

1. That acts of Beneficence and Charity are in a more peculiar way Duties of
the Gospel.

2. Show what further Encouragements there are for the performance of them,
from the very nature of these Duties themselves in some particulars.

3. The Duty of those that are relieved by others Charity, in way of a more
particular Application to this present occasion.

I shall begin with the first particular proposed.

1. That acts of Beneficence and Charity are in a more peculiar and eminent way
Duties of the Gospel.

If we consider the History of the Life of our Blessed Savior, and the
Precepts he delivers to the world in his holy Gospel, we may find it to be one
of the principal Designs of his Incarnation, to mollify the rough and churlish
Dispositions of men; and instead thereof to restore the decayed Principles of
Humanity and Goodness to their first perfection.

And therefore he made choice of that mean and humble form in which he appeared
when he was here upon earth, as that wherein he was most likely, with the best
advantage to recommend those Principles, by which he designed to reform the
corrupted manners of the world. And so though it was in his power, yet he took
not upon him the State and Majesty of a King, he affected not Power and Empire,
the great Idols of this world, but took upon him the form of a Servant, that so
in that Disguise conversing familiarly with the meanest of the people, he might
the better put in practice those Doctrines of Goodness and Charity he was to
deliver to the world, and by his example also teach Mankind this Lesson, That
men are born not for themselves, but for the benefit of others; and that it is
much more desirable to be good than to be great.

And though the Jews were generally blinded with a false notion they had
entertained, of a glorious and triumphant Messiah, who they fancied was to go
out before them to Battle, (like Moses or Joshua) and subdue and conquer all
their Enemies, Yet we find our Savior himself laid down a quite different
Character of the true Messiah, in the 11th. Chapter of Matthew, Verse 5. where
after John the Baptist in Verse 3. had sent two of his Disciples to him to
know, Whether he were the same that should come, or whether they should expect
another; that is, whether he were the Christ or no: he returns him only this
Answer in that 5th. Verse, Tell him (said he) what ye hear and see, that the
blind receive their sight, that the lame walk, that the lepers are cleansed,
that the deas hear, that the dead are raised, and the poor have the Gospel
preached unto them. Thereby giving the true marks by which Christ the Messiah
was to be known, viz. not by his Power and outward Greatness, but by the
offices of Goodness and Kindness he was to do in the world, particularly to the
Poor, to whom he was in an especial manner to preach the glad tidings of the
Gospel.

The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, (as he says himself, Matthew.
20.28.) but to minister, and to condescend to the meanest offices of Humanity
and Kindness to the poor and the abject, which he performed with great
compassion thoroughout the whole course of his Life.

This was his constant practice, as we find in the History of the Gospel, to
which his Doctrine was exactly suitable. His Sermons and Discourses to the
people were all to the same purpose: he did not entertain his Disciples with
nice and high-flown Speculations, (according to the vain way of the Gentile
Philosophers) which should only amuse their minds with unprofitable and
impracticable Notions, that tended to no real and substantial good: But his
Doctrines were purely for the use and real benefit of mankind, for the
establishment of Peace, and Love, and Kindness in the world; and for the
restraining and curbing those immoderate Passions, which made men mischievous,
or at best very uneasy to one another. His Law was the perfect Law of Love and
Charity, according to the utmost extent in the greatest Comprehension that ever
yet it was proposed to the world.

He commands us not only to love our Neighbors and Friends, with whom we
peaceably and amicably live in the same civil Society, but also that we love
our enemies, and those that hate us. He commands us not only not to revenge an
injury (which was the highest strain any Philosophers ever reached to in their
Principles, few so high in their Practice) but instead of evil to return good,
to bless those that curse us, and to show kindness to those that despitefully
use us. He commands us to bestow our Charity, not at large to any persons we
may have a fancy and inclination to, but he particularly determines it to our
very Enemies; If thine enemy hunger give him bread, if he thirst give him drink.

These are the Principles of Humanity and Goodness, he has recommended to the
practice of the world, refined and sublimated to the highest degree of
Perfection, that Humane Nature is capable of. And thus we see how this Divine
Law of Love and Charity is pressed upon all Christians, both by the example and
particular commands of our Savior; so that the observance of it is not left to
our liberty for a Free Will Offering, whereby we may supererogate; but it is
essential to true Christianity, without which we can in no wise pretend to be
the Disciples of Christ.

We are not therefore to think (to apply this Discourse more particularly to
Charity, which I mainly design) with the selfish and churlish Worldlings, that
whatsoever we can scrape together, (provided it be by means allowable by the
Law) is presently all our own; and that when once we have got it into our
clutches, we may dispose of it as we please. No man in this World is a
Freeholder, and an absolute Proprietor, in respect of the Worldly Estate,
which he possesses, but he has it from God, under some certain terms and
limitations, who has made some Reserves, and allotted some Pensions that are to
be paid out to the Poor and the Distressed.

The Rich are only Gods Stewards and Almoners, with whom he intrusts the Relief
of their Necessitous Brethren. Now, if they spend the Portion of the Poor in
Riot and Superfluity, or any other way divert it from the use it was designed,
they are false to the Trust Almighty God has reposed in them; they oppress and
defraud the Poor, and are upon the matter as Criminal as those that pick their
Pockets, and rifle their Houses, for which their Great Lord will one day call
them to a severe account.

And indeed, if the Gospel were silent, the common Principles of Natural Reason
and Equity would in great measure enforce this Duty. For can we suppose, that
God, the Wise Creator and Governor of all things, who regards not the high
looks of the Proud, and is no Respecter of Persons, should be so favorable and
partial to the Rich, and to the Great, as to bestow upon them such Plenty and
Superfluity, without some Reservation, for the necessary Support, at least, of
those who have the same Common Principles of Nature, and are equally the
Workmanship of his own Hands.

Or, if Societies of men were joined together merely by compact, can we
reasonably think that the meaner and lower sort of People should ever willingly
consent, or quietly submit to so unequal, nay, so unjust an Establishment, as
that which raises some to so vast a height and greatness, whilst they
themselves are destitute of the necessary supports of Life, without remedy? Is
it reasonable that the Head, and some other of the more Honorable Parts of the
Body, should be filled with precious Ointments and Perfumes, decked and adorned
in the most costly and extravagant manner, while no care or regard should be
had to the Feet and other viler Parts, which do the common drudgery of the
Body, and are the chief support of the whole? No, there ought certainly to be a
proportionable care for all the Members, because they partake of the same
Nature, and perform their distinct functions in the common offices of Life.

And so ought it also to be in Societies of men, the Rich, and the Powerful,
and the Honorable, who are maintained and supported in their Greatness by the
Services of Meaner Persons, are obliged in way of just Recompense to take such
under their care and protection, and out of their Superfluities, as often as
occasion requires, make the low and mean Estate, to which the others quietly
submit, for the sake of Order and Peace, to be as supportable and comfortable
as is possible.

Now, if it be demanded in what way, or after what proportion this Charitable
Relief is to be distributed to Persons in Want and Distress; I answer, it is to
be done without any bounds or limitation, both for the Manner and the Measure,
but such as Christian Prudence shall direct and determine. We ought, out of our
greater Experience and Knowledge, to counsel and advise the Ignorant, with our
Power to defend and protect the Innocent from Oppression, and with our Riches
and Abundance to relieve the Wants and Necessities of the Poor and Indigent,
without any determinate stint; but according to our Abilities, and according to
what the Exigence of others may require. And in this Latitude and Extent are
these Acts of Beneficence and Charity, in a more peculiar way, Duties of
Gospel: which was the first Particular.

But, besides this obligation of Duty, I shall, as I proposed, show,

Secondly, The farther Encouragements we have to the Performance of these Acts
of Beneficence and Charity, from their own nature: in that,

First, They are agreeable to the Principles of Humanity, and highly grateful
to a Generous temper in the very Performance.

Secondly, They give us great satisfaction of Mind at the time of our Death.

Thirdly, They make us live in the World after Death, by perpetuating our Names
and Memories.

Fourthly, They lay a good and sure foundation for Everlasting Life in the
World that is to come.

First, These Acts of Kindness and Charity are agreeable to the Principles of
Nature, and highly grateful to a Generous Temper in the Performance.

However, Atheistical Persons, to make way for their false and impious
Principles, think fit to scandalize Humane Nature, representing Men as Wolves
and Tygres, and Beasts of Prey, prone to tear and devour one another, and at
liberty to do it by their Natural Principles; yet this is an impudent and
malicious Slander of their own and the Devils devising, whereby God is
dishonored and Mankind abused.

The Law of Love and Charity, and Compassion, is the first and most Ancient
Law, and has a direct foundation in Nature it self, being interwoven in the
very frame and contexture of our Bodies; We are not hewn out of a Rock that is
obdurate and insensible, but are made up of the softer and more relenting
Principles of Flesh and Blood, which would incline us to be kind, merciful, and
compassionate, were it not that Pride, Ambition, Lust, and Worldly-mindeclness
(Creatures of the Devil) did by degrees corrupt and vitiate the true Principles
and Inclinations of Nature, and choke those seeds of Humanity (which though
oppressed) lie deeply rooted in every man's heart.

But to a good and generous Temper nothing is so grateful and voluptuous as to
do Good, and discharge its Pity in some kind and charitable Office. Nature it
self is powerful within, who with great Zeal intercedes in the behalf of the
Poor and Afflicted, and to be sure, pleads heartily upon that Argument, because
she then pleads for Self, that she may thereby allay the Pain of her
Compassion, and ease the distress of her own Bowels.

And surely any ingenious Person, that has been exercised in the Practice of
this delightful Duty of Charity, will not esteem his Obligation to it to be any
burden or heavy Imposition; but will cheerfully and joyfully take the advantage
of every Opportunity of performing it, for the very Pleasure and Satisfaction
of mind that attends it.

Now though this is an Entertainment with which few Worldlings and ill natured
men are acquainted, yet to well affected Minds it is most pleasant, and the
parting with Riches in such a way is much more delightful than either the
getting or spending of them upon themselves.

The Pleasure of thus doing Good is far greater than that of receiving it. To
relieve a Poor afflicted man in his Distress, and to rescue him from the Evils
with which he was oppressed, is a God-like act, resembling that of the
Creation, a Prerogative Royal of the Almighty communicated to poor mortal
Creatures, whereby they become (what our first Parents vainly affected by their
Disobedience) even as Gods.

For he that is thus enabled to raise a poor forlorn Creature, that is
destitute of Help, and give him Comfort (a new and an unknown thing to him)
does, as it were, create such a man, and bring him out of Nothing, and he that
relieves one fallen from a prosperous State into Misery and Distress, raises him
in a manner from the Dead, and endues him with a second Life.

Now what greater Dignity and Honor than this can Humane Nature be capable of?
or what should more reasonably satisfy the utmost Ambition of men, than to be
thus put in the Place of God himself, to be clothed with the Robes of his
Royalty, and have the Signature of that Power, which is Divine, imprinted upon
them? And thus we see how the Practice of this Duty of Charity, is both
Delightful and Honorable, and every way agreeable to the Inclinations of a
great and generous Mind: which was the first Encouragement proposed, from the
Nature of the Duty it self.

Secondly, as the Performance of these Duties of Kindness and Charity is highly
agreeable and grateful to our Natures, so will the Reflection upon it give us
great Consolation at the hour of Death.

And certainly there is nothing a man ought more to labor after, than that he
may so frame his Life, that he may with Quiet and Confidence leave this World
when God shall call him hence; and if he cannot attain to this, he can never
esteem himself happy in any Condition whatsoever, because those sad
apprehensions he will have at that last and dreadful hour, if he be not thus
prepared, will deface and utterly blot out the Remembrance of all the Joys and
the Pleasures of his former Life.

Now there is nothing does so cheer and revive a man's Spirit at his Death,
(except the interest he apprehends in the merits of Christ) as the Reflection
upon the Good he has done in the World in his Life time; then will his Alms and
Oblations, and all the Offices of Kindness he has done, present themselves
before him to his unspeakable comfort, and support his fainting and drooping
Spirit, in that time of Natures great Distress. When the Remembrance of all
worldly Felicity and Greatness will bring nothing along with it, but Torment
and Vexation of Spirit. The Epicure will find then but little Comfort when he
shall consider with himself, how he has spent the Portion of the Poor in Riot
and Luxury, and pampered his Lusts with that which should have refreshed their
hungry Bowels.

The most Magnificent and Stately Monarch will not then be at all affected with
the Pomp and Greatness of his former Life, nor be pleased with the Remembrance
of those great and bloody Exploits, whereby he has made himself terrible to the
Neighboring Nations. Though he has conquered and subdued Kingdoms, and set up
the Trophies of his Victories in every Place, yet what Comfort will all this
give him, when he is at the point to die? Will the Plains strowed with the dead
Bodies of his vanquished Enemies be a Scene of Delight to his disturbed and
disordered Fancy? or the Lamentation of Widows and Orphans, which his Sword has
made, be music in his Ears, and drive away the Melancholy from his Heart, at
that uncomfortable hour? No, the Memory of his former Oppressions and Cruelties
will then torment him, the frightful Ghosts of those thousands, which for his
Lust, or his Ambition, or his Avarice, he has murdered and destroyed, will
stare him in the Face, and make dreadful Impressions upon his guilty and
troubled Mind; and so he must needs leave the World in great Horror and
Confusion. But the good Deeds of the just Comfort and refresh his Spirit, when
he lies upon his bed of languishing, and so he surrenders up his Soul with
Considence into the hands of God the Just and Righteous Judge. It pleases him
then to think, that he has not been hurtful, nor altogether unprofitable to the
World, having done something for the good of it before he left it; especially
if he have contrived the settlement of his Charity to succeeding ages he may
then be content and well pleased to put off mortality, and live in those Works
of Piety he leaves behind; for the Design and End of his Life, having been only
to do Good, he will easily be disposed to die willingly, when he knows he shall
continue his doing of Good after his Death; he will without any Trouble part
with Life, because he is to enjoy the true benefits of it, when he is dead,
living more desireably this way, than in a natural Offspring, whereby most men
fondly imagine they perpetuate themselves.

For the Affinity of Blood will soon be worn out, and what Concern and Interest
has a man in a distant Posterity? besides, he knows not how soon it may
degenerate and prove unworthy to inherit his labors; and this very
Consideration cast a damp upon Solomon the wisest of men, in the midst of his
Greatness, 2 Eccles. 18.19. I hated, said he, all the Labor I had taken under
the Sun, because I must leave it to the man that shall be after me, and who
knows whither he shall be a Wise man or a Fool? yet shall he have Rule over
all my Labor wherein I have lahoured, and wherein I have showed my self Wise
under the Sun.

But a man that does what good he can in his Life time, and then leaves the
remainder of his Substance for an Inheritance to the Poor when he dies,
satisfies himself, that what he leaves behind is disposed of to Pious uses,
according to his hearts desire, and by this means he makes the most of this
World, that is possible, enjoying it as much and as far as is consistent with
this State of Mortality, and perpetuates his Memory to the best Advantage to
succeeding Generations; which leads me to the third Encouragement proposed.

Thirdly, Acts of Beneficence and Charity do after the best and most honorable
way perpetuate our Names and Memories to Posterity.

A good Name (says Solomon) is as precious Ointment; and there is nothing which
the more Ingenious part of mankind more earnestly affect, than a good
Reputation, and to leave a fair remembrance of themselves and their Actions, to
the Ages that are to come: but the greater part of men being blinded with
Ambition and Vainglory, court a false Reputation, and project rather to leave
a great than a good Name behind them.

In vain do great Princes think to perpetuate their Memories, by magnificent
and stately Buildings of Stone or Marble, for Posterity to gaze on, which add
nothing to their true Honor, but are rather Records and Monuments of their
Pride and Vanity.

In vain do the great Troublers of the world endeavor to be magnified in Story
for their mighty Conquests, (a Gentile word in use amongst the great, whereby
Murder and Robbery are expressed in a more civil and courtly manner;) for
instead of that Glory and Renown they think to get, they bring (in the opinion
of all good and virtuous men) a scandal and an everlasting infamy upon
themselves.

For what are the great things they would have recorded of them to posterity?
that they have brought great Ruins and Desolations upon Mankind, depopulated
great Kingdoms and Countries, and committed Crimes and Barbarieties too great
for Justice to take notice of. These are the worthy Achievements they desire
to have related, which are so far from doing them any Honor, that they are an
eternal reproach to their Memories.

But the Actions of the just and good man, who endeavors in his lifetime to
be beneficial to Mankind, are as a sweet smelling savor, his beneficence and
charity perfume his memory to all Generations; he is remembered by the tokens of
Goodness he has left behind him.

All good men will do him honor, as a great Benefactor to the World,
rehearsing with praise and admiration the noble and generous Acts he did in his
lifetime; how kind, how good, how courteous, how bountiful he was; how he
relieved the poor, protected the innocent, comforted the afflicted, and
according to the utmost of his power advanced the happiness and prosperity of
mankind.

Now such a Memorial as this is worthy to be recorded to posterity, (much to be
preferred before a long and vain Inscription in Marble or Brass, relating a
pompous story of bloody Slaughters that have been committed.) This is the good
Name that is the true and proper Portion and Inheritance of the Just, whereby
he lives in the minds of the good and the virtuous, with whom his Memory is
precious, and his Name honorable; which was the third Encouragement to this
sort of good works.

Fourthly and lastly, these works of Charity lay a good and firm foundation for
eternal life in the world to come, as the Apostle particularly declares in 1 Timothy 6. v. 17, 18, 19. Charge them (says he) that are rich in this world, that
they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God,
who gives us all things richly to enjoy, that they do good, and that they be
rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
lay hold on eternal life. Where S. Paul gives counsel and direction, how the
rich should lay out their wealth to-the best advantage and improvement, viz.
that they should give it to the poor, and that thereby they would make the best
sort of purchase, even a purchase of eternal life, and secure a Treasure in
Heaven, where moths do not corrupt, and where thieves do not break thorough and
steal; an Inheritance that is everlasting, that fades not away, that is
eternal in the Heavens. So that we see the only way to preserve our Riches is
thus, to part with them; for what we keep we are forced to leave behind, but
what we give away we carry along with us.

When Princes die, they cannot carry away their wealth, neither does any of
their Pomp and their Glory follow them; Naked came they into this world, and
naked must they return; they brought nothing with them, and it is certain they
can carry nothing out.

But the good deeds of the just and compassionate man follow him into the other
world; nay, rather they go before to prepare a place for him; and therefore our
Savior himself in Luke 16.9. gives us this advice, that in our lifetime
whilst we have opportunity, we should make us friends of our unrighteous
mammon, (so he calls the riches of this World) that so when we fail they may
receive us into everlasting habitations.

By which we see, that the poor which we relieve if they belong to the household
of says, are so many Harbingers sent before, to open the Gates of Heaven, and
to prepare a Place for us. They will then bear Testimony of our Deeds of
Charity toward them in their Distress, before God and his Holy Angels; upon
which Deposition of Theirs our Savior, the Just and Righteous Judge, will
pronounce that comfortable Sentence, in the 15 Mat. v. 35. Come ye blessed of
my Father, and inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the Foundation of
the World, for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye
gave me drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I
was sick, and ye visited me; I was in Prison, and ye came unto me. For verily I
say unto you, in as much as you have done it to these, you have done it unto
me; enter therefore into the Joy of your Master.

And thus have I dispatched also the second general Head proposed, the
Encouragements that are for the Performance of this Duty of Charity from its
Nature and Effects, thorough the whole Course and Progress of it. The Practice
of it is pleasant to us whilst we live; the Remembrance of it comfortable when
we die; the History of it is honorable to our Memories after Death; and
besides all this, it lays a firm Foundation for everlasting Life in the World
that is to come.

It now only remains that I proceed to the third and last thing proposed,
briefly to show what are the Duties of those that are or have been relieved by
others Charity, as a more particular Application to this Assembly. I shall
instance in these two following Particulars.

1. There is required Commemoration of the Kindness thus received.

2. An hearty Endeavor to answer the Designs and Intentions of it.

1. There is required a grateful Commemoration of the Kindness and the Charity
thus received.

And this is a return which Nature it self and the common Principles of
Gratitude dictate to all men: He that can receive a Kindness, and not be at all
sensible of it, is a Monster of Barbarity, unfit to converse with Mankind, and
unworthy to receive any Offices of Humanity. And therefore the least and lowest
Degree of Acknowledgment we can make is to be heartily ^ffected with it, and
upon all Occasions endeavor to preserve and revive the memory of our
Benefactors, and that charitable Assistance we have received from them.

And certainly in a more special manner all that any way relate to this noble
and ample Foundation, have abundant Reason to magnify the Goodness of God, for
that plentiful Provision he has made for them by the pious Charity of our
munificent Founder, whose Memory we this Day celebrate, upon which occasion our
hearts ought to be enlarged with a grateful Sense of those great Mercies God
has conveyed to us by his means.

You that are of the younger sort are to consider with your selves, how great
Obligations you have to a Pious Gratitude upon the account of those great
Blessings you receive in this Place; here are you nourished and bred up with
that care, as if you were in your own Fathers Houses; with that Indulgence to
your tender Age, as if you were still under the wings of your Mothers: Here are
many of you rescued from the sad and grievous pressures of Poverty, and the
dreadful effects of it; and delivered from the Calamities of a low and a base
Fortune, and the Temptations to which it usually exposes men to. All things are
here provided for your comfortable Subsistence, without any Care or Pains of
your own; you are fed as the Young Ravens to which our Savior alludes, Luke
12. v. 24. you only open your Mouths, call upon God, and are filled with good
Things. You neither spin nor toil, but are clothed as the Lillies of the Field,
and what is far more valuable than all this, you have means afforded you of an
ingenious and virtuous Education.

Your tender natures are seasoned with early Principles of Piety and good
Literature, whereby (if you are not wanting to your selves) you may be fitted
for future Employment, in your several ways, to the Honor of God, the Credit
of the Founder, the Comfort of your Parents, the good of the Church, and the
Service of your King and Country. All which great and signal Mercies cry aloud
to you for a grateful Acknowledgment.

And you that are old and Gray Headed, are under no less Obligations.

Consider with your selves how happily you may pass your declining age in this
Place, if you duly improve those Opportunities you do enjoy. You have here a
safe and quiet Retreat, from the Cares and and the Troubles of Life, being free
from the noise and Buzzle of the World, and at perfect leisure to compose your
minds and fit your selves for your approaching end. Death many times comes upon
other men at unawares, whilst they are in the hurry of business, and engaged in
a hot and eager pursuit after Worldly projects, which makes him more dreadful
when he appears; but certainly, those in your state of Life can never be
surprised by Death, because you have nothing else to do, but to expect him; and
by staring him continually in the face, his visage must needs become less
terrible unto you. In the mean while, you have nothing to disturb your minds or
distract your thoughts, but are at liberty wholly to apply your selves to the
Service of God, to make your peace with him, and patiently expect and wait till
your great change come.

You are passed over the troublesome and tempestuous Sea of this World, and are
arrived at an harbor of Rest, where all things are calm and quiet, from whence
you may look out and see the World round about you in Confusion and
Distraction, and every one (as in a great storm) tumbling and tossing up and
down, not knowing where to find any Secure and Resting Place; whilst You enjoy
Peace, and Ease, and Retirement; a state of Life which the greatest Monarehs
have envied, and have resigned their Crowns and Empires, and stripped themselves
of all their Worldly glory, that they might only secure to themselves before
their death, some few such happy and quiet hours as you enjoy: and therefore
ought you also be seriously and thankfully affected for all those Advantages
you receive from the hand of God, let your hearts be filled with Thanksgiving,
and your mouths with his Praise; Yea, let all both Young and Old join together
in consort, singing Hallelujah and Anthems of Praise to the Name of the most
High, whose Goodness is infinite, and whose Mercies are over all his Works. But,

Secondly, A bare Acknowledgment is not sufficient; there is a farther duty
required of those that live upon Charity, which is, that they answer the
designs and intentions of their Benefactors, by living according to the Rules
prescribed them, and by making Improvements answerable to the Encouragements
they do receive.

And therefore (to apply this more particularly) the younger sort here ought
with all possible diligence and industry, to endeavor to improve themselves in
Learning, and Piety, and Good manners; for which purpose so Liberal a
Maintenance is allowed.

And the Aged ought to sequester themselves from the World, at least from the
Cares, the Lusts, and the Vanities of it, and attend carefully and constantly
upon the Service of God and all holy Duties, that so living soberly, godlily,
and circumspectly, they may be in a continual readiness and preparation to
expect the summons of Death, which they are daily to look for.

And all others of us, who have at any time partook of the same Bounty, ought
to esteem our selves as great Debtors to the Public for what we have this way
received; we are not to think we are at our own disposal, but that we are
bought with a Price and purchased, to be a People zealous and studious of good
works. Which if we neglect, we are highly ungrateful and unjust to our Founder;
none of his Children, but Usurpers upon others rights, and who have robbed the
Heirs of his Family of their Inheritance.

Let us therefore all of us labor by all means possible to discharge our
selves of this Obligation, by being some way more than ordinary serviceable to
God and the Public, that so we may give encouragement to persons piously
disposed, by the good effects of other men's Charity, to the like practice of it
themselves.

This is our Duty in general, more particularly we that have been bred up upon
the same common stock of Charity ought, first, to preserve love and union
amongst our selves; secondly, we ought to be humble; thirdly, we ought to be
charitable to others.

1. We are more particularly obliged to preserve love and union amongst our
selves.

For our pious and charitable Founder having passed by his own Family, and
adopted us for his Children, we thereby become Brethren, as being the joint
Heirs of our common Father; and therefore we ought to retain the Memory of this
Relation: and however we may be disposed of, and dispersed about in the World,
we ought to carry the Sense of it about with us where ever we are, as a
Character and Impression that is indeleble, the effects of which we ought to
manifest upon all occasions, as opportunity offers it self, by all expressions
of kindness and good will one to another.

Secondly, The remembrance of that charitable Relief we have received ought to
keep us humble.

Be ye clothed with humility, says S. Peter, 1 Pet. 5. v. 5. Where he
recommends Humility to all Christians, not as a loose thing, which they may
take up, and lay aside again at pleasure, but as their clothing, which is
always to be upon them, as a necessary Covering to their Nakedness. Now if
every Christian ought to be clad with humility as a garment, we must wear it as
a Livery, as a signal and peculiar Badge, whereby we are to be distinguished
from all others, and known to belong to the Household of Charity.

Men that have been born to great Honors and Titles, and have had all along a
continued and uninterrupted stream of Prosperity flowing in upon them, without
being beholding to others for it, are perhaps under a temptation sometimes,
(though it ill become them) to despise others, and overvalue themselves: but
when men of low and mean beginnings, who have been lifted up by degrees to a
higher station, by the charitable assistances of others, shall forget
themselves and their Benefactors, and with the rest of the vain world be puffed
up with high and arrogant conceits of themselves, they expose themselves to the
scorn and derision of Mankind: For as Pride is not seemly in any, so in them is
it contemptible and ridiculous. They ought to look down into the Pit from
whence they were taken, and remember that their Foundation was in the dust, the
reflection upon which ought to keep them low in their own eyes, and check their
lofty Imaginations and teach them the more proper Lessons of Modesty and
Humility; which was the second particular.

Thirdly, And lastly (to bring this discourse back again to the immediate
Subject of the Text) Having been relieved by Charity our selves, we are theerby
more particularly obliged to be charitable to others, as God shall enable us.

For as Charity is a Duty in all, so in us it is a debt, and what we have
received in our need from others, we are to refund in some measure to those
that are in the like Condition.

How can we turn away our Faces from the Poor, and shut up the Bowels of our
Compassion against them, when we consider what plentiful Alms we have received
our selves, without which, perhaps, many might have been in as low and forlorn
a Condition as these that implore their Pity. Such a reflection upon our
selves, and our former Condition, ought to incline us to Commiserate the
Distresses of others; and this is an argument God urges upon the Israelites, in
a case not unlike this, Levit. 19.34. Remember, (says he) to be kind to the
Stranger that dwells among you, and love and cherish him as your own People,
for ye were also Strangers in the Land of Egypt.

To conclude, therefore considering what we have received, we ought to abound
in every good Work, especially those of Kindness and Charity, which are
expected at our Hands as an offering of Thankfulness, for the Mercies we have
by the same means enjoyed. And so let us take the Advice of my Text and the
Words immediately preceding to our selves Verse, 15.16. Let us offer up the
Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, the fruit of our Lips giving Thanks to
his Name; And to do Good and communicate, let us not forget, for with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.

FINIS.

