THE ART OF MEMORY.

THE ART OF MEMORY.

A TREATISE useful for such as are to speak in Public.

By Marius D' Assigny, B. D.

Omnis disciplina Memoria constat, frustraque docemur, si quicquid audimus
praeterfluat. Quintil. lib. II. Rerum omnium thesaurus Memoria est. Cic. I. de
Orat. Constat Memoriam habere quiddam artificii, and non omnem a natura
proficisci. Cic. London, Printed by J. D. for Andr. Bell at the Cross-Keys and
Bible in Cornhil, near Stocks-market, 1697.

To the Young Students of both Universities.
I Need not tell you, Gentlemen, how useful this Art is and may be to you,
whatever Employment you are to undertake in Church or State. As it is the most
desirable Faculty for the enriching your Minds with rare Sciences and
Knowledges, and the gathering from your Stations those rich Jewels that will
cause you one day to appear the greatest Ornaments of your Age and Nation; it
is also the most excellent Ability for the perfecting of all your Natural
Perfections, and procuring to you a real Happiness in this Life, and an eternal
Felicity in the next.

Seeing therefore that so many and apparent Advantages depend upon your
Memories, and the Improvement of them, pray be not wanting to your selves;
neglect not this Gift of God, suffer it not to be idle and useless, but employ
it for the Purposes intended by the Donor's Wisdom and Bounty.

If you have capacious and officious Memories able to receive, contain and
preserve much, keep them not as empty Bladders, puffed up with Wind and Fancy,
but fill them while you are at the Fountain with the profitable Knowledge of God
and Nature, of sound Learning, and of true Wisdom, and of those liberal Arts
and Sciences by which you design to be useful, and do good in your Generation.

Let your Elevation be never so great, and your Birth never so considerable,
Learning, Knowledge and Wisdom will add a greater Splendour and Glory to your
Nobility, and procure to you a greater Veneration from those who are to be
subject to your Commands and Dominion. Picus Father and Son, Earls of
Mirandula, tho Men of great Eminency in our late days, thought the Exercise of
their Memories in the studying of all manner of Sciences to be no Diminution to
their Nobility, but rather a considerable Increase to their Native Honor; for
one of them published at Rome, Theses de omnibus Scientiis, with a Promise to
defray the Charges of those Learned Men, if poor, who would have the Pleasure
to travel to oppose and dispute with him. And if you please to look into
Antiquity, how many Noble and Famous Men, how many Kings and Princes have
purchased to themselves everlasting Renown by the Exercise of their Memories,
by their Industry, Studies and great Learning? Cato the Elder, at the Age of 80
Years, pleaded his own Cause when accused by his Adversaries of a Capital
Crime; and it was observed, that neither his Memory failed him, nor his
Countenance changed. Themistocles that Noble Athenian, could call all his
fellow Citizens by their proper Names; and when he was banished into Persia, he
learnt in a few Months the Persian Tongue, that he might be able to speak to
King Darius without an Interpreter. And in our late Ages King Alfonsus,
Averroes, and Avicenna, were noted for their Learning as well as for their
Nobility.

Memory is a rich and precious Jewel, if polished, used and improved; but if
suffered to be idle, it is as a Pearl of great Value in the Hands of a slothful
or unskilful and ignorant Artist.

To this purpose Erasmus speaks very well. Ad nativae Memoriae vim natura
felicem accedat intelligentia, cura, exercitatio and ordo, ad memoriam
confirmandam non nihil opis pollicentur medici: sed praeter ea quae diximus
plurimum confert perpetua vitae sobrietas; nam crapula and ebrietas ut ingenium
hebetant, ita memoriam prorsus obruunt. Officit etiam curarum varietas and
turba negotiorum, officit and tumultuaria diversorum voluminum lectio. And
again he says, Optima memoriae Ars est and penitus intelligere, intellecta in
ordinem redigere, postremo subinde repetere quod meminisse velis. Certainly
such have a great advantage who are gifted with a large Memory, but it can
yield neither them nor others any Benefit, unless they employ this Gift for the
Purposes that their wise God has designed in the Donation. And let it be never
so strong and large by Nature, it may be improved and increased by Art and
their Industry, to the completing of their Felicity both Temporal and Eternal.

But if Nature seems to deny some of you this Advantage, and you are not so
ready and perfect as others in the use of this excellent Ability, you are not
therefore to slight the least Gifts of God in your Creation, but still to
endeavor the Improvement and Increase of them. Let your Labor and Industry
strive to supply the Deficiencies of Nature, and polish this Gift, this
precious Jewel by a continual Exercise. Demosthenes, the Prince of the Greek
Orators, had such Natural Imperfections, as made him unfit to speak in public;
yet by his resolute and virtuous Endeavors he attained to the highest pitch of
Perfection and Glory in Oratory. Art may procure to us diverse Excellencies
which Nature seems to keep from us; and the Divine Bounty grants many times to
our assidual Labors what was refused to our Birth at first. The sparing Hand
of Nature in bestowing this Ability should rather provoke our Resolution to get
it by other means, than cause us to slacken, or discourage our Endeavors; for
according to the old Greek Proverb, (...), the greater the Difficulty in the
Attempt, the greater will be the Glory and Satisfaction in overcoming it: for
of all the Perfections of the Mind there is none more capable of a greater
Improvement than Memory, and none will reward our Labors with more
satisfactory Returns than this excellent Ability when we can attain to any
Perfection. Pray consider therefore, you who are like to want the use of this
rare Faculty in the following course of your Lives, and in the Employments that
you design to engage your selves in, how much it concerns you now to polish and
increase your Memories, and exercise them frequently; for, as a Roman Author
observes, Memoria minuitur nisi exerceas eam. Tho the Labor may be great at
first because of your Natural Imperfections, the Difficulty is to be overcome
by Art; and what is wanting to you in Nature, the other will supply in time.
Pray weigh and consider these seasonable Verses applicable to my Purpose.

Quisquis desidiam, luxumque sequetur inertem,
Dum fugit appositas incauta mente labores,
Turpis inopsque simul miserabile transiget aevum.
The Advantages that the Exercise of Memory will procure to you are
innumerable; to you, Gentlemen, chiefly, who design to instruct the Nation from
the Pulpit: for besides the Honor, Glory, Esteem and Value that you will
thereby obtain from your Congregations by this way of Delivery, besides the
greater Efficacy and Power that your Words and Preaching will have upon the
Minds of your Auditors, besides the promoting of the Glory of God, and perhaps
the persuading a greater Number thereby out of the broad Road of Eternal
Perdition, I must needs tell you that you will quickly find an unspeakable
Benefit in a few Years; and your great Pains at first in conquering your
natural Weaknesses will be fully recompensed with a greater Ease, Pleasure and
Delight in the publishing of your Meditations. You will find that this way of
Delivery will smooth and polish your Conceptions and Fancy. You will find that
it will unty your Tongues, and make you more ready to express your selves: you
will find that your Labors will be the less, your Preaching more acceptable,
your Improvements greater, your Learning more sound, and your selves able upon
a sudden to answer all Gainsayers; for by this means the Body of Divinity will
become as familiar to you as your Pater Noster. Antisthenes, the Athenian
Philosopher, when a Friend complained that he had lost his Book where he had
recorded weighty Matters, told him that he ought not to have trusted things of
so great Importance to Pen, Ink and Paper, but to his Memory, where he should
always have found them ready at hand in time of need.

There is one Advantage more which we shall receive by the Exercise of our
Memories: how considerable it may be to us, and what Influence it may have to
increase and enlarge our Eternal Happiness, we may at a distance guess; for
thereby the Soul will be enabled to increase its Abilities, Faculties and
Graces, which have a natural Dependence upon this of Memory, and that also will
be enabled to retain more; because as there is a strict Union and Communication
of all the Perfections between the Soul and Body; so that if one receives an
Enlargement, it conveys the same Benefit to the other, and the other becomes
more perfect and accomplished in that Ability which its Partner enjoys: The
Exercise therefore of Memory will not only enable the Organ now to perform more
perfect Acts, and enlarge the Ability while the Soul is in Conjunction with the
Body; but at its Separation, and at the great Morn of the Resurrection, this
Perfection with all the rest, being as immortal as the Spirit where it is fixed,
and to which it is conveyed, by our constant Endeavors and Correspondence with
the Body, will then appear more complete and greater, for the better Reception
of future Glory and Bliss, and to our everlasting Comfort and Satisfaction:
Therefore as St. Bernard very well expresses himself, Ad aeternitatis Gloriam
acquirendam nullus labor durus, nullum tempus longum videri debet. In Doct.

I would not have those Worthy and Learned Gentlemen of my Function be
displeased with this Exhortation and Advice that I address to the Students of
our Universities, as if it were designed to undervalue their wise and
profitable Meditations pronounced with the Assistance of Book from the Pulpit.
Our Nation only is used to this way of Delivery; for we are wont ofttimes, as
we ought, to consider and weigh the Things and Expressions more than the manner
of the Publication. Neither is it possible for them after a Tract of Time and a
long Usage to change their Custom of Preaching. But for the Young Men coming up
to supply our vacant Places in Church and State, it is now in their Power to
alter this Custom, to exercise their Memories, to follow the Practice of the
Learned Men of other Nations: It Is now in their Power to use themselves to such
a Practice as will be advantageous to the Glory of God, the Salvation of Souls,
the Credit of our Church, and infinitely beneficial to themselves.

I recommend therefore this Treatise principally to you, Gentlemen; and let
nothing hinder you from the Exercise of your Memories, and the Practice of the
Rules here prescribed, which I will assure you from Experience have proved
effectual for the overcoming the Weaknesses of Nature, and inabling frail
Memories to perform the Acts of large and strong. If some of them seem common,
despise them not, they will be no less useful if put in Practice. I have not
only consulted, in the delivery of them, my own Knowledge and Experience, but
have also set down the Advices* of several Learned Men about this Subject, and
borrowed from the Skill of the Physicians several approved Experiments for the
strengthening and corroborating the Faculty of Memory.

However, I entreat you, Gentlemen, to accept kindly from my Pen this Endeavor
for your Benefit and the Public, and this sincere Expression of my earnest
Desire of your Success, Promotions and Advantages, and of the Prosperity of our
Church and Nation.

I beseech God of his Infinite Bounty to make you all truly useful in your
Generation, to enlarge your Memories, increase your Learning, bless all your
Abilities and Graces, and to preserve you all to his Eternal Kingdom.

Amen.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line penult. dele all. P. 10. l. 27. read (...). P. 23. l. 28. r.
suscitat. P. 43. l. 26. r. tam. P. 54. l. 3. r. capillis. P. 57. l. 24. r.
linguam. P. 58. l. 3. r. dicta. P. 59. l. 13. r. albi. l. 24. put a colon after
dictas. P. 60. l. 26. r. bulliant. P. 61. l. 4. r. Stichad^s.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. OF the Soul or Spirit of Man, page 1 Chap. 2. Of Memory, its Seat,
and Excellency, p. 18 Chap. 3. The Temper or Disposition of the Body best and
worst for Memory, with the Natural Causes and Reasons of both, p. 30 Chap. 4.
Some General and Physical Observations and Prescriptions for the remedying,
strengthening, and restoring a Memory injured by the ill Temper of the Body, or
the Predominancy of one of the four Qualities in the Brain, p. 38 Chap. 5. What
is very much prejudicial to the Faculty, Habit, and Practice of Memory, p. 42
Chap. 6. Of such Natural Things as may be assisting to, and may comfort Memory,
from the Procurement of Nature, and the Contrivance of Art, p. 49 Chap. 7.
Rules to be observed for the Acts or Practice of Memory, p. 62 Chap. 8. Rules
to be observed to help our Remembrance of things that we desire to preserve in
Mind, p. 77 Chap. 9. Of Artificial or Fantastical Memory or Remembrance, p. 82
The Art of Memory, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Soul or Spirit of Man.
THE Excellent and Wonderful Frame of the Human Body, wherein the Wisdom of the
Creator shines so beautifully and apparently before our Eyes, being but the
Cabinet of the Soul, or the outward Shell, made on purpose to receive and
entertain this Immortal Creature, gives good reason to imagine that this Jewel
is far more excellent and of a greater Worth. Certainly our Wise Maker had no
mean Esteem of this Masterpiece of the Creation, seeing he has caused all
Visible Beings to be designed for the Good, Assistance, Pleasure, Recreation,
Happiness, and Glory of Man. Therefore at the first forming of Adam, the Sacred
Trinity proceed with Deliberation, and act together with an extraordinary Care
and Consultation; Let us make Man after our own Image. Man bears both in Body
and Soul a lively Resemblance of the Unity and Trinity, and the Relation that
our Almighty God has to this great World. For as this universal Spirit gives
Life and Motion to every Member and Part, and supports the whole Fabric by an
overruling Providence, and a comprehensive Spirit; thus the Soul is the first
and only Principle that actuates, governs, and moves the Microcosm, the Body,
and every Sense and Member, being in the whole, and entire in every Part. In
the Godhead there is a Unity that admits of no Division, an Omnipotent Spirit,
not subject to the Infirmities of Separation or Partition. And is not the Soul
or Spirit of Man in this Excellency, the Representation of his Heavenly Maker?
It is a Unity not to be divided nor cut in parts; it discovers it self in the
whole Body, and by its Operations in every Member produces differing Acts
according to the Diversity of the Organs. In the Godhead we are informed by the
Sacred Penmen, that there is a Trinity of Persons, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost: Likewise in the Soul of Man we find three remarkable and
distinct Faculties, the Understanding, the Will, and the Memory; which tho they
be three Abilities or Powers, are but one Soul or Spirit. Of this Resemblance
between God and the Soul, Seneca seems to be sensible, when he inquires, Epist.
32. Quid aliud voces Animum, nisi Deum in humano corpore hospitem? And St.
Austin, in his Treatise of the Trinity, expressly confirms the Truth of this
great Mystery, by this Parallel with the Soul of Man. Man therefore being the
living Image of his Creator, participates in some measure of the Excellency of
that Eternal Being: Who in all his Proceedings in relation to this Creature,
expresses a high Esteem of him, and of his Immortal Spirit. For him he seems
to have raised, beautified and adorned this great Fabric of the World, putting
all things in Subjection under his Feet, and made him as it were a visible God,
to govern, dispose of, and command all the Creatures that inhabit the four
Elements. For him he has kindled so many Glorious Lights in the Firmament
above, sending down from thence the continual Expressions of his Kindness and
Goodness to Man. For him the World is maintained, and the Omnipotent Hand of
Divine Providence supports and continues all things entire, for the Completion
of that appointed Number of Mankind designed for Happiness, from the Beginning,
by the Divine Wisdom.

And since Man has wilfully forsaken his Maker, and joined himself in
Rebellion with the Apostate Spirits, God's Mercy has not totally rejected him,
nor debarred him from a Return; but on the contrary he invites him back to
himself, with the greatest and most endearing Expressions of Love, Kindness and
Esteem. The Divine Mercy values the Souls of Men at so high a rate, that it
has given an infinite Price to redeem them; and employs the Agency of an
Omnipotent Spirit to sanctify and prepare them for the noble Purposes for which
they are designed. If the Souls of Men had not been full of Excellency, and of
a great Value, would the Eternal Wisdom suffer the Son of God to forsake his
Glory, and stoop so low to fetch them out of the Depths of Everlasting Misery?
Would he have joined himself to this Being, and took upon him our Human Nature?
Would he have thought no Pains nor Suffering too great to purchase them to
himself? Would he have opened for them the Treasuries of Immortality to enrich
them, and commissioned his Holy Spirit to polish and purify them from the
Remains of Corruption? Would the Glories of the Heavenly Mansions be preparing
to receive these Souls, and the Blessed Spirits Above attend to conduct us in
our Passage thither, were there nothing in us worthy of so great Love, Care,
Expense and Labor? It plainly appears therefore, by the actings of Divine
Wisdom, and the proceedings of the Spiritual Beings, who in reason ought to be
well acquainted with the real value of the Spirit of Man, that it is of a
Divine Excellency, and far more worth than the whole World; seeing they have no
such regard for any created Being besides, as for this visible Governor of the
Universe.

If therefore Man's Soul is a Jewel of such extraordinary Worth, if God and the
Superior Beings have for it so great an Esteem; certainly Man should have no
less for this better part of himself. However, it is a Madness to prostitute
the Interest of the noblest Part to the Lusts, Follies, and Corruption of the
vilest, and prefer the deceitful momentary and counterfeit Satisfactions of the
Body to the real and everlasting Advantages of the Soul: A Weakness not
excusable in a Rational Being.

And if the Abuse of so Divine a Part of our selves be Criminal, the Neglect is
Heinous. Remember, O Man, that this Rich and Spiritual Jewel is by the Divine
Wisdom committed to thy Care, and recommended to thy Endeavors to be polished
and fitted for the adorning the Heavenly Sanctuary above. As there are diverse
Imperfections that belong to it in the present State, which render it incapable
of so high an Advancement, and which must of necessity be first removed by our
Religious Practices; so there are several Ornaments, Excellencies, and
Improvements requisite before it can expect so great an Honor. It is not
possible to leap from our vile and mean Condition of Sin and Corruption, to the
Enjoyment of the Presence of a Holy God, without a due Preparation, or in a
moment of Time. We are to draw near by degrees, and labor to attain to those
Endowments of the Mind that may predispose and recommend our Souls for the
Heavenly State.

There is nothing created in a condition of an absolute Perfection, but in a
possibility to be advanced higher, to be increased, enlarged, and enriched with
greater Perfections. Chiefly the Intelligent Beings, who have Abilities and
Faculties granted to them for that very purpose by our wise Creator, it is
certainly their duty to answer this end of their Creation, to study the
Improvement of their Natures, and labor in this Life to draw nearer to
Perfection; which tho it be not attainable till we be admitted to the Vision of
our God, nevertheless it is both our Duty and Interest to approach as near as
we can to that Blessed State, and prepare the Abilities of our Souls for that
Glorious End.

And tho all Gifts, Graces and Improvements of our Nature proceed from God, as
the Apostle affirms, that is, from the Assistance of his Holy Spirit and Divine
Bounty, from the Concurrence of his overruling Providence and apparent
Benediction, from the secret Actings of his Grace and Wisdom, that influences
our Wills and Endeavors; yet we are not to be sluggish and idle. But as we
come into the World with active Abilities, we are in all reason obliged to
employ them, and make them instrumental in procuring our own Good. Nay, we are
to seek and endeavor this Improvement, and not wholly to depend on the
favorable Will and Blessings of our Maker.

But of all Improvements those of the Spiritual part of Man are chiefly to be
minded, because our present and future Happiness will thereupon depend, because
such Improvements are not subject to the Casualties of the Body, nor cannot
easily be taken from us by Violence or Death; but as this excellent Being is
Immortal, all the Ornaments and Perfections acquired to it do accompany it into
another State, and are not changeable without our Wills and contrary
Endeavors. How soon are the Excellencies of the Body destroyed, and (...) the
Gifts of God and Nature humbled in the Dust, together with all our Labors to
imbellish and adorn this outward part of our Selves, made the Sport and Food of
the vilest Worms? But the precious Souls of Men, with the Graces and Virtues
that enrich them, are not so quickly spoiled; they are to continue with that
Heavenly Substance, and to abide with it for ever. Death, the great Destroyer
of God's Works, cannot separate those Perfections from the Souls, with which
God's Blessings and our Endeavors have enriched them.

For this Noble Part as well as the Body is capable of great Improvement. The
latter grows and increases by degrees, in the use of the ordinary Methods
appointed by God in Nature. Thus the Soul with every Faculty is to be enlarged,
increased, and advanced to Perfection, by the means prescribed to us by the
Divine Wisdom. The Understanding is to be enriched with an increase of
Prudence, Wisdom and Knowledge; the Will of Man with the Habits of Moral and
Christian Virtues. Thus ought the other Faculty of the Soul, called the Memory,
to be enlarged, increased and imbellished. To this purpose St. Bernard has an
excellent Saying, Dilatari oportet animam, ut fiat habitatio Dei. Sup. Cant.
Sermon. 28. For that intent our wise Creator has appointed in his Church the use
of his Word and Ordinances, has ordered his inspired Prophets and Apostles to
deliver to us the Sacred Mysteries of our Religion, and the most Heavenly
Directions, that we may grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. And for the same purpose our good God has
opened to us the Books of Nature and Providence, that we might continually
read, study and understand the Secrets of his Divine Wisdom, and draw nearer to
the Perfections of the Mind; unto which we shall never attain till we are
admitted to the Vision of God.

Now this precious Jewel is by the Philosophers defined, Forma substantialis
corporis viventis, per quam vivimus, sentimus, nutrimur, intelligimus, and loco
movemur; The substantial Form of our living Body, by which we live, are
sensible, nourished, understand, and move from place to place. Aristotle tells
us, it is (...) of the living organized Body. It Is altogether Spiritual, and
proceeds from the immediate Agency of our wise God, Creator and Preserver of
all things, who at the time of Conception and Formation of the Body, when the
Parts and Organs are duly prepared, and fitted to receive this Heavenly Guest,
creates it without any Concurrence or Assistance of the Parents. Witness the
Words of the Ecclesiastes, chap. 12. verse. 7. That at the Dissolution, the
Spirit shall return unto God who gave it.

And it is observable in this Excellent and Spiritual Being here are diverse
Faculties, which are either natural, vital or animal, by which the Soul in
conjunction with the Body produces diverse Functions and Actions of Life. The
Natural Faculty is that Power of the Soul by which the Body, assisted by the
natural Heat and Food, is nourished, grows, and produces acts of Generation.
The Vital Faculty is that by which the Vital Spirits are engendered in the
Heart, and Life is preserved in the whole Body. The Animal Faculty is likewise
that Power of the Soul by which a Man is sensible, moves, and performs the
principal Functions, which are Imagination, Reason and Memory; which indeed are
the chief Functions of the reasonable Soul.

We must here take notice of a considerable difference between (...) anima, and
(...) spiritus. Indeed the Divine Oracles make use of both Words to express the
same Spiritual Being; as in Matthew. 10. 28. (...) Fear not them which kill the
Body, but are not able to kill the Soul: but rather fear him which is able to
destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. This same Soul is named the Spirit, in the
last Prayer of the Proto-Martyr, Acts 7. 59. (...) Lord Jesus, receive my
Spirit. Therefore the Soul and the Spirit in the Scripture Language, signifies
that same Spiritual Being that enlivens, moves, and governs this dull Mass of
the Body, which cannot be destroyed by the Malice of Men, and which at the
Separation is received into an Estate of Bliss, by our great Savior, and the
Holy Angels his ministering Spirits. Yet if we examine some other Passages of
Holy Writ, we shall meet with a Distinction not Essential but Accidental. In 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. St. Paul desires that their whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body be
preserved blameless unto the Appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the
Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 4. v. 12. declares, That the Word of God is
sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul
and Spirit.

Interpreters differ something in the Exposition of these two Passages. Mr.
Calvin understands by the Soul the Will and its Affections, and by the Spirit
the Understanding and all its Gifts: which Interpretation seems to be weak, and
not answering the Scope of the Words. Others, and amongst the Ancient Fathers
not a few, tell us, by the Soul is meant the Sensual and Animal Part of Man,
and by the Spirit the more refined and more sublime Part, the Intellect and its
Perfections. This Interpretation, in my Judgment, draws nearest to the meaning
of the Apostle: but we must take heed of a gross Error, contrary to all Reason
and Philosophy, of some of them, who make Man to be composed of three Parts,
Body, Soul and Spirit, and multiply Beings without Necessity. The Spirit given
by God to enliven, move, and govern this Body, is but one, and has all the
Abilities granted to it which they ascribe to two distinct Substances; it has
the Power to govern the Senses as it is united to the Body; and as it withdraws
it self from the Senses, it performs all Spiritual Operations: Therefore this
Gloss which is designed by them to solve the difficult Question about the
Descent of Christ into Hell, in my Opinion is not Orthodox, nor agreeing with
the Principles of Reason and Nature.

So that in these two Passages (...) and (...) differ in some respect, but it
is only in the Original Signification of the Words, and in the Relation that
the Spirit of Man has to the Body, and the Animal Faculties and Operations. As
it is a Spiritual Being separate from the Body, and enjoys a Subsistence
independent from this outward Tabernacle, it is named (...), the Spirit of Man,
created by the immediate Hand of God at that moment that it is put to inform
and enliven the Organized Body, which takes its immediate Beginning from other
Principles. This Spirit at the Dissolution of the Body is immortal, and returns
to God that made it, and cannot be destroyed by Death. It enters into another
State, and has the freedom of its Faculties and Operations, as the Holy Angels
above. It is delivered from the Pains and Slavery of the Body, and from its
Concernment with this vile Part of Man. It enters into a new Acquaintance, and
into a Conversation with Beings answerable to it self. In this blessed State,
styled in Holy Writ, The Joy of our Lord, The Paradise of God, Fullness of Joy,
God's Presence, etc. the Soul or Spirit retains all its Perfections, Graces and
Abilities; and being delivered or let loose from the Body that clogs it, from
the Members and Organs decayed by Sickness or old Age, it thereby arrives to a
more excellent Activity than it was formerly capable of, when confined to the
Limits and Bondage of the Senses. It is not so much straightened in its Operations
as when it was One in Society with the weak and infirm Body; but every Faculty
has the greater liberty to manifest that Improvement that has been made in
them by our former Diligence, Industry and Labors.

But while this Spirit continues in Conjunction with the Body, and operates by
the Senses and Organs, it is properly named (...) Anima, or the Soul, and in
the Hebrew Tongue (...) a word derived from the Verb (...) he breathed, because
its present Being and Subsistence relates to the Animal Functions maintained
and continued by our constant breathing. But tho most part of the Actions of
this Spiritual Being are produced in and by the Organs of the Body, there are
at present many Operations of the Soul that have no relation to the Senses,
especially in such as are sanctified by the Spirit of God, and are designed for
a better and higher State: Therefore in the former Passage to the
Thessalonians, St. Paul prays that God would sanctify their Spirits from the
Corruption conveyed to them by the vicious Inclinations of the Body, and that
this immortal Part might be preserved pure and undesiled from all Sin and
Infection: That the Soul likewise, that is, the same Spirit as it works and
acts by the Animal Senses of the Body, and in conjunction with this outward
Part, might be also free from Sin and Pollution: And that the Body also with
all its Members might be sanctified, and preserved blameless unto the
Appearance of Christ. Likewise the Author to the Hebrews tells us, that the
Word of God is so sharp as to divide between the Spirit and the Soul; that is,
that it is so exact in its Commands and Injunctions in relation to Piety and
Holiness, as to lay an Obligation to be circumspect upon the Spiritual Being of
Man in the Actions that are produced in conjunction with the Body, and in the
Operations that are separate from the Senses, and that it censures both the
Spiritual and the Sensitive Part of Man.

But by this near Conjunction of the Soul and Body, it happens that the Habits
of the former are more or less perfect, and the Actions more or less excellent
according to the good or vicious Disposition of the latter. So that an
Impediment or a Weakness in the Organ may hinder the Soul from acting. But such
Impediments, if they proceed not from a natural Deficiency in the principal
Part, may in some cases be removed by an assidual Labor, a resolute Industry,
a long Usage, and the Blessing of the God of Nature. As in the Example of a
famous Orator, who wore away the stammering of his Tongue with Peble Stones,
and attained to a Facility of Speech and Memory by speaking often to the
roaring Waves of the Sea.

Indeed we are the more indebted to our wise Maker, when he gives an excellent
Soul in a well-disposed and well-organized Body, and that the Temper of the one
assists the Operations of the other.

CHAP. II. Of Memory, its Seat, and Excellency.
ST. Austin names Memory the Soul's Belly or Storehouse, or the Receptacle of
the Mind, because it is appointed to receive and lay up as in a Treasury those
things that may be for our Benefit and Advantage. Diverse Names and Descriptions
are given to it, but all may be reduced to this one Definition, That it is that
Faculty of the Soul appointed by our wise Creator to receive, retain and
preserve the several Ideas conveyed into it by the Inlets of the Understanding,
whether intellectual or sensitive.

Two Virtues belong to it, readily to receive, and long to retain whatsoever is
committed to its Custody by the Understanding: For Perfection of Memory
consists in these two Qualities, quickly to receive the Impressions or Images
of things, and to keep them long from Oblivion, that the Intellect might there
find them to employ them for such Uses as Reason may require. There are
likewise three differing Acts of this Faculty, tho some reckon but two; 1 st,
That which we properly call Memory, which is a Retention of the Ideas of things
admitted into the Soul. 2 dly, Recordatio, Remembrance, or a calling to Mind,
or a refreshing those Ideas that are there closeted up. 3 dly, Reminiscentia,
which is a Recovery of the same Ideas which were formerly lost, or a renewing
of those Impressions in the Memory that were blotted out, or defaced by
Forgetfulness. The first may be found in some measure in the Brutes, and other
Animals, who have a kind of local Retention of the Objects that are either
grateful or hurtful to their Natures; so that the presence of those things
cause them either to fly from, or to run to them, having had a former Sense of
their good or evil Qualities. This Animal Memory differs in this from that of
Man, in that it requires the presence of the Objects to mind the dumb Creatures
of their past Experience; but the Soul of Man having more perfect and excellent
Assistances, needs not the Representation of Things to remember the former
Passages; neither is his Memory so narrow, so weak and infirm, as that of the
Brutes. But the two latter Acts of Memory are not to be found in them, because
they depend on the reasoning of the Understanding, and cannot be produced
without that Ability, which we cannot admit in other Animals.

And tho these two Acts, which some reckon to be but one, be produced by the
same Faculty as the Acts of Memory, yet they differ in this, that the Memory
may be without the use of reasoning, but the others require the Assistance of
the Rational Faculty to recover the lost Ideas, by the help of certain
Circumstances that remain yet in our Mind. Besides, it is very common, that some
who are excellent for Memory, may be the more apt to be guilty of
Forgetfulness, and to let slip out of their Thoughts many weighty Matters.
Again, Memory precedes Remembrance in relation to Time, for we cannot call to
mind Things that we never had in our Memory before. And I judge there is this
difference between Recordatio and Reminiscentia, that the first is a plain
Remembrance of Things remaining yet in the Memory, but not thought upon before,
by reason of the multiplicity and crowd of other Ideas; whereas Reminiscentia
is a recovery of the lost Ideas which were blotted out of the Memory, and again
refreshed and renewed by the assistance of some known Circumstances and
Passages, that lead us to the minding again of those Things that we had
forgotten: however we must acknowledge between them the difference of magis and
minus. Now there are four natural Motions observable in Memory; First, the
Motion of the Spirits, which convey the Species or Ideas from the thinking
Faculty to that of Memory. Secondly, the Formation or Reception of those Ideas,
and the fixing or imprinting them into the Fancy. Thirdly, a returning back of
those Spirits from the memorative Faculty to the rational. Fourthly, that
Action by which the thinking Faculty reviews what is treasured up in Memory,
which indeed is the very Act of Memory. Therefore some have defined Memory,
Apprehensio in Anima existentium specierum cum indagatione and inquisitione; An
Apprehension of the Mind of those Ideas that are in the Soul, accompanied by a
Search and Inquisition.

We must here make one Observation more; That as the Peripateticks commonly
distinguish three distinct Things in every Faculty, so we must note the same in
that of Memory. First, there is the Faculty, Power or Ability of Memory, which
we fancy to reside in the Soul as in its proper Subject, and to produce Acts by
that Organ appointed by our wise Maker, namely the Cerebellum. Secondly, to
this Ability or Faculty belongs the Habit of Memory, which is acquired by
repeated Acts; for there may be a Faculty in the Soul, which through Neglect or
otherwise may be useless, and it often happens that the Faculty is perfected by
a constant and continual Practice and Habit, whereas Slothfulness decays and
ruins the most excellent Ability. The third Thing observable in Memory, is the
several Acts produced by the Faculty, which at last make up an Habit. We shall
find this Distinction to be of some use in the following Chapters.

Now the Seat of Memory is generally acknowledged to be in the hinder part of
the Head, which we call Occiput; in the third Closet, named Ventriculus,
Puppis, or Cerebellum. For as all the Naturalists are of opinion, that in the
Brain there are three Operations of the Soul, the Imagination, Reason, and
Memory; they have from the Direction of Experience, assigned to the two first
the two greater Closets of the Brain, and to the latter the less and
hindermost. For I need not busy my self to prove that all the Functions of Life
have their particular Organs; and the Soul acting little or nothing without the
concurrence and assistance of the Body, our wise Creator has appointed the
several distinct parts where the Spirit is to move and act, to produce the
differing Actions of Life; according to that old and approved Saying of the
Physicians, Cor sapit, and pulmo loquitur, fell suscitat iras,
Splen ridere facit, cogit amare jecur:
The Heart is the Seat of Wisdom, the Lights are employed in Speaking, the Gaul
moves us to Anger, the Spleen inclines to Laughter, and the Liver to an Amorous
Temper. Thus in this Closet of Memory the Soul treasures up the Ideas of
Things, making use of a clear and subtle Spirit, ascending from the Heart, to
form the Impressions, which contain either a longer or shorter space,
answerable to the Temperature of the Body, and the Largeness of this Closet:
For they have observed, that such have a capacious Memory whose hinder-part of
the Head is larger than ordinary; but when that part is otherwise, plain, and
narrow, such Persons are seldom gifted with a rich and an officious Memory. It
is most certain that the good or evil Disposition of the hindermost part of the
Head contributes much either to the largeness or shallowness of Memory. For
when that part of the Brain is sound, and the Passage open and wide, by which
the Spirits ascend up to it with Ease, and without any Obstruction, such Men
are quick of Apprehension, and their Memory is the more happy, and the more
susceptible of the Ideas. But if the way be obstructed that conveys up the
Spirits, or if there be any natural or casual Defect in that part, they will
quickly find it by the decay of Memory. Some having received a considerable
Blow in that side of the Head, as a Greek Author relates, forgot all their
nearest Relations. And it is reported of Messala Corvinus the Orator, that by
an Accident he became so stupefied as to forget his own Name. The Casualties
therefore that may happen to this excellent Faculty, by the Prejudices to which
this part of the Brain is subject, should awaken our Care and Diligence to
preserve and defend it.

But as the Parts of the Body, and the Soundness and Perfection of the Brain,
are great Helps to a good Memory; they have caused the Naturalists to divide
Memory into Natural and Artificial. The Natural is when the Person has this
great Advantage from his Natural Parts, without any help from his own Industry,
and when his wise Maker has bestowed upon him all the inward Qualifications
needful for a large and happy Memory. The Artificial is that which is acquired
by our Care, Study, Invention and Labor. For it is the Opinion of Cicero, That
the goodness of our Memory proceeds not always from our Natural Perfections,
but sometimes from the Contrivance and Art of Man. And our Experience can
verify the same, that Memory is capable of increase and decrease; and that the
Art of Man may add much, and accomplish this excellent Ability. However, if we
offer to neglect, and suffer this rare Faculty to be unpolished and covered
over, as it were, with the Rubbish of Idleness and Debauchery, when God and
Nature have been bountiful to us in this respect, we cannot expect to use it
with that Advantage, as others who have labored to increase their Maker's
Gifts by their Study and Industry. Of some it has been reported, that they had
prodigious Memories. Mithridates, that famous Enemy of the Roman State, was
once a King of two and twenty Kingdoms, where so many differing Languages were
spoken; which he understood so well, that he could speak every one of them, and
to all his Subjects, without an Interpreter. The Great Cyrus had so large a
Memory, that he could call every Soldier of his numerous Army by his proper
Name. Likewise Seneca tells us of himself, that he could repeat 2000 distinct
Names that had no dependence. And in our late Days, the Cardinal du Perron was
able to repeat, without missing a Word, two hundred Verses which were spoken
before Henry the Fourth by a famous Poet, and never heard nor saw them before.
Likewise in our Age and Nation, some carry with them whole Libraries in their
Memory: Which in reason cannot be expected, unless Men endeavor to improve
this rare Gift of God by a continued Exercise. I need not enlarge upon the
Usefulness and Excellency of Memory, to incline Men to the practice of the
Means to attain to it. All other Abilities of the Mind borrow from hence their
Beauty, Ornaments, and Perfections, as from a common Treasury: And the other
Capacities and Faculties of the Soul are useless without this. For to what
purpose is Knowledge and Understanding, if we want Memory to preserve and use
it? What signify all other Spiritual Gifts, if they are lost as soon as they
are obtained? It is Memory alone that enriches the Mind, that preserves what
Labor and Industry collect, which supply this Noble and Heavenly Being with
those Divine Excellencies, by which it is prepared for a Glorious Immortality.
In a word, there can be neither Knowledge, neither Arts nor Sciences, without
Memory: Nor can there be any improvement of Mankind, either in respect of the
present Welfare, or future Happiness, without the Assistance and Influence of
this Supernatural Ability. Memory is the Mother of Wisdom, the common Nurse of
Knowledge and Virtue, as the Poet very well has expressed, Sophiam me vocant
Graeci, vos sapientiam,
Vsus me genuit, matter peperit memoria.


But as these Lines are designed for the Benefit and Encouragement of their
Memories chiefly who are to appear in the Pulpit, or at the Bar, to speak in
the Audience of the People; I need not tell them with St. Austin, Memoria in
primis oratori necessaria, That there is no Ability more useful to an Orator
than Memory: For it gives Life to what is spoken, and makes a deeper Impression
in the Minds of Men; it awakens the dullest Spirits, and causes them to
receive a Discourse more kindly than otherwise; it adds a Grace, and an
extraordinary Excellency, both to the Person and his Oration, and is the
greatest Ornament of that part of Rhetoric that we commonly name Pronunciatio.
So that if there is any thing worthy to be esteemed or valued in that Art, so
useful in a Commonwealth, it is all borrowed from Memory alone; which gives the
greatest weight and efficacy to the Words that are spoken. It is reported of
Eschines, that when he came to Rhodes, he read to the Inhabitants a famous
Oration of Demosthenes, which they very much admired, tho pronounced without
the Grace of an Orator: But said he to them, Quid si ipsum audissetis? How much
more would you admire and esteem this Oration, if you had heard it from his own
Mouth? But our daily Experience can declare more of the Excellency of this rare
Ability.

I shall therefore proceed to examine what Temper is most agreeable with a good
Memory.

CHAP. III. The Temper or Disposition of the Body best and worst for Memory,
with the Natural Causes and Reasons of both.
MEmory is named, or rather described, by Plato, that great and famous
Philosopher of his Age, the Soundness of the Senses, because the Soul making
use of the Senses of the Body to receive the Impressions of Things, the Memory
is either larger or narrower, greater or less, according to the good or ill
Qualities of the Senses, and the Ideas are more or less lasting in Man.
However, it is most certain that in general it is requisite for a good Memory,
that the Body be in a perfect Health; for if either the whole be distempered,
or any part be diseased, the Sufferings are communicated to every Member, and
all are sensible in some respect of the Pain with the disaffected Part; and the
Disease, whatever it be, disorders the Functions more or less, according to the
nearness of Communication. Some Diseases have that evil Influence that they
totally deprive us of our Memory for a time, as those that seize upon the Head
and Brain, and such as distemper the Nerves and Veins that are uppermost, and
corrupt the Blood and Spirits which are used for the Exercise of Memory.
Besides, when any part of the Body is diseased, the Mind is distracted, and
cannot so readily perform that Office, as when it enjoys a perfect Tranquillity
free from the Avocations of Maladies and Pain. Likewise, if the Spirit be
disturbed by the violent Passions of Anger, Fear, Despair, etc. the Exercise of
Memory can never be so free, because it requires a sedate and quiet Temper of
Mind as well as a Soundness in the Body. All the Alarms and Troubles of the
Soul blot out the Ideas that are already entertained, and hinder others from
coming in. They obstruct all the Passages; and the Crowd of Thoughts that in
such Cases arise is a great hindrance to Memory.

But the Learned observe, that two Tempers of the Body or Brain are Enemies to
a good Memory, and that such can never expect any great Advantage from this
Ability that in those cases is naturally disinabled. The first is a Temper
extraordinary Cold, for thereby the necessary Motions are stopped, and the
Passages for a speedy Conveyance frozen, and the Imagination as it were
benumbed. So that as a convenient Heat of the Body is a notable Help to an
active Memory, a cold Temper can never be so quick in Apprehension, nor receive
the Impressions that are offered. Therefore a noted Physician names Cold the
Mother of Forgetfulness, and declares that there can be nothing more pernicious
to Memory, either to the admittance of the Ideas, or to the making use of them,
than an inward or a too violent and ambient Cold.

The second Temper unfit for Memory is Moist, when a too great Humidity seizes
upon the Brain, as in Drunkenness, Intemperance, and Defluxions; Memory in such
a case may quickly receive an Impression, but it will as speedily lose it: As a
Ship at Sea running swiftly through the Waves, leaves behind a Track, which is
almost as soon lost as made, so that no sign can be found of its Passage through
that fluid Element. So the Moisture of the Brain may be susceptible of an Idea
for the present, but it is not lasting, nor is there any sign a little after of
any such matter. Those Persons may remember the things near at hand, but they
seldom call to mind that which has been long ago done.

I might add a third Temper very much unfit for Memory, that is, an
extraordinary dry Brain, or a corrupt Disposition of Body, proceeding from too
much Heat and Dryness: for tho these two Qualities are necessary Assistants of
a good Memory, both for Reception and Retention, yet when they exceed the
Prescript of Nature, they must needs be offensive to Health, and consequently
to the Practice of Memory. It is therefore needful for this purpose that the
four Qualities of the Body be in an Equilibrium, in an equal Balance; because
this Equality serves very much for a more ready Formation of the Ideas, and
inables the Organ the better to receive and retain them. But of the four
Qualities it is observed, that Cold and Moist are the most destructive to
Memory; an excessive Cold being the greatest Enemy of Nature, and of its
Preservation. For Humidity, it cannot be expected that when the Brain is
drowned in Liquor, or overflows with Humors, that in such an Inundation Memory
can act and perform its Duty with that Exactness, and in that Perfection that
it can at other times, and in a better Temper. Now it is not difficult to
understand what Quality is predominant by these following Experiments: First,
by our Sleep; for if we are more inclinable to it than ordinary, it is a sign
of a wet and moist Brain, that makes us heavy and drowsy; but if we cannot take
our usual Rest, it is an evident Token of a dry Temper. Besides, this Humidity
falls down into the Palate by an extraordinary Spittle, breaks out of the
corner of the Eyes, and evacuates it self through the Nose and other
Conveyances from the Brain, in a greater abundance than is usual. But if the
Brain be too dry, you will not be able to close your Eyes as formerly, you will
find a Lightness in the Head, there will be seldom any natural Evacuations, and
the Eyes will appear sunk into the Head, and the Excrements of the Ears will
increase. This is the Case of such as grow in Years, which causes old Age to
be less susceptible of new Impressions in their Memory, but to be more
retentive of those that are there already: So that all the Passages of their
youthful days they can quickly call to mind.

But if an inward Cold predominates, it will appear by these Signs: The Face
will seem very white, the Eyes languishing, the Veins will scarce be seen; a
Cold may be felt about the Parts next to the Head, and a Dullness and Stupidity
seizes in such a case upon the Spirits and Brain; so that by this means Men
are rendered less fit for Action. Now it is observed by Physicians, that the
Brain is naturally hotter in Summer than in Winter, unless it be when some
Distemper increases the internal Heat, and augments it the more by reason of
the ambient Cold.

If too much Heat be in the Brain, it may be perceived by these infallible
Signs. All the Parts about the Head will be hotter and more red than ordinary,
the Eyes will be rolling and fiery, the Temples burning, and the Person cannot
be inclinable to sleep, because all the Vapors that cause Drowsiness are
consumed by that internal Heat, and dried up as soon as they enter the Closets
of the Brain. From what has been said it is most certain, that a moderate
Temper, where all the four Qualities correspond and agree in an Equality, is
the most fit for the Practice of a good Memory; and when any of these exceed
the natural Proportion, both the Health and Memory also are impaired in that
Body, and rendered more unfit for Exercise. In such cases therefore the
Physicians Art may be very useful to restore Health, to rectify the Brain, to
remedy the Temper, and remove the superfluous and pernicious Quality, and
consequently it may preserve, increase, enlarge and help Memory. For as it is
most certain that diverse Diseases destroy this Ability, or disinable it; so it
is unquestionable that several Remedies may assist, comfort and corroborate
this excellent Faculty, which requires a good Disposition of Body, a careful
Government of our selves, and an Abstinence from the Extravagancies and
Debaucheries of the Age.

Now in some Cases it is impossible to remedy a decayed Memory, as when Nature
fails through some violent Disease; when an extraordinary Heat and internal
Dryness has corrupted the vital Parts, or the Closet of Memory, and filled it
with infected Spirits; or when old Age brings a Diminution to our Strength,
Vigor, Abilities, and all our Natural Parts decay with our Body. It Is then in
vain to attempt by Physic to help or remedy that which is naturally lost and
perished. However in such Cases we may preserve what remains of Memory by a
regular manner of living, and by such Food as may expel the inward Dryness and
Cold, and comfort the Brain with a Recruit of wholesome Spirits, proceeding from
the Easiness and Quickness of Digestion.

CHAP. IV. Some General and Physical Observations and Prescriptions for the
remedying, strengthening, and restoring a Memory injured by the ill Temper of
the Body, or the Predominancy of one of the four Qualities in the Brain.
THE Excellency of Memory, as we have taken notice, depending wholly upon the
Health and good Disposition of the Body, it is not to be doubted but that which
restores Health to the one, is by consequence useful and assisting to the
Welfare and Operations of the other. Chiefly, if the Head or Brain be any ways
damnified, encumbered or prejudiced, such Medicines as are proper to remove the
ill Qualities, or to restore Soundness, are also proper to help Memory: Diverse
therefore are prescribed by the most eminent Physicians, answerable to the
several Distempers of the Brain, and the Causes from whence they proceed.

First; If by reason of extraordinary Looseness and immoderate Evacuations, or
of any internal Dryness, the Memory be prejudiced, we must seek a Remedy from a
convenient Diet, which may strengthen the Body, and comfort the Spirits and
Senses. In such a Case juicy Meats are to be used, and such as are of easy
Digestion in the Stomach; good and wholesome Drinks are to be taken, as Claret
Wine, Metheglin well made, etc. We are likewise to exercise our Bodies
moderately, and without being tired; we ought to rub the Head and Temples
softly with Woollen Clothes, and endeavor to restore the Body to its ordinary
Temper by Sleep, Bathing, and other natural Means. But if the Brain and Memory
be injured by reason of an internal Cold, Heat must be applied to expel it (as
Humidity is used to remedy the Dryness of the Temper) but always with a
convenient Moderation; for we must take heed that we heat not the Brain too
much, nor totally dry up the internal Humidity, for fear of falling into a more
dangerous Distemper, which may deprive us both of Life and Memory together.
When the Brain is out of order by reason of Cold and Moisture, the Air is to be
chosen for the Patient to live in which may be hot and drying: and in wet and
cold misty Weather, the Chamber or Dwelling where he is, ought to be perfumed
with hot and odoriferous Herbs, as Sage, Marjoram, Lavender, Rosemary, Thyme,
wild Thyme; and let a Smoke be made of some of these wellscented Herbs in the
Chamber, together with Juniper, (for such Perfumes will dry the Air, and help
the Brain) chiefly of that Indian Amber that is named the Gum of the Soul. The
Diet ought to be according to the Distemper, of such Meats as are of an easy
Concoction; and tho some Physicians forbid cold Sallets, I suppose they may be
of great use, chiefly in the Spring and Summer, to some hot Stomachs, as
Lettice, Purslane, Spinach, Corn-sallet, Cichory, Endive, and Nasturtium; the
latter being good to stir up the Spirits, and a natural Remedy against Sloth;
from whence comes the old Direction to a Sluggard, Vade and ede Nasturtium.
Likewise it is very proper in many Distempers of the Brain, to open a Vein, and
free the superior Parts from the over-flowings of Blood, and to give a gentle
Purgation, either by Potions, Pills, or other usual Means, according to the
Advice of experienced Physicians, and the Nature of the Distemper. Now such
Diseases incident to the Brain are either in the Cavities, or the Substance of
the Brain; in the first are chiefly these, Vertigo, Catarrh, Epilepsia,
Apoplexia, Palsy, Convulsion, Trembling: in the Substance are these, Phrenzy,
Melancholy, Madness, Loss or Hurt of Memory, sleepy Diseases, etc. All which,
as they bring a present Prejudice to the Faculty of Memory, so they are to be
removed and cured before it can act with Vigor.

But if the Disease proceeds from a too great Increase of the Humors, such
skilful Physicians are to be consulted, and proper Remedies are to be applied
for the correcting and removing of those Humors, as Bleeding, Purgations,
Glisters, Vomits, Issues, etc.

Now it is most certain that diverse Ointments, Snuffs, Perfumes, Plasters, and
Medicines are applicable to the Head and Temples, for curing several Distempers
of the Brain: But this being a Subject that more properly concerns the
Physician, I shall only advise the Patient to be very cautious in making use of
Remedies for the removing of Diseases of the Head, which is a tender Part; and
when once the Part or Organ is wounded, it is a very difficult Task to cure it,
and without a Miracle it can never be made whole.

CHAP. V. What is very much prejudicial to the Faculty, Habit, and Practice of
Memory.
THE Memory residing in so tender a Part as the Brain, Nature has had a
particular care to preserve it from all Casualties by a thick Skull: It shows
thereby what Esteem, Value, and Tenderness we are to have for that Part of the
Body, and how much it concerns us to take heed it be not injured either by our
own Miscarriages, or by others Endeavors. Certainly we are worthy of blame if
we ruin that most excellent and most necessary Part of our selves, and run
wilfully into such Actions as are hurtful to our Brain and Memory. Now it is
observed, and we may understand it from our own Experience, that these
following Particulars are prejudicial to Memory.

1. All Crudities, Repletion, and Indigestions of the Stomach; for they
engender many dangerous Diseases, disorder the Brain, and send up infectious
Vapors, which cause Pains in the Head, Giddiness, and several other
Distempers: consequently they are pernicious to Reason and Memory, as St.
Ambrose tells us, Cibus immodicus and Animae and Corpori nocent: An excessive
Eating hurts both the Soul and Body.

2. Drunkenness is offensive to the Brain, and all its Functions, because it
fills it full of Humors, and naturally causes Forgetfulness. And as a Father
expresses himself, Ebrietas Tempestas est tam in Animo quam in Corpore, and
seipsam ignorant; It is a Storm both in the Body and Soul, and causes us to
forget and be unmindful of our selves. Therefore the use of strong Wines is
dangerous, and a frequent ingorging and constant Debauchery turns Men into Sots
and Beasts, and weakens all the Operations of the Brain. I cannot but mind here
what Suetonius writes of Claudius Caesar, that by Drunkenness he had forgot
what he had commanded but an hour before: for having ordered his impudent and
lecherous Wife and Empress Messalina, to be put to Death, because of her
unsufferable and public Adulteries, when he sat down to eat Meat a while
after, asked his Officers and Servants what their Lady was doing, that she came
not as usually to Table with him. And the same Roman Author, with others, tell
us of Vitellius, who when he came to the Empire, gave himself over to such
Debauchery and Drunkenness, that he lost and drowned all his Memory and Reason.

3. A violent and outward Cold in the Night-season offends the Brain, if the
Head be not well covered. Therefore for the better Preservation of the Seat of
Memory, it is convenient to keep our Heads warm, according to this French
Direction, Gardez chaux les pieds and Lateste, audemeurant vivez en besse; keep
warm the Feet and the Head, but for the rest live as the Beasts.

4. To take cold and wet in the Feet in Wintertime weakens the Eyesight, and
injures the Memory, because of that great Correspondence that there is between
these two Extremities, the Head and the Feet.

5. An extraordinary and hot Air, or a burning Sun, disturbs the Mind, and
prejudices Memory, if we suffer it long to work upon us.

6. All windy Foods and Drinks are not good for the Assistance of Memory, but
rather contrary, unless Nature carries them speedily off in the ordinary course.

7. We must avoid eating in the Evening such things as may increase too much
the ascending Vapors, and cause a too great Humidity in the Brain, or may be of
an ill Digestion, or may too much fume up into the Head: for tho such things
may incline to Sleep, they may have a bad Effect upon the Seat of Memory; and
remember these seasonable Verses, Ex magna Coena stomacho fit maxima poena,
Vt sis nocte levis, sit tibi Coena brevis.


8. Forbear drinking too much immediately after eating, chiefly after Supper,
for that will but spoil and hinder Digestion, and will prove offensive to the
Brain and Memory.

9. An extraordinary Idleness and Laziness of Body begets and increases ill
Humors, which have bad Influence upon the Faculty of Memory: Therefore a
moderate Exercise becomes us as Men, and is very useful for our Health, and the
Safety of our Being; as an ancient Philosopher taught his Disciples, by telling
them, that Exercitium confert ad Corpus and Animum; that Exercise is profitable
both to the Body and Soul.

10. Forbear sleeping immediately after a plentiful Supper or Dinner, before
the Food has past down from the Orifice into the bottom of the Stomach; for
there is nothing more pernicious, because it prevents the working of Nature,
and causes often the good Food to become bad, and to disturb both the Body and
Mind.

11. A too frequent and violent use of Venus, when the Stomach is altogether
empty, or too full, or contrary to the Rules of Conjugal Chastity and Religion,
is very dangerous, not only to the Body, but also to the Soul, and all its
Faculties: For such an irregular Act draws a Curse after it, and obliges our
just and wise God to withdraw his Blessing from such Contemners of his Laws,
enacted for our Safety and Preservation.

12. Fear, Sadness, Anger, violent Passions, and melancholy Thoughts are no
Friends to Memory; for they disturb the Mind, disquiet the Soul, and disorder
all the Faculties.

13. A too violent Vomiting is destructive to Memory, because it forces Nature,
and discomposes the Brain.

14. A disquieted Mind can never make use of Memory, tho the Faculty may be
good, and assisted by Exercise, and strengthened by Habit; yet while the Soul is
alarmed, and dissatisfied, it can never in the midst of its Troubles use its
Memory with Freedom, and so well, as in a more peaceable Temper and Disposition.

15. All such Motions of the Body as cause Giddiness, or Swimming in the Head,
are destructive to Memory. Therefore we should have a special care to avoid
Falls from high Places, turning round, or Blows upon the hinder part of the
Head. For, if we may believe Thucidides, some by that means, in the Grecian
Wars, lost totally the use of their Memories: For by that Violence the Seat of
Memory received so great a Prejudice, that the Faculty could make no use of it;
and the Contusion was so great, that the Brain was disturbed, and could receive
no more Impressions, nor preserve them that were there before.

These Experiments are not to be neglected, by those who design to attain to a
Perfection of Memory; for they are of dangerous Consequence, as our Experience
can witness, to the Faculty of Memory, and to the other Functions of the Brain.

CHAP. VI. Of such Natural Things as may be assisting to, and may comfort
Memory, from the Procurement of Nature, and the Contrivance of Art.
GOD and Nature have bestowed upon us Faculties and Abilities, and with them
Means to enlarge and assist them in the performance of their several Offices.
As there are some things to be avoided, which may be pernicious to them, so
there are others to be used and employed for this good purpose, for a more
ready Execution and Discharge of their Duties and Functions. Memory, this
excellent Ability of the Soul, may meet with many Helps in the Course of Nature
to strengthen it, and render it more perfect. I shall recommend these following.

1. A moderate and convenient Exercise of Body before we sit to Meat, to
prepare the Stomach for a more hearty Reception, and a better Digestion, is
useful not only to the Faculty of Memory, but to all other Animal Functions;
for from thence proceed those good Spirits which help all the Offices of the
Brain, and make it more able to act with Vigor: Such an Exercise, I mean, as
may be answerable to the Abilities, Calling, and Employment of the Person; such
an Exercise as may free us from all Natural Superfluities, which may incommode,
incumber, or burden Nature.

2. It becomes us to feed upon such temperate Meats as may agree with our
Stomachs as well as our Appetites, and to eat and drink with that Moderation,
as may tend to strengthen and not to destroy Nature: for as there is nothing
more pernicious to the Faculty of Memory than Excess, Drunkenness, and
Gluttony, so there is nothing that can better preserve it than a sober use of
those good things that Nature affords to supply the daily Deficiencies, and
corroborate our Strength.

3. There are some things that may hinder the ill Fumes of the Stomach from
ascending higher, which are useful to strengthen Memory after a plentiful
Repast, as Stiptick, Fruits well prepared by Art or Nature, Coriander Seed well
preserved with Sugar, and other Things.

4. A moderate Joy and Contentment of Mind is very profitable for the
preserving and fortifying this Ability of Memory: For if the Soul be uneasy,
all the chief Faculties are disturbed, more especially Memory, and rendered
more unfit for Action.

5. To wash our Feet often in hot Water, wherein we have boiled some Camomile,
Laurel, Balm-mint, and some other odoriferous Herbs, is very comfortable to the
Brain, the Eyes, and the Memory: For besides the good effect the hot Liquor
has upon the Head, the Scent of such Herbs serves very much to refresh the
Spirits, and comfort the Brain. Therefore in Summer the smell of Roses, and
other fragrant Flowers, is not useless, but advantageous to this purpose.

6. A convenient Purgation of all Superfluities of Nature is likewise helpful
to the Faculty of Memory: for when there is a Stoppage of that which ought to
be cast out, there is a Burden that is not only troublesome to the Person, but
also of a dangerous Consequence to the Health and Life, and to all the
Superior Faculties and Functions that are thereby hindered in their Actions
and Operations.

Now Physicians inform us, that this tender part of Man, namely the Brain, is
injured and prejudiced by three Means. First, By a violent breaking in of the
Excrements of the Body, or of any part of it. Secondly, By nourishing and
harboring some ill Quality. Thirdly, By retaining the usual and natural
Purgations, when they have not their ordinary Course by the common Passages
appointed by our wise Maker: For as there are continual Vapors ascending to
the Brain from the inferior parts, designed for the nourishing and assisting
the Brain in the several Functions of Life; so there must be some Evacuations
for that which is superfluous and useless in Nature, to be voided. Now these
Vapors, if they have any ill Quality, or are any ways offensive to the Brain,
do quickly hinder the Operations of Life and Reason. For there is no part of
the Body more tender than this, no Part is sooner and more susceptible of
pernicious Fumes and Vapors than the Brain. Our good God therefore has
provided, amongst the Natural Things, a great many Antidotes, and comfortable
Herbs, etc. which are proper to help and restore the Brain to its usual Temper
and Perfection, and consequently to assist and preserve Memory. Now amongst the
Natural Things, and those that may be prepared by Art for the use of Memory,
are either Pouders for the Head, or Pouders to snuff up in the Nose; Plasters
to apply to the Temples or other part of the Head; Bathings, Drinks, Fruits,
Confections, Smells, Purgations, Ointments, etc.

1. Of Pouders to dry up the Humors of the Head, and cleanse the Hair: they
are very useful for the strengthening of the Memory, when the Person is of a
moist Temper, and that he finds a too great Humidity to burden the internal
part, and disturb his Fancy; or if he be often afflicted with a Cephalalgia,
proceeding from Cold or Vapors. But such Pouders are to be made of Odoriferous
Herbs, and well scented, which may be pleasing to the Smell. Riverius
prescribes for this purpose, this excellent Powder. Pulveris Ireos Florentini,
lb ss; Storacis, Benjoini, ana ii. fiat pulvis tenuissimus capilli^
inspergendus in lecti introitu, and mane pectine decutiendus; si efficaciam
intendere volueris, add caryophillos, nucem moschatam, and cinamomum.

2. Sneezing Pouders well prepared are of great use, but may prove pernicious
if any thing is offensive to the Brain in the Composition. Now the same Author
recommends the dried Leaves of Marjoram, Sage, Rosemary, the Roots of the Herb
Pyrethrum, of Lingwort perfumed with Musk, to be a choice Sneezing Powder, to
comfort the Brain and Memory. And the Herb Galangal well dried, and reduced to
Powder, is very useful to strengthen Memory. Another good Sneezing Powder may
be made of Pepper, with the Herb Condisi, white Lingwort, and Lillies, with
some perfumed Gums. But we must have a care not to offend Nature by a too
frequent use of these or other Snuffs, which may prejudice the Brain.

3. And as all noisome Smells are hurtful to the Brain, and when they are
continually taken are infectious; so there is a great Benefit to be expected
from good and wholesome Scents, as of Flowers, Perfumes, etc. This is excellent
to comfort the Brain; Take Lign-aloes, Frankincense, Gum-mastix, Red Roses,
Leaves of Betony, Cinnamon, Mace, Spice, Cloves, with Styrax; and with all this
make a Powder: cast it on a Chafing Dish of Coals in a Morning, and it will
wonderfully comfort the Brain and help Memory.

4. Diverse Plasters, when we find a Decay in Memory, may be useful for the
helping the Brain: As a Plaster made of Mustard Seed, and clapped to the hinder
part of the Head, or the Oil of Mustard Seed when applied to that Part. Or if
you please to be at greater Expense, take Florentine, Lillies, the Herbs
Hermodactyle and Pyrethrum, Leaves of the wild Vine, Pigeon-dung, Mustard Seed,
of each an Ounce; mix them with Moschata Nuts, Spice, Cloves, Cinnamon, and
Pepper, and make a Plaster, which you may likewise apply to the hinder part of
the Head, and you will find it will increase and help Memory. And a certain
famous Author assures us, that the Gall of a Partridg anointed about the
Temples does wonderfully strengthen the Seat of Memory; as also the Brains of
Birds and Fowls roasted, and chiefly of Hens, are not useless for the same
purpose.

5. If you please to try this Experiment, you will find it of great use, as
some Learned Physicians tell us; Take the Seed of Orminum, and reduce it to
Powder, and every Morning take a small quantity in a Glass of Wine. And they
say that the Shavings or Powder of Ivory produce the same Effect, namely, the
corroborating of the Brain and Memory; as likewise a Grain of white
Frankincense taken in a Draught of Liquor when we go to Bed, dries up the
offensive Humors of the Brain. And it has been observed, that the Application
of Gold to that Sutura which divides the Seat of Memory from the other Closets
of the Brain, strengthens the Weakness of the Head, drives away all Pain, and
has a wonderful Effect upon the Faculty of Memory.

6. There are some Ointments to be made for the same Intent, as this; Take of
the Fat of Hens or Capons, together with the Fat of a Cow, and Gum of Ivy, of
each a Pound; which being distilled in a Lymbick with a soft Fire into an Oil,
is very good to anoint the Temples and the Wrists three times a Week. Here is
another Ointment which Aristotle is said to have often used for the
strengthening of his Memory: Take of the Fat of Moles, Bears if it be to be had,
of Weesel and Bever, or instead of that of Otter, of each an equal Quantity,
Juice of Betony and Rosemary; of all which make an Ointment to anoint the
Temples chiefly in cold Weather.

A famous Author tells us, Vt profunde Memoria teneas, and perpetuo utque
velociter apprehendas, hoc usi sunt multi magni Viri: Recipe radicum linguae
bovinae, radicum valerianae, ana uncias quatuor; radicum rutae uncias duas; fac
inde pulveres subtilissimos: postea recipe succum euphragiae, sclareae sive
ormini, berbenaeque, ana uncias quatuor; coletur been succis per pannum: postea
misce succos simul, and pulveres separatim: postea recipe medullam anacardorum
unciae unius pondere, and fac pulverem ut supra. Item recipe lingu^^ avis, id
est semen fraxini, and fac pulverem subtilissimum: postea misce omnia praedicta
simul, scilicet succos and pulveres, and accipe sartaginem terream vitreatam,
and pone ad ignem, intusque pone ex ursi pinguedine, and funde seu liquefac
paulatim, and intos projice dictos pulveres, cum succis miscendo, semper
apponendo de dicto pinguedine, quousque fiat Vnguentum subtilissimum; quo unge
tempora, and partem Memoriae, and frontem, and verticis partem versus nucham;
hocque ter vel quater in anno facies, and continuabis sic ungendo etiam, prout
magis aut minus oportebit. Hoc enim in virtute excedit superstitiosam artem
notoriam.

Again, another Experiment may be tried for the same purpose. Recipe octo
calices aquae communis, foliorum hederae, stichadis, ana lib. unam semis;
ponantur simul in aqua, ad bulliendum fere ad consumptionem aquae; postea
coletur been, and exprimatur, and intus pone modicum terebinthinae lotae cum
rosaceo: postea caput lava cum bono lixivio, and post siccationem unge cum
praedicto liquore tempora and occiput.

The same Author recommends to us the making of this perfumed Apple for the
comforting of the Brain and Memory. Recipe Ladani, ligni Aloes, Styracis, ana
drach. unam; Caryophillorum, nucis moschatae, seminis Ozimi, ana drach. semis,
cum aqua rosacea, in qua nonnihil Moschi and Ambari dissolutum sit; fiat pomum.

Another Prescription we find recommended to us by a worthy Author in this
manner. Ad habendam profundam memoriam, vel siquis eam ex debilitate vel
infirmitate amisisset; valet etiam Vertigini. Recipe Roris marini, id est
Libanotidis, Boraginis, Chamaemeli, Violarum, Rosarum, ana unciam unam;
foliorum Lauri, Majoranae, Salviae, ana uncias duas: omnia incide, and pone in
optimo Vino, and post diem destilla per alembicum vitreum aut vitreatum; and
destillatum serva, in quo pone Terebinthinae odoratae lib. unam, Thuris albi
uncias octo; Mastichis, Myrrhae, Bdellii, Anacardorum, ana uncias quatuor:
omnia tere, and dimitte sic stare per dies quinque cum destillatione cooperta;
postea destilla in tantum cum igne fortiori, donec ex eis oleum habeas, quod
serva been* clausum in ampulla vitrea, been cum cera and pergamento obturata.
Modus usus talis est: Recipe ex eo quantum caperet cortex avellanae per os, and
unge etiam parts Memoriae, scilicet occiput, and quasvis parts jam dictas:
optimum experieris.

Some Physicians order Pills for the use of Memory to be made in this manner.
Recipe Cubebarum, Calaminthae, Nucis moschatae, Caryophillorum sing. drach.
unam semis; Thuris optimi, Myrrhae electae, Ambari orientalis sing. scrupulum
unum semis, Moschi grana quinque, cum aqua Majoranae: pilulas confice; recipe
unam hora decubitus, duas vero in solis ortu, horis quinque ante Cibum, Hyeme
per mensem, Vere and Autumno rarius.

Aliud probatissimum Experimentum ad Ingenium and Memoriam, quod ferunt esse
Aristotelis. Recipe ursi pinguedinem, quam habet in humero seu spatula dextra,
eamque repone in vesica ipsius ursi, simul cum ejus urina, and simul stent octo
diebus: tum extrahe and accipe succum Ormini, sive Sclareae domesticae,
Euphragiae, Berbenae, Buglossi, Valerianae, Aloes, Omnium aequaliter, and simul
misce cum praedicta pinguedine super ignem, cum lignea spatula agitando quoad
fiat Vnguentum spissum; ex quo cum volueris accipe quantitatem parvae fabae,
and unge frontem and tempora fricando aliquantisper, and audita recordaberis.

Lixivium pro ablutione Capitis humidi frigidique comfortativum, and Memoriae
conferens, debet autem esse ex Cinere Sarmentorum vel Quercus, postea intus
haec bulliant. Recipe Acori very, Stichadis, foliorum Lauri, Roris marini,
Ivae, Salviae, ana manipulum unum; ex isto lavato caput: post vero ablutionem
aquae vitae modico sinciput madefacito, and sequenti pulvere aspergito. Recipe
Pulegii, Calaminthae, Caryophillorum, Sandaracae, Macis, Stichados, mentae
siccae, Majoranae, ana drach. quinque; misce, and fiat pulvis subtilis, and
post inspersionem superpone stupam canabis; aliis quoque diebus ingrediens
lectum, pone super capitis bregmate ex pulvere illo etiam illoto capite, nam
siccat, etc.

And Ludovicus Mercatus advises to make this Water, which he says has a
wonderful Virtue for the restoring and strengthening of decayed Memories.
Recipe Aquarum Buglossae, Betonicae, Florum Libiae, ana lib. 1. Aquae Vitae
optimae, lib. ss; Florum Anthos, Rosarum, and Majoranae, and Florum Buglossae,
ana P. j. specierum confectionis anacardinae iiij. infundantur flores in aquis
suo tempore, and tandem species, and stent in loco solis vel digestionis per
mensem, postea in Balneo extrahatur aqua, cujus noctu ij. aut ss porriges vel
accipies.

CHAP. VII. Rules to be observed for the Acts or Practice of Memory.
MEmory, as we have already observed, being an excellent Faculty or Ability of
the Soul, it is by consequence to produce Acts answerable to it self; which
Acts by degrees form an Habit, that strengthens the Ability, and makes it more
ready and able again to appear in Action: for the more we use this Ability, the
more able and perfect we shall render it, whereas by Neglect and Sloth Men lose
this natural Gift, and it becomes useless.

Now for the better exercising of Memory, and for the accomplishing this rare
Faculty, I shall recommend these following Rules, which I shall desire those
Persons to observe and practice that intend to use their Memories either in a
Pulpit, or at the Bar, or on any other occasion where they desire to deliver
their Meditations without the Assistance of Book or Paper.

1. Let the Subject that we treat upon, or the Matter or Discourse that we
deliver, be rational and worthy of our own Esteem: For the things that we
admire, or that afford us Pleasure in the reading or hearing of them, make a
deeper Impression in our Minds than those things we value not. As this Faculty
is noble, it retains willingly nothing but what is answerable to it self:
likewise any thing strange and unusual, or that which is suitable to our own
Genius and Temper, commonly finds in Memory a kind Reception, and a longer
Retention. It is therefore the Advice which a wise Man recommends to young
Students, Sapientem audire Praeceptorem, quem etiam cogaris admirari, plurimum
enim Memoriae conducit; To hear a wise Tutor whom we ought to admire, because
Admiration is a great Advantage to remember his Instructions. And amongst the
Keys of Wisdom he reckons this to be one, Honor Magistri, a particular Respect
not only for the Person of our Teacher, but a Value that we must put upon his
Words and Directions, that we may treasure them up for our own Use and Benefit*
For tho Memory by the Naturalists is compared to a Sive, or (reti similis) to a
Net, it is in respect of those weak and unfaithful Memories that never retain
the things committed to their Custody, and that lose them as soon as they have
them.

2. Let there be a Method and convenient Order observed, and a Coherence in the
Discourse that we design to deliver; for it will be far more easy to mind and
remember what has a mutual Dependence one upon another, than that which is
without Order or Method.

3. Let every thing that we desire to remember be fairly written and
distinctly, and divided into Periods with large Characters in the beginning;
for by this means we shall the more readily imprint the Matter and Words in our
Minds, the more remarkable the Writing appears to the Eye. This Sense conveys
the Ideas to the Fancy better than any other; and what we have seen is not so
soon forgotten, as what we have only heard. Therefore Cicero tells us, in 3. de
Oratore; Facilius ad ea quae visa sunt, quam ad ea quae audita sunt Oculi
Mentis feruntur: That the Eyes of the Understanding, and consequently Memory,
are carried more easily to the things that are seen, than to those that are
heard.

4. Let these Characters, or Beginnings of every Period, be well imprinted in
our Minds, for they will quickly bring thither the whole Discourse also. No
sooner shall we think upon the first Entrance, but we shall have a prospect of
all the rest in our Imagination. And it will be no small Assistance to our
Memories, if these first Letters of every Sentence or Period can luckily
express some known or remarkable Word or Thing in every Page. As Buxtorf in his
Hebrew Grammar, that Students may remember the Letters which change their
natural Pronunciation by the Inscription of a Dagesh, has gathered them
together in the word Begadkephat. And that they might not forget those Letters
which are named Quiescentes, that are written and sometimes not pronounced, he
has put them together in the word Ehevi. Thus if we may happily join all the
first Words of every Sentence so as to express some remarkable Thing, or
Subject, or Word, we shall remember more easily the Beginnings of every Period
or Sentence; and by taking every Letter in order one after another, come to the
remembrance of all that is written in the Page without any difficulty; for the
Beginning will lead us to all the rest. This Direction may be of great use to
weak and infirm Memories.

5. If we will have the Command of our Memory, and secure it from the frailty
of Oblivion, or the apprehension of a Mistake, it becomes us to have in our
Minds well imprinted the Abbreviation of our whole Discourse, and the chief
Heads, so that in an instant we may be able to recollect and cast our internal
Eye upon any part of the Matter that ought to lie as it were before our
Fancies; for in this case if any Interruption happens, or any Casualty comes
accidentally to disturb the Series of our Discourse, we shall be the more ready
and better able to call to mind our Business, and proceed on with more Courage,
Resolution, and less fear of a Miscarriage, because we may be certain, that in
an unexpected Weakness of Memory we shall have a Remedy at hand to relieve us
in case of need, and we shall speak with more Confidence and Boldness, the more
we shall know our selves secure from Frailty. Therefore it is Seneca's Advice,
that in a large Discourse we should have it abbreviated and contracted to
certain principal Heads, for the prevention not only of Confusion, but also of
that Disorder that multiplicity of Words and Matter is apt to cause in weak
Memories.

6. Let there be a local Apprehension of our written Discourse well fixed in
the Mind, and in the Delivery of it let the Fancy proceed on, and the
Imagination leisurely dictate the Matter, and the Words as they are couched in
our Paper. This local Apprehension is the greatest help to Memory, and chiefly
if the Characters, as we have formerly noted, be fairly written, and remarkable
to the Eye and Fancy; for as they give a deeper Impression into the Mind, they
become more legible, and are not so soon defaced.

7. When we first intend to recover a Discourse, and get it into our Memories,
we ought to read it quietly with the greatest Attention and Intention of the
Mind, setting aside all other Business which might incumber or interrupt us. We
must for this purpose summon all our Thoughts to attend upon the Business in
hand, and seriously read over every Period and Sentence; for without this
Intention it is impossible to be able to imprint any thing well into our
Imagination. And before we proceed on too far, it becomes us to get well a Part
by Heart, that our Memories may go on more securely and gradatim, by degrees.

8. Therefore it becomes us for this purpose to repeat often over what we have
already learned, and softly to utter every Sentence one after another. This
Repetition will be of great use both for the getting it more perfect, and for
the more easy delivery; for when the Tongue is accustomed to the Expressions,
it will more readily deliver them again. And we find by Experience, that Verses
and other Discourses that we have often spoken, when once we begin to deliver
them, they drop from us insensibly; and, as a Man that is use to run in a
Career, or down a Hill, we cannot stop till we come to the end.

9. After we have thus gotten into our Memory a Discourse in the beginning, we
must suppose that it is not confirmed in us, and must therefore run it over by
a frequent Meditation, chiefly in the Evening when we are going to Bed, or in
those Intervals that we cannot sleep; for then the Silence of the Night, and
the Quiet of the Time, are very proper to strengthen in Memory what we have
committed to its Custody. These Meditations are esteemed by Aristotle the
greatest Assistance of Memory; and Ptolomey calls Meditation the Key of Truth.
Truly without this Practice a Discourse can never be well digested, but will
come from us raw, perhaps as a Lesson from a Schoolboy; neither can we be able
without it to make it our own, nor to give that Life and Virtue to it that is
needful to affect the Minds of our Auditors. Therefore a Discourse ought to
have a convenient time to settle in our Memories, that they might often run
them over by Meditation.

10. Let young Men take care to exercise their Memory betimes, for by a
frequent Practice we gain and strengthen the Habit of Memory. Let not the
Difficulties that may appear in the Beginning fright or cause us to
discontinue, but resolutely proceed on in the accustoming our Faculty to retain
both Matter and Words. I know some charge their Memory with nothing but the
Matter, but it is as easy to mind the Words when once we have used our selves
to the Practice. Cicero writes of Lucullus and Hortensius, two famous Orators
of the Roman Empire, who had vast Memories, that the former remembered Matter,
the other Words, and prefers therefore Lucullus before Hortensius: but I
conceive that Orator to be the most accomplished, who having penned his
Discourse in such a manner, that it speaks weighty Matter as well as Words, is
able to deliver it verhatim with Deliberation and Vigor. Seneca tells of
himself, that he could repeat two thousand distinct Names one after another
without any Mistake, so large was his Memory, which proceeded from a long and
continued Exercise; for by this means we shall attain to a great Perfection.

11. Beware of taking a Pride, and glorying in our Memory. As we are to use it
in necessary Occasions for the Glory of God, the Edification of his Churchd and
Instruction of the People, I woul e not have any vainly to boast or presum, too
much upon the Strength of Memory but to look upon it as a Gift proceeding from
God's Bounty to us. Staupitius, a Tutor of Martin Luther, in a Sermon thought,
in a vain Ostentation of Memory, to repeat all the Genealogy of Christ
mentioned by St. Matthew; but when he came to the Captivity of Babylon, his
Memory failed him, which caused him to take the Assistance of his Book, with
this Expression, I see, said he, that God resists the Proud. How many have
there been, who vainly priding in this Excellency of the Soul, have been
totally deprived of their Memories, forgotten their own Names, their dearest
Relations, etc.? The Gifts of God are not to be employed as Instruments of our
Pride and Folly. Our Great Creator is sensible of the Injury done to his
Liberality, when we ascribe to our Industry, Sobriety, or the Goodness of our
Temper, what is most and chiefly due to his Bounty. Several sad Examples
therefore of the Resentment of his Justice have appeared before our Eyes, of
Persons who have altogether lost in a manner what was the greatest Subject of
their Glory; that we might learn to avoid such Provocations, and behave our
selves with Humility and Thankfulness to his unwearied Goodness, always giving
to him the Honor of our Perfections and Enjoyments.

12. For the better Preservation of the Faculty of Memory, it becomes us to
know well its Strength, Ability, Reach and Frailty, that we may take Measures
accordingly: for the loading of our Memory too much may be as prejudicial to
it, as the taking of too heavy a Burden upon our Shoulders will be to our Body
and Loins; for it will wrong the Faculty it self, and disinable it from further
Service. Besides, the Ignorance of our own Weakness may expose us to the Shame
and Laughter of the World, when we shall presume to undertake what we cannot
well perform. And as it is with a Man's Stomach when it is filled, crammed more
than Nature will bear, no Digestion can possibly be there; and instead of
strengthening the Body, the Health is impaired, and a shameful Disorder happens:
So it is with the Memories of Men, they must not be too much loaded, nor
burdened with more than they can well bear, according to the Saying of Horace,
Sumite Materiam vestris qui scribitis aequam Viribus, etc.


13. If we are to study any Liberal Art or Science, it becomes us for the
better Encouragement of our Memories, and for a more firm Retention of the
Doctrines and Principles, to comprehend the Sense, Meaning, and Reasonableness
of them, before we commit them to their Custody. What we understand is our own,
and cannot easily be forgotten. Reason is an excellent Confirmation of Memory
when it is concerned in that Employment; for whilst our reasoning Faculty
continues, we shall never forget what it has formerly approved of, as agreeing
with its internal Principles.

14. And if we are to speak in public, it will be a great Advantage to Memory
that we perfectly understand the Matter and Business in question; that we are
fully acquainted with the Argument, Mystery, or Theme that we treat of; that we
have searched and studied all that may be alleged for or against it, and have
continually a prospect of all that may be said upon the Subject: For in case
Memory should be interrupted, disturbed, or fail, it will not be difficult then
to recover our selves to proceed on; and if we have any thing of Invention, we
may supply the Defect of Memory by our former Knowledge; however, it is a great
Assistance to it to remember all the Particulars, and the continued Series of
Discourse, when we thus understand perfectly the Subject, and are no Novices in
the Matter that we are publicly to deliver.

15. When we betake our selves to our Study, or offer to exercise our Memory by
the delivery of a Discourse, we must observe what has been said before to be
useful for the assisting of Memory, and endeavor to avoid what is prejudicial,
as Gluttony, Drunkenness, Debauchery, etc.

16. Set aside all other Occupations and Employments, and chiefly those
troublesome Passions of the Mind that will not suffer us to enjoy our selves,
as Anger, Wrath, Envy, Revenge, Lust, Covetousness, Alarms, Fears, etc. for
when the Mind is totally taken up with such uneasy Guests, it is not possible to
employ it about the Functions of Memory, according to the old Proverb, Pluribus
intentus minus est ad singula sensus.


17. A convenient time is to be chosen for the Exercise of Memory; for all
Seasons and Times are not proper, nor is the Mind ready disposed always for an
Activity: We must therefore choose such a time as we know our selves to be best
able to retain the Things that we hear and read. Neither are all Tempers alike,
but commonly when we are fasting, or after a moderate Repast, or in the
Night-season, or in the Morning, most Men are best prepared for the Exercise of
their Memories, and to receive the Impressions and Ideas.

18. But one Rule more I must add, which I look upon to be the chief; To seek
from God by our devout and constant Prayers, both the Continuance and Increase
of our Memories: For I must confess, that it is a particular Gift and Favor of
our great Creator, who has bestowed upon us such a Natural Ability. As
therefore it depends upon his Bounty, it is from thence that we must expect its
Perfection and Welfare. And tho by Art we may remove what is prejudicial to it,
and help in some respect the Faculty; tho we may prescribe Rules for the
Practice of Memory, yet all our Endeavors will prove vain and ineffectual
without a Blessing from above, which we must strive to obtain by our Humility
and Devotion, being the ordinary Means appointed by the Divine Wisdom for the
getting and increasing of all Temporal and Spiritual Blessings. Neither are we
to doubt of gracious Returns to our Requests; for we have this Assurance from
the Sacred Oracle, If you that are evil know how to give good things to your
Children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to them
that ask him? God has reserved to himself the bestowing of all Spiritual
Gifts, and this of Memory proceeds from him, not only the Faculty, but likewise
the Practice depends very much upon his immediate Influence; for Experience may
inform us, that we have often an inward Assistance granted to our Petitions, to
comfort and help the Weakness of our Memories in diverse occasions, chiefly
where the Interest of Religion and his Honor is concerned, as in the public
delivery of his Word and Will to his People. It becomes us therefore in all
such Instances not to rely or presume too much upon our own Strength or
Ability, but lean and trust upon the All Sufficiency of the Holy Spirit, who
will never be wanting to them who earnestly and heartily implore his gracious
Assistance in time of Need.

CHAP. VIII. Rules to be observed to help our Remembrance of things that we
desire to preserve in Mind.
THE Multiplicity of Ideas and Matters that we commit to our Memories, will
sometimes cause the most Capacious to forget things of the greatest Importance.
For the better assisting therefore this Faculty, to call to our Remembrance
such Objects, these Rules are to be observed.

1. Mind the Order in which those things were first entered into our Memories;
for the things that precede will oblige us to think upon those that followed,
and the Consequences of things will refresh in our Fancies that which went
before. It becomes us therefore to record them in order with a Connection and a
mutual Dependence, and this Order will direct our Memories, and help them to
find out such things as were lost and defaced by Forgetfulness. Therefore a
wise Man tells us, Quae been invicem ordinata sunt, been reminiscibilia sunt;
quae vero male, difficulter in Memoriam revocantur. The Things that are in good
order are easily to be remembered, but those that are without Method or Order
cannot, without much difficulty, be recalled to mind.

2. For the better remembering of things, we ought to compare them with those
things with which we are familiar, or best acquainted, and that have a
Resemblance with them, either in Syllables, in Quantity, in Office, Employment,
etc. For this Similitude will certainly imprint the Thing or Person so in our
Mind, that if we do casually forget, we shall the more easily recover the lost
Idea, because the Idea that we have already in Memory, and that has a
Resemblance and Relation to that which is absent in some known Particular, will
lead our Fancy to it again.

3. We may imprint in our Minds, and fix Things in Memory, by thinking upon
their Contraries or Opposites; and we may by the same means better remember
Things that are almost blotted out of our Imagination. For Example, he that
remembers an Hector, cannot forget Achilles; he that thinks upon a Goliath, will
also mind a David: when we represent to our selves Sobriety or Temperance, we
cannot but have a Notion of Debauchery and Intemperance. Now if that which is
contrary is better known to us, it will quickly refresh the Remembrance of that
which we had forgotten.

4. If we desire to mind Things of Importance, we ought to imprint all the
Circumstances in our Memories of Time, Place, Persons, Causes, etc. because
these Circumstances being always in our Fancy, will also keep there the things
that we intend to preserve from Oblivion. And such Circumstances will scarce be
defaced if they are recorded in our Memories by the assistance of the Eyes from
the things themselves, or from the sight of them written or otherwise appearing
to this Sense: for as a Shadow can never be without a Body, nor a Form without
a Substance, neither can the Circumstances be in our Minds without that Reality
that we purpose not to forget.

5. We may think upon Things, and remember them by their Properties and
Qualifications. For Example; if we desire to remember a gross and fat Man, we
may think upon King Dionysius, of whom an Author tells us, that he grew so fat,
that he could scarce see, and that at last his Eyes were closed up with Fat.

6. If we desire to remember any thing, let us mind that Circumstance that is
belonging to it, most admirable, remarkable, or suitable to our Genius, Temper,
or Interest; for this will fix it in our Memories in such a manner that it will
not easily be forgotten.

7. If we have several things to record in our Memory, note exactly the Number
of them, with the first Letter of every such thing which may casually make up
some Name or Word; which being fixed in our Mind, will quickly direct us to
every particular thing that we design not to forget. For Example, I desire to
remember Sugar, Almonds, Prunes, Oil, and Raisins, I will therefore take the
first Letter of every Word, and I find they make Sapor, which being fixed in
the Mind will direct me the sooner to the things that I design to remember.

Some other Rules may be prescribed for this same purpose which our Ingenuity
may supply us with, as a careful Repetition, frequent Meditation, etc. but
because I have already mentioned them before, I proceed to represent the
Fancies of some Ingenious Men, and a Method which they lay down, and which may
sometimes be useful I confess for the assisting of an Artificial Memory, and
which indeed may very well be named a Fantastical Remembrance, because it
altogether depends upon the Fancy of the Contriver.

CHAP. IX. Of Artificial or Fantastical Memory or Remembrance.
ARtificial Memory, says the Philosopher, Est Dispositio imaginaria in mente
rerum sensibilium, super quas Memoria naturalis reflexa, per eas admonetur ut
memoratorum facilius distinctiusque recordari valeat: It is an imaginary
Disposition in our Mind of sensible things, upon which when our Memory
reflects, by them it is admonished and assisted to remember more easily and
distinctly things that are to be minded. And, as Cicero speaks, Constat ex
locis veluti ex cera aut tabella, and imaginibus veluti figuris literarum* that
it consists in Places and Images, etc. Now some prescribe the Imagination of a
fair and regular Building, divided into many Rooms and Galleries, with
differing Colors and distinct Pillars, which the Party must fancy to stand
before him as so many Repositories where he is to place the Things or Ideas
which he designs to remember, ordering them according to their several
Circumstances and Qualifications, for the better Assistance of Memory. Others,
instead of a House, Palace or Building, have chosen such Beasts as answer to
all the Alphabetical Letters in the Latin Tongue, and instead of Rooms have
assigned their several Members for our Fancy to six our Ideas there, and place
them for our better Remembrance: These are the Names of the Beasts, Asinus,
Basiliscus, Canis, Draco, Elephas, Faunus, Gryfus, Hircus, Juvencus, Leo,
Mulus, Noctua, Ovis, Panthera, Qualea, Rhinoceron, Simia, Taurus, Vrsus,
Xystus, Hyena, Zacheus. Every one of these they divide into five Parts or
Places, into Head, Fore-feet, Belly, Hinder-feet, and Tail; for this is the
Order that Nature it self directs, neither can our Imagination be disordered in
reckoning or telling them over. So that by this means the Fancy may have one
hundred and fifteen Places to imprint the Images of memorable things. Likewise
in the Person speaking, we may fix the Ideas of things to be remembered, on his
Head, Forehead, Eyes, Mouth, Chin, and so downwards on all his Members. But if
this way of Remembrance be beneficial, it is best when the Places where we
design to leave and commit our Ideas are more known and familiar to us: as for
Example, the Town where we live, or the City that we are best acquainted with;
our Mind must as it were enter by the Gate, and proceed to the several Streets
and Quarters of the City, marking the public Places, Churches, Friends Houses,
etc. by this means we may have an infinite number of Places to commit our
Ideas. And because all Directions are best understood by Examples, I shall
recommend these, that this Method of remembering may better be comprehended.
Suppose therefore a large and empty House, unto which we must not go often but
seldom; suppose at the Entrance there is one Room about three Foot from the
Door, the second about 12 or 15 Foot, being in a Corner, the third being
distant about the same number of Feet; and so likewise the fourth, fifth,
sixth, seventh, and as many as you please, fancying upon them the Number that
denotes and distinguishes the Rooms and Corners the one from the other, that
there may be no Mistake nor Confusion in our Remembrance; or, if you please,
distinguish the several Rooms by other Characters than Numbers. Now when we
have well settled and divided the several Rooms and Corners in our Imagination,
where we are to place the Ideas for our Remembrance, we must contrive such a
remarkable Fancy of that thing that we intend to put there as may not easily be
forgotten, and such a Fancy as may be remarkable for Folly, Simplicity, Wisdom
or Wonder, etc. For Example, If I will remember any thing acted by another, I
must fancy him in one of these Rooms acting in a ridiculous manner that which I
design not to forget. Now the Figures that we must there place ought to provoke
to Pity, Wonder, Laughter or Scorn, that it may make a deeper Impression in our
Fancy. Again, we may represent things by their Likeness or Contraries; for
Example, If we design to remember Galen, we will write the Name of some famous
Physician well known to us, or of some contemptible Mountebank. If we will
remember Ovidius Naso, we shall represent a Man with a great Nose; if Plato, we
shall think upon a Person with large Shoulders; if Crispus, we shall fancy
another with curled Hair, and so of other things. But this Method of remembering
things is cumbersome and fantastical, and perhaps may not be suitable to every
Temper and Person; neither is it proper, or of any use for the Delivery of a
Discourse by Memory, but rather for the assisting our Remembrance not to forget
some certain Passages of our Life, and of others, and we may make some use of
it for the remembering of Sentences and Names.

I shall conclude with just setting down some other Rules which are prescribed
by such as recommend this kind of Artificial Remembrance, for the better
imprinting the Ideas in our Mind, and the avoiding Confusion.

1. That the things we design to remember be three or four times read over or
repeated, before we assign to them any kind of Images, or noted Species to
preserve them, for by this means we shall be better acquainted with them, and
they will be less strange to our Imagination.

2. We must know how to adapt such Figures as are most suitable to the things to
be preserved in our Memory, and such Figures as are known to us, that we may be
the more quickly and easily minded of the things themselves.

3. Now to such Figures we must assign a convenient Action or Motion, for that
makes a greater Impression than such as are still and quiet, and the
Imagination is more readily moved by a moving Object than by one without Life
and Motion.

4. Such Figures are to be contrived to mind us of the things as may excite the
Passions of the Soul and the Affections, as Sorrow, Anger, Pleasure,
Indignation, Wrath, Wonder or Compassion. etc. thereby the Soul is more
concerned in keeping in mind the Things and Ideas that we desire to preserve.

5. We are to make use of such Figures as are proper not only for the Things,
but also for the Places where we lay them up for our Remembrance, and such as
have a natural Relation to the Places, as a Miller grinding in his Mill, the
Fish in the Water, Birds flying in the Air, wild Beasts in a Forest, etc. And
therefore we may rather use Natural Figures than Artificial, or such as our
Fancy may contrive.

6. Again, those Figures must not be too mean or contemptible, nor too high
above our ordinary Reach, Capacity, and familiar Acquaintance.

7. Neither are we to make use of the same Figures or Images to represent
diverse things at the same time: Therefore we must have ready in our Fancy
several Images to picture out, or form the Ideas of the things that are to be
remembered.

8. Such Images are to be often recalled in our Mind in the same order as they
were placed, with their several Circumstances and Properties, and such as are
most remarkable and notable: for if by chance the Idea be blotted out, those
Circumstances will quickly renew them in our Memorative Faculty; and a frequent
Repetition will make a deeper Impression in our Minds of the things that we
desire not to forget; chiefly if this Repetition be made when we are going to
lay down our Heads upon our Pillows: for it is observable, that what we think
upon when we are going to sleep, we shall have fresh in our Fancy when we awake
the next Morning. And in those Intervals that we lie quiet at Midnight without
sleeping, we may easily imprint in our Imagination things that will not quickly
be forgotten. The Mind will then be more susceptible, more retentive and
tenacious of any Idea that we recommend to it with Deliberation, and free from
the Encumbrance of Business: for he that will make use of his Memory, must know
himself what time and season is most proper to employ it, when it is most at
liberty, and freest to receive the Impressions or Ideas of Things. It Is with
Memory as with the other Faculties and Abilities belonging to Man, there is a
time for Action, and a time when they are not sit, and a Temper that renders
them unable to produce the Natural Operations. Such Times therefore, Seasons
and Tempers are to be chosen for the Exercise of Memory when it is altogether
disingaged from Troubles, Impediments, and all Encumbrances, and freest for
Action. Our youthful Days are the most proper to begin to employ this Faculty,
for we then may speedily learn, and easily improve this Ability to our great
Comfort and Advantage in the following course of our Lives. And as it has
already been observed, Exercise will render us by degrees more perfect: So that
we shall never have cause to repent of the Labors and Pains that we take in
this case at the beginning of our Days. It is therefore the Advice of a wise
Author, Nunc adhibe puro pectore verba puer; Nunc te melioribus offer.
Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu.


And another tells us, Non tantum celerius, sed etiam perfectius imbuuntur,
quae a pueris discuntur. Veget. lib. 1.

I shall conclude this Treatise with the two Verses of Persius.

Mill hominum species and rerum discolor usus,
Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vivitur uno.
And with the Proverb of Hesiod, (...)
And with the Saying of Tully, Virtute duce, comite fortuna, omnia summa
consequi possumus.

FINIS.
BOOKS printed for Andrew Bell in Cornhil, near Stocks-market.
ADvice to the Young; or the Reasonableness and Advantages of an Early
Conversion: In three Sermons on Eccles. 12. 1. By Joseph Stennett.

Emblems, by Fra. Quarles; with the Hieroglyphics: All the Cuts being newly
illustrated.


