THE Divine Art OF PRAYER: Containing the Most Proper Rules TO PRAY WELL.

WITH Diverse Meditations and Prayers Suitable to the Necessities of Christians,
useful in every Family.

To Which Are annexed Seasonable Prayers for Soldiers, both in Their Majesty's
Army and Fleet.

By Marius D'Assigny, B.D.

LONDON, Printed by R. Everingham, and are to be Sold by John Everingham, at
the Star in Ludgate Street, near the West end of St. Paul's. 1691.

Augustissimis Serenissimis, and OMNIBUS VIRTUTIBUS Pietate and Religione
Ornatissimis Principibus GULIELMO and MARIAE D. G.

Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regi and Reginae, Fidei
Defensoribus etc.

Hunc Libellum Reipublicae Anglicanae perutilem, in observantiae suae
testimonium humillime

Offert Consecrat and Dedicat, MAJESTAT. vest. Addictissimus

Marius D'Assigny.

THE PREFACE To the Devout Christian.
I Need not use any Arguments to recommend unto you the use of this Little
Treatise; your Religious Disposition will I hope (after a perusal) find that
pleasure and benefit that is intended; for doubtless you will meet here with
such considerable Assistances to your Devotions, as will not suffer you to
reject them, because of the smallness of the Book, the obscurity of the Author,
or the frequency of the Subject: For here are perhaps some Observations,
Directions, and Reasons, that are not usually met with, and proceed from a long
Experience in the Service of God and Religion.

I confess, that I first designed these Meditations only for my Country
Neighbors, at the Request of some Religious Persons, they being in a
Wilderness, at a distance from other like Books of Devotion, of which they were
altogether ignorant: And I conceived they might more readily embrace my Advices
in this kind, because of their Acquaintance with me, and esteem of my Person.
The Language therefore, and Style was made the more easy and plain, that it
might be levelled to their Capacities; for I design not Words, but Things; not
to wrap them in a Cloudy Discourse, or Lofty Expressions, but to lay them open
to the apprehension of the Vulgar Sort.

And to the Helps and Encouragements of Prayer, I have purposely added diverse
Meditations and Prayers, that you might have here the Practice, as well as the
Rules of Devotion. Let not therefore your Familiarity with the Works of other
Divines, cause you to mistake this as useless, or a repetition of the Gift of
Prayer; you will find the Design to be otherwise; to enable the Soul, not so
much to speak the Words, as to recommend the Things that we want to the Divine
Bounty, with that Decency, Humility, Respect, and Qualifications that are
required from us, as Creatures and Servants of so Holy a Majesty.

Therefore, as I design nothing but your Assistance and Comfort, I doubt not
but to meet with favor and acceptance from all Rational and Grateful
Christians, whose business is Devotion and Religion.

Farewell. M. D.

The CONTENTS.
A Discourse to encourage to Prayer, with the most proper Helps and Directions
to Pray well. page 1. A Morning Prayer according to the Book of Common Prayer.
127 Another Morning Prayer for a Family, when business is most urgent. 131
Another Prayer for a Family. 133 Another Prayer for a Family when business is
urgent. 139 A Morning Prayer for a single Person. 143 A Morning Prayer for a
young Person. 149 A Morning Prayer for a younger Person. 153 A Morning Prayer
for a Child. 155 An Evening Prayer for a private Family, according to the Book
of Common Prayer, with some new Collects for the time. 157 An Evening Prayer
for a whole Family, suitable to the times. 165 An Evening Prayer for a single
Person. 171 An Evening Prayer for young Persons, and Children. 176 Prayers
before Meat. 179 A Profitable Meditation at the sight of a Table spread or
covered with food for our Bodies. 180 Another Prayer before Meat, for a Child.
184 Vsefel Meditations and Prayers upon God, and his Divine Attributes. 185 A
Meditation and Prayer upon the incomprehensible Being and Presence of God. Ibid
A Meditation and Prayer upon the immutability of our great God. 187 A
Meditation and Prayer upon the Eternity of God. 189 A Meditation and Prayer
upon God's Almighty Power. 190 A Meditation and Prayer upon the Wisdom of God,
and his infinite Knowledge. 192 A Meditation and Prayer upon the goodness of
God, manifested in Nature and Providence. 195 A Meditation and Prayer upon the
Mercy of God, in the Redemption of Man by the Lord Jesus Christ. 199 A
Meditation and Prayer upon the Justice and Holiness of God. 202 A Meditation
and Prayer upon Plenty and Riches. 208 A Meditation and Prayer upon the
consideration and sense of Poverty and Want. 211 A Meditation and Prayer at the
enjoyment of Prosperity. 216 A Comfortable Meditation and Prayer for such as
are in Adversity, and Afflicted with Crosses and Losses in the World. 219 A
Meditation and Prayer in time of health. 233 A Meditation and Prayer useful in
time of Sickness. 226 A Meditation and Prayer when the Symptoms of Death
appear. 233 A Meditation and Prayer for such as are going to the Public
Assemblies to hear the word of God. 237 A Prayer for Soldiers before a Fight.
241 A Prayer for a Ship's Company, before an Engagement at Sea. 243 Seasonable
Ejaculations, and short Prayers in the midst of a Fight, either by Sea or Land.
245 A Prayer for Mariners in a furious Tempest. 246 A Thanksgiving after a
Victory either by Sea or Land. 247 A Prayer for the Preservation of the King's
Person. 250 A Prayer for the Church Militant. 251 A short Prayer for such as
are desperately wounded. 252
A DISCOURSE To encourage to PRAYER, With the most proper Helps and Directions
to pray well.
THERE is no Duty of Religion more excellent, more divine, more beneficial, and
of a greater Concernment to us all, than that of Prayer. For in respect to God,
it is an Adoration, and an open acknowledgement of all his glorious Attributes
at once; and the best and only return that we poor Men are capable of, for all
the Expressions of his unwearied goodness; and in respect of Man the
Petitioner, it is the most effectual means to supply our continual wants, to
procure and increase the divine Graces in our Souls, to arm us against all the
attempts of Worldly Misfortunes, and predispose us for an Eternal Communion
with our great Creator. So many and such real Advantages which we reap from the
performance of this our Duty, are sufficient Encouragements to stir up our
negligence, and to oblige us to present our selves very often in Prayer to the
Divine Majesty, whose power is answerable to his Goodness, of an infinite
extent, and may discover the folly of those frivolous Objections, that men of
corrupt minds and manners invent to dissuade us from praying. For when a
considerable Benefit appears, together with the express Command of our God, if
the Sense of Duty be not sufficient to move us, the expectation of our own good
should cause us to set aside all other considerations. Now in this case of
Prayer, here is considerable, nay, assured and unspeakable Benefits mentioned
before, arising from thence to our Bodies and our Souls. The prosperity, the
Health, the Riches, the Honors, Blessings, and the very breath of the former,
with all other Temporal things relating to its good, are in the Hands, and at
the disposal of our God; they proceed from his Bounty, and are commonly
obtained by our zealous Prayer; for God, an unchangeable Truth, has promised
in his holy Word, to have a special regard to the Prayer of the Destitute, to
hear the groaning of the Prisoner, to loose them that are appointed to Death.
That he will cause him that asks to receive, he that seeks from him his
Necessities, shall find them in due time. That he will grant whatsoever we ask
in Christ's name. That he will hear the Prayers of all Flesh, and perform their
desires. That he will open the Treasuries of his Mercies, to such as call upon
his Name, and grant them their requests. In a word, God promises that he will
freely, bestow upon us all those earthly advantages which Men so highly esteem
and stand in need of, in consideration of our devout and Constant Prayer,
together with the more lasting and more excellent Riches of the Soul Psalm
102.17. Luke 11.9. John 14.13. Psalm. 65.2. Jer. 29.12. and Jer. 33.3. Zech.
13.9.

If some profane Varlets that contemn God and Religion, and neglect this Duty,
nevertheless seem to be so happy as to be laden with these Temporal Blessings,
they enjoy them not with that deliciousness and content as a praying Soul: That
which to the latter is a real Benefit, proves a present Curse to the former,
and an aggravation and the f^wel of their Vices. Neither can they find that
sweetness in good which naturally it yields, and a good Christian tastes;
partly because the fears and apprehensiens which commonly attend upon a
disorderly behavior, with the gripings of an awakened Conscience, sour and
poison all the Mercies of Heaven; and partly because the secret Curse that
accompanies the Wicked in the neglect of their Duty to God, changes the very
nature of the greatest Blessings. Let therefore the Care, Diligence, and
Frugality of our Forefathers make never so much provision for us: Let God's
Providence put into our hands a plentiful Estate, Honors, Power and Authority,
as soon as we are born, Prayer is as needful in such a Condition, as if we were
daily to expect the continual Supplies of God's Bounty to entertain our beings,
as if we had no such assurance of a livelihood in the World. Humane Greatness,
if not supported and animated by Goodness and Piety, is like those unweildy
Bodies, the sooner brought to ruin for want of Vital Spirits, required to keep
them in motion, and preserve them from the encroachings of the Diseases unto
which their grossness and fatness are inclinable. Worldly promotion can never
be well maintained and continued, but by that Providence from whence it first
proceeds. Reason as well as Religion obliges us to seek from God's mercy the
preservation of those Stores of good things which he has bountifully bestowed
upon us, seeing that without it they must needs decay, and shrink away to
nothing. Think not thy self, O Man, less indebted to thy God, because he has
given thee, by whole Sale, all the Riches of the Earth, which he distributes to
others but by retail, and that therefore thou dependest not so much upon his
Power, and need not so much his continual assistance, as others of the
lowest rank of Men. Sooner may the Moon and glittering Stars yield their light,
and comfortable Influences, without the Aspect of the Sun; sooner may the Earth
bring forth its variety of Creatures, without the Celestial Globes, than that
Man, though never so Rich and Powerful, should subsist without his God. When
therefore Solomon, the wisest of all the Kings of Israel, built the famous
Temple of Jerusalem, he placed the King's Bedchamber near to God's Sanctuary,
and caused a door to lead into it, whereof the Key was transmitted with the
Crown and Scepter of Israel, and always in the King's possession, that this
might mind him of his dependency upon his God, and to seek from him those
Blessings and the protection that he continually wanted in that lofty Station
of Honor. If therefore our Subsistence, the preservation of our Estates in the
highest degree of Power, and the continual assistance of our God, needful in
the greatest abundance, proceed from his bountiful hand, and are obtainable by,
and promised to our Prayers, should not this oblige us to draw near with
Humility to the Throne of God's Grace, to offer up this cheap Sacrifice always
ready and at hand, so acceptable to our good God?

I confess he is acquainted with our indigencies, and his infinite knowledge
needs not be informed of the things that we want in the World, for he knows our
necessities before we ask, and our ignorance in asking. He understands our most
bosom thoughts. He sees and foresees what is most useful both for our Souls and
Bodies. Though this Consideration may seem to render our Prayers frivolous, and
not so needful as if God were ignorant of our Wants. Yet Christ and his Holy
Apostles, require and advise us both by their Examples, and Commands, to lay
open our Necessities in Prayer to our gracious God; and Nature it self calls
upon us to seek from him a supply to our daily Wants. For we must not look upon
Prayer as a simple information of our desires and estate, but as an open
acknowledgement of God's Liberality and Riches; not as an increase to his
knowledge, which is in it self Infinite, and can admit no augmentation, but as
a means appointed by his Wisdom, to increase and augment our happiness. Neither
must we look upon Prayer as an obligation laid upon God, to commiserate our
poor Condition, but as a n^^hod to dispose and render us fit to receive the
Mercies of Heaven, and as that unto which God's promises of Earthly and
Spiritual Blessings are annexed. Which the divine Wisdom has so much the more
cause to encourage, and we sinful Men to practice, because it is the most
agreeable to God's magnificence and unlimited Bounty, and to Man's weakness and
poverty. Because it is the most excellent Armor to strengthen us against the
assaults of worldly Casualties, the safest shelter where we may retreat when
pursued by Storms, and Tempests. The best Pourveyor, to procure us all things
needful for our maintenance and beings: And because it is the readiest means to
entertain and increase that familiarity with our God, which must of necessity
precede that Eternal Union and Communion with him, which we shall enjoy in the
Estate of Glory, God will have us draw nearer to him by degrees, and not leap
from our vile Fellowship with Sin and the World, into an immediate fruition of
his unspeakable Bliss. As there is a vast distance between these two extremes,
it is not possible to pass from the one to the other in a moment, or without
some mediums that are appointed to rid us of the indisposition of the one, and
prepare us for the acceptance of the other. It is for that good purpose that
his Wisdom condescends to send us the assistance of his divine Graces, by which
our Souls are not only cleansed from the filthiness of our sinful habits, but
also enabled to this blessed Correspondency with God in Prayer, the Fountain of
all spiritual Joy and Comfort.

Let not therefore any Persuasion or discouragement hinder thee, O Christian,
from visiting often thy God in Prayer. Let not the sinfulness of thy Actions,
the vitiousness of thy Disposition, the multiplicity of worldly business, the
Cares and Troubles of the World, nor any mistake of God or of thy self, cause
thee to omit this beneficial Duty. What if thou art sinful, or naturally
indisposed to so holy a Performance. Remember Christ in Heaven sits at God's
Right Hand to intercede for thee, to render thy Prayers effectual, to sanctify
thy Groans, and offer them up to thy God. What if thou make thy Addresses to
a glorious Being, of an infinite Power and Majesty: If thy disposition be
suitable to the Duty, thou may draw near with confidence to the Throne of
his Grace, for he is thine Heavenly Father, he desires nothing more than to
render thee happy, and to bestow upon thee his Mercies. Consider his gracious
invitations and many encouragements in his holy Word. Come unto me all ye that
travel, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Matthew. 11.28. Call upon me
in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm.
50.15. The Lord is good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto all
them that call upon him, Psalm. 36.5 Before we call he will answer, and while we
are yet speaking he will hear, Isaiah 65.24. To all that turn to him, the Lord
is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, Joel 2.13. He
will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, Matthew. 12.20.
Shall his mercy be so ready to receive thee, and will thou be so unworthy to
draw back? Shall his goodness long to bestow upon thee what thou want, and
will thou be so unreasonable to contemn it? Shall his Love desire to be
acquainted with thee by thy frequent Addresses, and will thou be so ungrateful
to slight his offered kindness? Take notice of the just punishment of those
ungracious Souls whom his Wisdom invites in vain to her self. Because I have
called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded, but
ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof. I also will
laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. Then shall they call
upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not
find me, etc. Prove. 1.25, 26.28.

Adversity may have that Power to awaken many, who in prosperity from one year
to another scarce think of praying to their God: But what can such expect in
reason from his Bounty, which they in their flourishing Estate despise or
neglect? Those Services can never be thought real and sincere, unto which
necessity drives Men; and those persons that make a mock of this Duty at any
time, cannot probably receive from it, in their greatest urgencies, the
benefits they expect. It is therefore Wisdom constantly to practice that which
may stand us in good stead, and without which we shall assuredly be at a loss.
Prayer may help and comfort thee, O Man, when all other helps and comforts
forsake thee, when thy Riches and thy Guards, thy Treasure and thy Friends, thy
Power and thy Glory shall leave thee to be Tormented with the Pangs of a
Disease, or suffer thee to pass alone and naked through the dark and mournful
Vale of Death. In a word, when all the World can yield thee no assistance,
Prayer alone may assist and relieve thee. I cannot prescribe to any persons the
times and moments for every one to make his Addresses to his God. There is no
hour of the day nor night, but the divine goodness is ready to receive the
humble Application of a dutiful Supplicant. No wonder therefore that St. Paul
advises us to pray without ceasing. Which words we must not so understand, as
to spend all our time in this Duty, leaving all other necessary Employments of
Life, as the ancient lasie Heretics, surnamed by the Fathers, Euthicks, taught
by their Doctrine and Practice. But this Command may admit of a threefold
interpretation, equally necessary for the observance of a Christian.

First, We may go far to the completing of the Apostles Counsel, by sending up
unto God without intermission, our hearty desires, our sighs, and groans, when
we are busy in our daily works to implore his needful assistance, and
protection. The constant business of this Life should not hinder thee from this
preparation for the next, nor the encumbrances of the World clog thy Soul from
this elevation to its God, with whom an uninterrupted correspondence will
wonderfully advance our present affairs, as well as dispose thee, O Man, for a
more blessed Estate.

Secondly, in imitation of David, of Daniel, and of other Religious Men
mentioned in holy Writ, we may pray always, by a constant performance of Prayer
at those times that chiefly require a divine assistance, and an acknowledgment
of Gods continual Mercies. Evening, Morning, and at Noon will I pray, and cry
aloud, and he shall hear my Voice, says David, Psalm. 55.17. And Daniel could
not be frighted, with the sear of the Lions fury, from praying three times a
day to his God. In the Morning when our Eyes are open again to behold the
wonderful works of God's Power and Wisdom in the Creation and Preservation of
the World; it concerns us to praise his divine Attributes, that shine as bright
as the Sun over our Heads. When we receive a fresh expression of God's
goodness, in keeping us safe from the dangers of the preceding Night, in adding
another day to our Lives, and a continuance of all his Temporal Favors, does
not Justice and Reason call upon us to be as mindful of God's Bounty, as he is
of our necessities, and to be as liberal of our thanks, as he is of his Riches?
When in the Morning thou art going about thine Employments, and considerest
that all thy labors will be to little purpose without God's Blessings, that
thou art going through a world of dangers, Spiritual and Temporal, a World of
Enemies subtle, malicious, and powerful, that besiege thee on all sides, ^s it
not thine Interest to beg the favor and Protection of that good Creator, that
thy Soul and thy Body may be preserved in the midst of all their envious
attempts, that thy designs and undertakings may be successful, thy labors
fruitful, and all thy proceedings prosperous.

At Noon when thou see thy Table covered with God's good Creatures, appointed
to strengthen thy Body, and tastest the sweetness of his Mercies at a distance,
thou can do no less than lift up thy hands and thine Eyes, in prayer, to
this bountiful Creator, as well to praise him for such a fresh expression of
his liberality, at that time before thee, as to implore his Blessing needful to
accompany the means used to recruit thy strength and preserve thy weak Body.

In the Evening when the Curtains of the Night are spreading about thee, when
thou art lying down to refresh thy wearied Body with rest, when thou know
not the dangers that hang over thine head, and have no other means to avoid
them, but God's gracious protection, should thou not, for thine own safety,
desire his favorable providence and all-seeing eye, to watch over thee,
shelter, and defend thee from all spiritual and corporal Enemies? Were we but
sensible of the mischievous temper of some of those airy Spirts that fly about
us, those many and subtle Devils that plot our destruction; did we but
understand their Power, Malice, and their unavoidable Assaults and propinquity,
we should need no other Arguments to persuade us to arm our Selves with God's
merciful protection when we lay our Heads down upon our Pillows. How soon
should we perish, if God and his Holy Angels were not as watchful to keep us,
as those Enemies of Mankind are watchful to destroy us! They wait continually
for an opportunity to vent their Natural displeasure against us, and by the
Evil Thoughts, filthy Dreams, unusual and unnatural disturbances, of the Mind,
they discover themselves in our sleep, and their hatred against us. Who knows
but that God, who holds them fast in Chains, as so many furious Beasts, will
let them loose to punish thy contempt of his Power and Providence, and neglect
of this Duty, if thou forgettest to call upon thy God. Remember therefore, O
Man, thy weak, thy frail and perilous Condition. Thy Life is but a Breath, thy
Riches uncertain, thy Glory but a shadow, thy Power but for a time, thy
Prosperity but like a Dream, thy Beauty but a fancy, and thy Health always
besieged with many Diseases, thy Body and Soul surrounded with Enemies, and thy
present Estate, let it be nenever so flourishing, is in a continual want of
God's favor, protection, and Blessings; whether thou risest or layest thy self
down, lift up therefore thine Eyes and Hands in Prayer to this good God, to
supply thee with those things that thou stand in need of, but chiefly in the
Morning and in the Evening. Let these be the Solemn and constant times of thine
Addresses to God. Offer up unto him the Morning Sacrifice of Prayer, and the
Evening of Praise. In the Church of the Jews, these were the appointed times to
call upon God, 1 Chronicles. 16.40. 2 Kings 16.15. And Christ our Savior, whose
Example the Name and Profession of Christianity call upon us to follow, was
wont to consecrate these hours to Prayer and Devotion, Mat. 14.23. Luke 6.12.
Mark 6.46.

Seeing therefore that Reason and Religion binds us to this Duty of Prayer in
the beginning and close of the Day, and oblige us then to renew our
Correspondency with God, too often interrupted by our daily miscarriages, let
not the multiplicity of Business, the Cares and Troubles of the World, the
frightful apprehensions of Sin, discourage or hinder thee from this constant
and necessary Familiarity with thy God.

When a sudden occasion calls thee away, so that thou art not able to offer up
thy desires in such a solemn manner as is required at these usual times; make
use at least of the shorter Prayers of the compendious Ejaculations of the
mind. Let thy Soul be with God, though the World hurry away thy Body. Spare a
thought unto that merciful God, who has spared thee to attend upon thy
necessary Occasions, and who can render thine undertakings either prosperous or
unhappy, as he sees convenient. Venture not out into the wide and troublesome
World, without the safeguard of God's Protection. And enter not into the
shadows of the Night, this Cousin and remembrancer of Death, without his
merciful allowance, who has the Keys of Death and of Hell.

The third Interpretation of the Apostles Advice, To Pray without ceasing, Is
to be always in a disposition sit for Prayer, to shake off all Impediments, all
encumbrances of Sin, which hinder us, that the Soul may still be in a readiness
with the Wings of Faith and Love, stretched toward Heaven, always ready to
take its Flight.

The troubles and vexations of the World should rather animate thee, and
inflame thy Devotion with an expectation, and certain assurance to find more
favor in him than in all inferior enjoyments. His Holy Spirit can convey
comfort into thy Soul, when the World fills thee with Sorrow. He can send thee
delights and sweetness to qualify all other bitterness; for by the means of
Prayer, a Christian can keep himself in such an excellent Temper, that will not
suffer him to be sensible of many misfortunes and Crosses, and so secure his
Soul, that all outward Accidents shall do him no harm.

I know that the sense and conscience of Guilt, is wont to estrange us from
God, and interrupt all correspondency between his mercy and our Souls. And
Reason seems to forbid us, together with the respect we owe to so holy a Being,
when our hands are reeking with Blood, or our Body comes from the commission of
any other grievous Offense wilfully acted, to presume to present our selves
before the Throne of God's Grace immediately, without any delay. I confess that
such unhappy Criminals ought to pause a while upon their woeful Condition, and
the sense of their Guilt ought to move them to Repentance and Sorrow, before
they offer up their Prayers to God, for otherwise, this Sacrifice will meet
with no better acceptance than that of Cain, or that of Hophni and Phineas, or
that of Corah and his Rebellious Company, whose Offerings were so much the more
distasteful, because they were encouraged by disobedience to God, and to his
Servant Moses. But yet I would advise a Christian to spend and delay no more
time, but only to prepare himself the better for this sacred Duty. Suffer not
thy Sin to grow old, nor this Burden to lie too long upon thy Soul, for fear it
should leave an Impression that thou will not be able to remove in haste. In
such a case, though Guilt ought and will interrupt and break off our continued
Prayers to God, yet it ought not to drive us further from him, but rather cast
us into the Publicans Disposition in the Gospel. He would not lift up so much
as his Eyes to Heaven, but smote upon his Breast, saying, God be merciful to me
a Sinner: Or into the Blessed temper of the Prodigal Son, I will arise and go
to my Father, and say unto him, Father I have sinned against Heaven and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired
Servants. A greater Humility in such a Case, ought to prepare our Persons and
Prayers for God's acceptance. The more unworthy sin has made us, the more
lowly ought our approa^hes to be to him. The alteration in our behaviors
should cause an alteration in our Souls, before we present our selves before
God. Instead of alienating our minds from him, the consideration of our
weakness should, encourage us to fly to him by prayer, and seek from his
all sufficiency strength against future Temptations. In such a case, I would
have a repenting Christian understand that God, our merciful Creator is not so
soon estranged from us, as we are from him. The Sin that disorders our Souls,
and causes us to shun his presence, may cause him to correct us for our good,
but it will never oblige him to cast us away, if there be any sense of our
Guiltiness in us, accompanied with the hopes of his Mercy. Therefore this ought
not to be long an impediment to our Prayers, or the cause to interrupt our
daily correspondency with God, Morning and Evening; for we see it often happen
by woeful experience, that by such an omission of our Duty, many are insensibly
brought into dangerous Snares. And God withdraws his protection from such as
were not mindful to take it along with them. To avoid such miscarriages and
dangers, Prayer is as needful to a Christian in the beginning and close of the
day, as Armor and Weapons to a Soldier, and Shoos and Clothing to a
Traveller, to defend him from the injuries of the Way and Weather.

It emboldens the Soul against all accidents, it gives Life and Heart to a
Christian, and makes him walk every where, and lie down with David's
Confidence. Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear
no ill, for thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff they comfort me, Psalm. 23.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my Life, Psalm. 4.6.

Likewise in the midst of a danger, at the Tidings of Losses or Successes, at
the beginning of any Business of weight or moment, and at several other times
and occasions, it concerns us to address our selves in Prayer to God, the chief
and only Author of all Temporal and Spiritual happiness; for as this Devotion
will disappoint the mischievous intent of Evils and Crosses, it will infallibly
draw a Blessing upon all our undertakings. I have therefore endeavored in this
Book to furnish you, my Christian Brethren, with all the Prayers that are
suitable for many Occasions, and Casualities, and Accidents, needful in these
wicked and dangerous times, in which we now live.

If you offer them up in the manner as you ought, you need not doubt of the
Success. The Prayer of a devout Soul has an invincible Power. The whole
Creation is not able to resist or render ineffectual the religious Prayers of a
Child of God. Joshua's Prayers arrested the Sun in the middle of its Course.
Moses's Prayer dried up the Waters of the Red Sea. The Israelites Prayers
undermined the Walls of Jericho. Hezekiahs's prayer obtained fifteen years to
his Life, already condemned by the furiousness of a Disease naturally
irrecoverable, and caused an alteration in the common Course of Nature. David
by his Prayers marched safe through many dangers, and was secure in the midst
of all the Risings and Tumults of his Enemies. Ahab's humility, and prayers,
suspended and put a stop to God's Judgments, that were going to fall upon his
Idolatrous House. Manasses's Prayer freed him from the Chains of Babylon, and
restored him, against all probability, to his Kingdom and Throne. Daniel's
Prayer shut up the Lions mouths, and disarmed those furious Beasts. Esther's
Prayers changed the Sentence of death, established against against the Jews,
and caused the mischief to fall upon their Enemi^s Heads. The Churches Prayers
unfettered St. Peter in the midst of his Guards, op^ned for him the Iron G^te,
and set him at liberty. Elijah's Prayers shut and ope^'d the. Windows of
H^aven. The thu^dering Roman L^gion by Prayer relieved their fellow Soldiers
with fresh showers of Rain, and discomfi^ed their Enemies with strange
Lightning and Thunder. So many and such strange Events, above all expectation
and humane Power, have been brought to pass by zealous Prayers; that we have
good cause in the greatest difficulties to be full of hopes whilst we have
liberty to pray. The Heavens, the Seas, the Earth, the Elements, and all the
Creatures, animate and inanimate, seem to be at the Devotion of a devout Soul.
For the great Author and preserver of all Created Beings, causes them to yield
help to the assistance of the humble and contrite Petitioner. As they are always
in his hand, and at his disposal; he employs them in their Relief, and for the
accomplishment of such desires as tend to the Universal good of his Creatures,
and his own Glory. What is not Prayer able to bring to pass, when it
int^r^sseth an Almighty Power and an infinite Goodness in our Affairs, and
fetches to its assistance that same Omnipotency that created the World out of
nothing? Nihil fortius, says a Father, homine legitime Orante. There is
nothing more powerful than a Man praying as he ought. For the efficacy of
Prayer depends not upon the holiness of the Petitioner, but upon God's
promises, that are unchangeable, Christ's Merits that are truly meritorious,
and his intercession that is unresistable. At the right hand of God, where he
sits above this unconstant World, he is employed in offering up the requests of
his Members and S^rvants on Earth and there before the Mercy Seat, to perfume
them with the Frankineense of his Passion, that they might be acceptable to our
Heavenly Father. Whilst we have such a prevailing Mediator, never doubt of the
success of a Prayer, procceeding from an humble Soul, sit for the acceptance
and encouragement of our merciful Savior.

And if at any time thou feel thy self indisposed, or not able to offer up
thy Prayers with that Devotion that is requisite, be not therefore discouraged,
despair not of the success, know for certain that it is not so much thy
weakness as thy negligence, not so much thy inability as thy sloth and
indisposition, that clogs thy Prayers, and stops them in their ascent to
Heaven. Know for certain, that God regards more humility, truth, and sincerity,
than the flourishes of Wit, and the excellency of the language, or the
vehemence of the expression in all thy Requests. That the Sighs and Groans of a
broken heart, or of a devout Soul, are more powerful with God, than the
strongest Arguments or the longest Prayers. God is not wont to proportion his
mercies, only to our deservings or reasons, but rather out of his inexhaustible
Treasuries, to take and bestow upon us Men, beyond all merits and expectation.

Therefore slack not thine Endeavors to pray well, God's greatness and thine
estate in relation to him, calls for the greatest Respect, the profoundest
Humility, the exactest care, the most fervent Zeal and earnestness that thou
art capable of. God is not to be courted with ordinary Devotion. His Blessings
are not to be obtained by a slothful hand, and a negligent Soul. The distance
betwixt God and us vile Men, should be expressed by the humility of our Souls
and Bodies, and our Prayers offered to so excellent a Majesty, must have an
excellency to recommend them to the Throne of his Grace. For that purpose we
must take notice of, and observe these following directions in all our
Addresses to God.

First, let a short Meditation upon God, his Power, Glory, Sufficiency,
infinite Presence, Goodness, Knowledge and Riches precede your Prayers; with
some Reflections upon your selves, your sinfulness, vileness, and the former
experience of God's goodness; that such Considerations as these may cause you
to shake off all negligence and sloathfulness, and help to banish from your
Souls all undecency, carelessness and misapprehensions, usually found in the
devoutest persons. We are naturally too much unmindful of the respect that we
owe to our God; too careless in the performance of our Duties; too fond of the
World and its Vanities; Therefore this Meditation must stir us up, and
pre-dispose us for this holy Conference with our Maker. It must withdraw all
our minds from all other intangling thoughts, that we may with more liberty set
our selves entirely apart for this important Duty. We must rid our selves of
those things that commonly entangle us when we present our selves before our
God, and draw near to him with such thoughts as these.

I, poor wretched and weak Man, Dust and Ashes, am going to speak to, and
petition a God, the Creator of the World, a Holy and Divine Majesty, an
incomprehensible Spirit, which sills Heaven and Earth with his infinite
presence. He is at my Elbows, and takes notice of my behavior in my Soul; and
observes all the wanderings of the Mind in every corner of this wide World, and
sees and hears our wants and necessities. How careful must I be to appear with
respect before him? He is Holy, and abhors all filthiness; I must therefore
banish all silthy, polluted, and idle imaginations at this moment. He is as
just as he is good, ready to punish irreverence, but much more inclinable to
reward Humility and Devotion; how devout therefore should my Soul be in his
presence? How circumspect and humble before him, who is an all-seeing Majesty,
and a consuming Fire. The indiscreet Devotions of the Sons of Aaron, caused the
Fire from the Lord to fall upon and consume them. Vzzah's unseasonable
officiousness, and the impudence of the men of Bethshemesh, in drawing near to
God without respect, were severely punished; and shall I presume to draw near
to my God with carelessness and indiscretion? Shall I escape if I venture before
him, without due consideration? Shall I expect any gracious returns of those
prayers that are offered up with so little grace and dread of God's Power, with
so little sense of his glory and Majesty. O let my Soul be silled with the fear
and reverence of so fearful and holy a Being. Let my mind be seasoned with such
a dread of him, that may not fright me from him, but rather oblige me to draw
nearer to him with more Devotion and Humility. If we entertain such thoughts as
these, they will cleanse our. Souls from all that sapersluity, which will
otherwise disgrace and spoil all our holy performances. A little pause
therefore before Prayer, is needful for this purpose; however it is an Act of
Wisdom, in so weighty a business, to proceed on with caution and wariness; and
this little recollection of our selves, which I recommend to every devout Soul
before Prayer, (chiefly before the solemn and public Prayers offered up to God
in the public Congregation) cannot but be of a great use, and very
instrumental to prepare us for that Duty; for thereby we may see what there is
in us able to impede us in our addresses to God, and what is likely to hinder a
favorable return of our Petitions; besides, it savours much of that respect
that God's greatness requires from us, together with our Relation to him. Keep
thy foot, says the Wise man, when thou go to the House of God, and be more
ready to hear, than to give the Sacrifice of Fools. Ecclesiast. 5.1. That is,
when thou go to appear before God's Majesty, keep thy self with watchfulness
and circumspection, and understand thy self, thy disposition, and what thou
art, and what thou do; that this sacred Frankincense of Prayer may be
presented to God, with the Ingredients necessary, and from a. Soul rightly
qualified.

Secondly, For that purpose, you must never come to God with any known sin
unrepented of; that is, with any sin near and dear unto our Souls, which we
entertain with a Resolution, never, or not yet to part with: For not only the
sacred Word of God assures us, that God hears not Sinners, John 9.31. but
Reason also teaches us, that it consists not with his Wisdom, to listen to the
Prayers of such as will not hearken to his Commands; to bestow his Blessings
and Mercies upon such unworthy Souls, as will not leave a sin for his sake; or,
as prefer the filthy Pleasures of the Flesh to the sincere Joys of God's
savor, and the real advantage which slow from thence in abundance. Therefore,
by the Mouth of the Prophet Isaiah, he speaks thus to the Jews, and to all
impenitent Sinners; When you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine Eyes
from you; when you make many Prayers, I will not hear. The cause of this
severity is discovered in the next words; because your Hands are full of Blood.
All other sins as well as blood guiltiness are wont to divert God's Mercies
from us, and withdraw those good things, which otherwise we might enjoy. Our
Prayers in such a case, without this due Preparation, savours of the greatest
impudency, and Atheistical boldness; because we attempt the obtaining of God's
Riches and Favors to our unworthy Beings, and present before his all-seeing
Eye, Bodies distempered with Vice, Hands full of Sin, Eyes swelling with Pride;
or bearing the marks of Contempt of his Divine Majesty; and a Soul that would
never regard him, were it not for our Wants, and God's Riches. The Prayers of
such a Person will prevail no more upon God than the Sacrifice of Corah and his
Confederates; for he accepts not the Offerings presented by foul hands: Purity
and Innocence are required in such as come before God: And though none of us can
pretend to an absolute freedom from sin, and from those wicked propensities to
vice, which render our Prayers ineffectual; yet every one of us may cleanse our
selves from all actual Transgressions by Repentance, and make some amends by a
repeated resolution against our beloved Sins, and by an inward and hearty
sorrow, before we appear in God's presence, for our past miscarriages; for
unless we appear in that temper, our most just and excellent Prayers, will
avail us nothing; they will not be accepted, if they proceed from a Soul
bewitched with the deceitful Allurements of Sin. The Devil's Slave can never be
fit to appear before the God of liberty, till the Bolts and Chains of Hell be
shaken off: He shall never meet with acceptance with a Jealous God, who is
already betroathed, and inseparable from sin, the great Enemy of his Glory. How
unseasonable and odious were the Devotions of Zimri, when in the public
Congregations of the Children of Israel, humbling themselves for their Sins in
God's presence, he had a Midianitish Woman at his side? How unwelcome were the
Addresses of a proud Pharisee, whose Prayers were the expressions of his Pride
and Vanity? Cain's Sacrifices were not pleasing to God, because there was a
mixture of Wickedness amongst his Offerings; therefore such Prayers as proceed
from impenitency and vice, are odious to God.

Likewise, in such a Case, the Petitioner is not in a disposition fit to
receive God's Mercies; for sin discomposeth us, and while we retain it in our
Assections, both the Action and the Habit of sin conspire together, to
intercept and deprive us of all gracious returns of our Prayers from God. It
sills the Soul full of jealousies, fears, apprehensions, suspicions; and
instead of Love, it begets an hatred of, and an aversion to God, which will
never suffer us to draw near in that manner, as his infinite goodness and
unlimited liberality require; so that unless true repentance intervene between
our Sins and our Prayers to our Maker, they will rather provoke his Justice,
than prevail with his Mercy.

Thirdly, If you will have your Prayers acceptable to God, you must offer them
with that attention and intention of the mind, that so weighty an action, and
the greatness of God's Majesty require: For to what purpose is it to attend,
and be present in a praying Congregation, if we be no more concerned in the
Devotion, than the Timber and the Stones of the Fabric; if our Bodies ^e
present without our Souls? God demands from his People spiritual Sacrifices and
Services; which are not to be performed with the outward part alone; the Mind
and the Understanding must be active, and the Soul and all its faculculties
ought to be concerned in this Spiritual worshipping of our great God. As God is
an Unity without Division, whatsoever is offered to him, must express this
Unity, by a total Consecration of it self, chiefly in that Christian Service,
where all the divine Attributes are acknowledged, and wherein the Soul as well
as the Body is to resign it self over to God. Dead Sacrifices under the Law
were abominable, and bodily Devotions alone under the Gospel, are disrespectful
to God, and injurious to our selves; for they commonly proceed from the
multiplicity of Worldly business that possess the Soul, from an unmindfulness
of God, and a want of an Holy fear of his Divine Majesty, from a carelessness of
our Duty, or from the disturbances and lusts of the Flesh, that steal away our
Thoughts as well as our Affections from God's Holy Worship, and deprive us of
the advantages that we might expect from a due performance of our Duty. To
prevent such ill consequences, the Christian in Prayer ought to mind the
weighty Business in hand, and not only at the close of every Petition, in
imitation of the Primitive. Church of Christ, to subscribe and declare his
ascent and consent to the Requests offered up to God, by the universal Amen,
but also to express inwardly in the Soul, what is outwardly pronounced and
spoken, and to be seriously attentive to every Petition; for, as the rational
Soul is able to express it self, as well as the animal part does with the
Tongue, and that by an internal Word and Faculty proper to it, that must speak,
or else God will not hear; for that intent, it is necessary to hearken with a
Religious attention to the Prayers which proceed from our own, or others Lips,
and endeavor to hear that part in the Devotion which is appointed for us. It
is necessary to set aside all other Worldy business, to disengage our selves
and our minds from all other encumbrances, to six them to the Duty they are
employed in, and to tie and settle them with the dread of God's presence; so
that our thoughts may not take the liberty to wander up and down from this holy
exercise: And when we are in Prayers, we must set a watch at the door of our
Senses, forbid entrance to all sudden Accidents, and, in a word, summon all the
thoughts of the Mind, and faculties of the Soul, to render their homage to
God's Divine Majesty, and not to suffer them to straggle from the weighty
business in hand. Remarkable is the Example of that Noble and Courageous Youth
of Macedon, whose Office it was to burn Frankincense before King Alexander,
when he sacrificed to his Gods; though a burning Coal was casually fallen into his
open sleeve, Val Max. l. 3. c. 3.
and did there consume both his Vestment and his Flesh, lest he should
ominously and unhappily interrupt the public Sacrifice of his Prince, he
persisted in his business to the end, through all the Torments, and would not
so much as complain. How religious were such, and other Heathens, in the
public Worship of their false Gods! Nothing was able to cause them to
interrupt their Sacrifice! And shall we Christians mingle in our Devotions to
the true Lord of Heaven and Earth, vain, idle, wanton and lascivious thoughts
and actions? Shall every accident and casualty be able to take us off from the
Service we are about? Yet this we see most commonly happens both in our public
and in our private Addresses to God, for want of a due respect and dread of
God's presence, of which we should at such times be really and most sensible.

Fourthly, The Affections of the Soul ought to be moved and concerned in the
offering up our Requests, and our Petitions ought to receive that qualification
from them as is suitable to the reasons, cause, and intent of our Address. Our
praising of God must be performed with an holy and reverend freedom, and a real
sense of our Obligations: Our requests must be sent up to God, with humility,
and an acknowledgment of our undeservings: Our Confessions of sin must be
seasoned with sorrow, and a resolution of amendment: Our Promises, Vows, and
Engagements, must proceed from an hearty resolution, and a sense of our
miscarriages and weaknesses: In short, all our Prayers must be the outward
expressions of the inward affections of the Soul, which ought to qualify and
animate them; for unless our Hearts be thus concerned, the Prayer is but from
the Tongue, the Soul has no part in it; it is but the Effect and production of
our Imagination, but no real Devotion of the mind; it is a Worship in jest and
not in earnest, visible to an Allseeing Eye. Such heartless services are so
full of Imperfections, that in reason we can never expect any gracious returns
from a Just and Wise God, who would not admit neither the Blind nor the Lame to
draw near to his Holy Altar, to offer Sacrifice, though of the Priestly Race,
Levit. 21.18. If under the Law, the want of these Members excluded Men from
God's Service, how much the rather under the Gospel, when the noblest Member is
wanting, the Heart and its Affections? A Gospel Worship must be an hearty
Worship, that only is sufficient to obtain acceptance. It was God's Complaint
of Israel, that they honored God with their Lips, whilst their heart was far
from him. They are guilty of the same Formality, who frequently attend at
Prayers without causing their hearts to be concerned in the Devotion; it should
be therefore our care, to stir up our affections with all the considerations of
want, necessity, future advantage, experience, duty, God's presence, and
whatever may have the greatest influence upon us.

Fifthly, And that our Affections may be the more inflamed, we must kindle them
with an Holy Zeal, which must burn, not so much with the sense of want, as with
an earnest and unfeigned desire to Glorify our Maker; however, both may very
well contribute to inflame our Affections in the Divine Worship of our God in
Prayer. Now this Zeal needful in all our Addresses, is that holy violence that
strains our Affections in religious Duties, and gives that perfection to the
Action, which otherwise they would want; it is accompanied with a dissidence of
our selves, and a strong resolution to worship God with the utmost of our
endeavors; it is quickened by the fears and apprehensions of being guilty of
that profane sloathfulness, which might displease our gracious God, and stop
the current of his Mercy; it sills the Soul full of Jealousy, which awakens
all its faculties and powers, to the performance of the present Duty: And as
our great Savior, when he expelled the Merchants and Money Changers out of his
Temple at Jerusalem, was animated by a Divine Zeal for God's Glory; so a
Christian that is governed by the same Spirit, and Zealous Affection for his
God, drives out of his mind all worldly Business, and considerations of Profit
and Advantage, that God may be worshipped in this Spiritual Temple, the Soul,
without the interruption and clamours of our sensual and secular Interests,
where Sin and the Devil commonly insinuate themselves too much, John 2.16.

Sixthly, As there is a care to be taken of our persons, and manner of offering
up our Prayers, that they may be in some measure answerable to God's glorious
Perfections, and our own vile and mean Estate; we must likewise mind the things
that we petition for, that they be not contrary to God's revealed, or secret
Will: God's Will must regulate ours, in all our actions; for Christ our
Savior, teaches us by his Blessed Example, to be instrumental in, as well as
desirous of the performance of God's will on Earth; and Reason tells us, that
God being the supreme Agent, the great Maker and Protector of the World, the
Lord and Redeemer of Mankin'd, that all our Inclinations and Wills ought to
yield homage to his Pleasure; in which submission there is this advantage
arising to our selves; thereby we compass and attain unto the end of all our
desires, an infallible happiness; for the best self-interest is a submission to
that wise Agent, who is engaged to promote our Felicity and his Glory together,
according to his promise, Romans 8.28.

If in other actions of our life, God's Will should be the Rule of our desires,
how much the rather in that weighty, and religious action of Prayer, where the
Soul and the Body together, are to summon all their Faculties and Members, for
the worshipping of their great Creator and Benefactor? for the chief intent of
this performance, is the magnifying of God's glorious Attributes, which we can
never do, if we suffer any of our desiers to oppose his Will, or contradict his
Wisdom, or question his Alsufficiency and Goodness. The want of his Mercy
should cause thee, O Man! to yield to his Wisdom and Power; if thou expectest a
favorable return from his Bounty, thou must learn to court it by a dutiful
submission to his Wisdom and Governance, both in the things that thou desire,
and in the expectation of the time which he judges most seasonable to grant
thee thy requests: All impatiency in Prayer is guilty of indiscretion, of
profane folly, of disrespect, and disesteem of God's Wisdom and Mercy. In
this, and in all other acts of Devotion, Men must learn to prefer his Glory,
whose goodness they want to the satiating of their own craving and importunate
Appetites, and to give a check to the furious desires of our corrupt Nature,
when we find them proceeding beyond the Bounds limited by God and his Will, and
our real happiness, which commonly are unseparable.

But there is a difference to be observed, according to the difference of the
things that we desire from God. For Spiritual Mercies, for Faith, Grace,
Regeneration, Strength against Sin, Truth, Wisdom, Knowledge, and other
Blessings relating to God's immediate Glory, and our own Salvation, a
Petitioner can never be too earnest, zealous and impatient. Such advantages are
to be wrested, if I may so speak, from our good God, by our continual and
fervent Prayers. Violence, condemned in other things, is approved of by Christ
himself, in such as intend to be partakers of Heaven's Kingdom; and an Holy
importunity in Prayer, never returns without a grant of the Request, when we
ask the divine Riches of God's Grace, unless we have, like Esau, forfeited
before all pretensions to it; for God is as willing to bestow them, as we to
seek them; and their excellency is such, that Men can never have, and desire
them too much. As David therefore, whose Soul was insatiable on Earth, for
Grace and divine Mercies, let us not give our selves any rest, until we have
obtained these Riches and Ornaments of the Soul, and the assurances of God's
favor.

But as Earthly prosperity and Blessings, relating to our better convenience on
Earth, are not of such a value and importance, our Requests for these things
must be qualified accordingly; and because in some Rules they may be
prejudicial to our everlasting Interest, we are to beg them always with a
condescension to the Will and Wisdom of our great God, who knows what is best
for us, and most conducing to our real good. To desire them too passionately,
or without any such condescension, is to Idolize the Creature, and to prefer it
before the Creator; it is to give to those Earthly and mean things, that
affection which is due to God alone, and his divine Mercies. Nature I confess,
will be always craving, and the sense of our wants will cause us to cry aloud
for a relief and remedy; but a good Christian must give a check to those
natural motions, in imitation of Christ our Savior, whose Humanity was loath to
taste of the bitter Cup that was prepared for him to swallow; therefore you may
hear him desire that it may pass away, and that he may be excused to drink it;
but immediately after he adds, not my will, but thy will be done. The
fulfilling of this will, we must prefer to the things that we most passionately
desire on Earth: As it ought to be our chief aim, it should be our most zealous
request, and most earnest petition, to be placed at the close of all our
Prayers which we offer up for these pleasant, glorious, and useful things on
Earth, that draw away too much of our Affections. Likewise when we beg from God
for the good things of this Life, we must take heed of two other intentions or
affections of our corrupt Nature, that are able to render our requests most
sinful and abominable in God's Presence.

The first may proceed from an unjust principle of Covetousness, when the Soul
is possessed with an insatiable spirit, that craves more than is needful, and
forces it to desire what is not really ours, to the prejudice of others; or
from ambition, vainglory, and immoderate care of the World, that may cause us
to petition too passionately for its Vanities, as it may proceed from some Lust
that governs the Soul. All these, and other Principles of the like nature, as
they are irregular, the Devotions that proceed from them can never be good; for
all our requests in such like Cases tend to procure to our selves those good
things, that we purpose to abuse, in the satisfying of our unruly and base
affections. Such Prayers are Sacrifices of the Devil, and not of God; His
Blessings, never so mean, are too good to be prostituted to our shameful Lusts.
We must not think to feed the Devil's Brats with the Milk and Mercies of
Heaven. It is an ungrateful Conversion indeed, to convert that to God's
dishonor that proceeds from his Bounty. And it is the mark of a great
indiscretion, and want of Piety, to seek from God the means to dishonor his
holy Name, and to employ the chief part of Religion for such a profane and
unworthy purpose.

The second Affection is a Spirit of Envy, Anger, Revenge and Hatred, which if
we discover in that part of God's Service, where we are to implore his Bounty,
we cannot probably expect any great success, or any favorable return; we
cannot expect that the God of Mercy and Love, should be favorable to
inhumanity and revenge, that he will grant such Petitions as proceed from that
affection, which is direct contrary to his Divine Nature and Commands. God must
not, nor will not be made the Executioner of our vengeance, nor receive the
Commissions from us to punish our wrongs. Vengeance belongs to God; it is a
bold presumption to prescribe to his Wisdom either the method, time, or measure
of inflicting i^ upon the greatest Offenders. Therefore let us always cast our
selves upon him and his Justice, with a disposition ready to forgive the
greatest Enemies: Let us leave all our wilful Interests entirely to the
disposal of his Wisdom, and not venture nor suffer our corrupt Nature to give
him directions, how, and where to execute his wrath, chiefly in that part of
his Service where our Business is to entreat him to suspend the execution of
his Justice from us, justly due for our Offenses committed against his
continued goodness: If he shows so much favor to us, he expects that we should
do the like to such as have offended us, and deserved our displeasure. Our
Prayers therefore must not be Imprecations and Curses, all Gall and bitterness
must be cast away, and separated from this Sacrifice to the God of Heaven, as
the Gaul of the Heathen Victims was, when they offered them up to the superior
Gods.

I confess that self preservation, God's glory, common justice, and the safety
of our Friends, of the Church and Public, may oblige us to petition Heaven for
the disappointment of the unjust designs of Wicked Men, though it be to their
utter overthrow. David in his Divine Psalms affords us many Examples to this
purpose, Pour out thy Wrath upon the Ideathen, says he, that have not known
thee, and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy Name, Psalm. 79.6. Let
them be blotted out of the Pook of the Living, and not be written with the
Righteous, Psalm. 69.28. Consume them in thy Wrath, consume them that they may
not be, and let them know that God rules in Jacob, unto the ends of the Earth,
Selah. Psalm. 59.13. These and such like Prayers have an intent chiefly to
prevent the future Mischiefs, which the Malice of God's Enemies, and of his
Church, was likely to draw upon his Servants. They are intended to disarm them,
and take from them the ability or power which they would infallibly abuse often
to God's dishonor, and the Prejudice of God's People, and innocent Persons.
They are intended to Petition God, that he would be pleased to vindicate his
own Cause, and declare his Justice in the punishment of vile Contemners of his
Power and Authority. For such intents as these, we may sometimes beseech God to
send down his Judgments upon our Enemies, as well as his Mercies; but out of a
mere Principle of Revenge, or of an implacable hatred, to desire the ruin of
any that we disaffect, is to concern God too much in our frivolous quarrels,
and to cause him to withhold the favors, which otherwise he might be willing
to grant us, For with the same measure that we mete, it shall be measured to us
again. Let therefore Men be never so much alienated from us, and separated in
judgments, designs, or Interests; let them purpose never so much our Ruin, if
they be Christians or but Men, that Christian disposition which Christ our
Savior recommends to us, both by his Commands and Example, teaches us to pray
for their amendment, and the prosperity of their Souls and Bodies, so that it
may be without any notable prejudice to God, his Church, the public or our
private happiness: The Sacrifices of an implacable Spirit, will never find
acceptance at the Throne of Grace. That good Savior that prayed for his
Murderers, teaches us to suppress the sense of all personal Wrongs, and not
suffer our displeasures to be vented in our Addresses to God.

In this particular, as well as in the former, Nature will speak when it is
oppressed, and complain for the Evils that burden us; it will petition for help
and justice when it is grieved; and I cannot think but that this natural motion
may be allowable, if it be kept within the bounds of Christian Charity, and be
accompanied with a disposition ready to forgive the Injuries received, in case
of amendment; and our Enemies become fit Objects of our Mercy and Forgiveness.
But in such Cases we must take heed, that we suffer not our Resentment of
former wrongs, to speak too loud in Prayer, and that we desire not from God,
that which neither becomes God's Wisdom to grant, nor our modesty and Christian
Charity to ask.

Seventhly, Faith must likewise be an ingredient in this part of God's Worship,
as well as in the rest: This Grace is the Life and Soul of Devotion, without
which all our Addresses are to no purpose, For he that comes unto God, must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him.

Now there is a double Duty that our Faith is bound to perform in Prayer.
First, it must make us sensible of God's presence and all-seeing Eye; it must
cast the Soul into a dread of that divine Majesty, who hears and sees every
Petitioner all over the World; it must awaken all our abilities, and quicken us
with the consideration of God's glorious Being, unto whom we offer up our
Requests; it must represent him present, and as he is a God, a just, a
powerful, and a merciful Creator, to our imagination; but let the good
Christian take heed that he suffer not his fancy to give any visible shape to
God's incomprehensible Being: Our minds are too apt to be extravagant in this
Case, and to commit that Spiritual Idolatry, which the Heathens were outwardly
guilty of: This infinite Spirit is to be represented inwardly to Souls, without
any such contemptible appearance, unto which our imagination, instructed by our
Senses, is wont to confine him. His incomprehensible Being must not be
disgraced by our weak and shallow apprehensions. Therefore in all our Addresses
to him, our busy imagination ought to be entertained with the Thoughts of the
things we want, and desire from God, and our Minds stopped with the notion of his
Immensity, and our belief ought to make us as sensible of his Presence, as if
he were visible before our Eyes; this will banish all careless, idle, and
wandering thoughts and negligence, and quicken us in the performance of this
important Duty. The sense of God's presence will cause us to summon all our
abilities, and rid us of all those things that might be an impediment to our
Prayers. And for want of it, Men are commonly sloathful and careless in their
Addresses to God's Divine Majesty.

But there is another Duty that our Faith must perform in Prayer; that is, it
must keep the Soul in an expectation of the grant of our requests, and assure
us, that God is both willing and able to fulfill our desires in his due time;
that he has Goodness and Power enough in store to reward us, and satisfy all
our Wishes; nay, that he will give us the good things that we petition for, if
they be convenient for us, and likely to be instrumental in the promotion of
his Glory on Earth. For that purpose Christ has encouraged us with this
promise, Math 21.22. All things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believing,
ye shall receive. And elsewhere, he calls upon the sloathful to ask, and
assures them, Math. 7.7. that they shall have; seek, and ye shall find; knock,
and it shall be opened unto you. And immediately before his Crucifixion, he
reproved his Disciples for their backwardness in Prayer, John 16.24. Hitherto
have ye asked nothing in my Name, ask, and ye shall receive, that your Joy may
be full. By these and such like Promises, Christ offers us God's assistances
and mercies, and desires us to send up our Prayers to him with a lively Faith,
and a strong persuasion, that he will grant us our requests, or so much of them
as is needful for us. This Faith, or Persuasion must not be grounded upon such
a deceitful Foundation, as our Virtues, good Qualities and Excellency; Men are
too apt to flatter themselves with such proud mistakes, and to look upon their
persons, as deserving the favors that they petition for; and that in
consideration of their own Piety and Holiness, God will infallibly hear their
Prayers: Though our innocence may be a means to draw the Blessings of Heaven
upon our Heads; it becomes not our Christian Humility to rely upon our Merits,
and claim God's mercies as due for our Services: If God is a Debtor to us, it
is in regard of his Promises, and not of our deservings, which cannot be in any
wise proportionable to his Blessings. God may reward our Piety with the good
things of this Life, and with a prosperous success in all our undertakings,
according to our desires; he may vouchsafe his mercies to his faithful
Servants, as well as keep them from the smart and fury of his judgments, and
that because of their Virtues, and abstinence from the public Sins; but it
becomes not the Humility of a Beggar, when he comes to the Throne of God's
undeserved Grace, either to expect or claim more gracious returns, because of
our former services due to his Sovereignty over us: Besides Men are commonly
mistaken, and we are apt to think too well of our selves; but though our Virtues
should be never so Heroic, and our lives never so exemplary, I would not
advise any Petitioner to settle thereupon his Faith and Confidence of
acceptance of, and success to his Prayers; because that persuasion claims God's
Mercies as Debts, and deserves as severe a repulse as that boasting Pharisee in
the Gospel, whose Prayer was but a provocation of God's displeasure against
him, whereas the Publican's Humility obtained a gracious forgiveness.
Self-conceitedness in Prayer, is the worst disposition that we can bring, and
discover in our Addresses to him, who knows the very bottom of our Souls;
sooner will the scandalous Sinner, who is sensible of having rendered himself
unworthy of Heavens Mercies, receive the effects of the tenderness of his
Fatherly Love, rather than an over-confident and a proud Saint, that is ready
to upbraid God with his continual Services.

But as our confidence in Prayer must not proceed from an high Opinion that we
have conceived of our selves, of our perfections or actions, so it should be
settled upon the Merits and satisfaction of Christ our blessed Savior, and our
real Interest in him; our faith and assurance of God's acceptance, must eye his
Promises and infallible Truth, and look upon the deservings of an alsufficient
Redeemer, in whom, and by whom we are welcome to a bountiful God; it must trust
upon Christ's intercession, that sanctifies our imperfect Prayers, and offers
them up for us to our Heavenly Father. Let his Mediation procure us admittance,
and his Excellency purchase unto us a favorable return; then only we may
expect success, when our Petitions are recommended by the Merits of a Crucified
Christ.

All such requests, as our Savior promises, shall meet with acceptance, if we
can be persuaded of an assured success, or if we believe. By which words he
seems to encourage us to believe, that whatsoever we ask the Father in his
name, we shall obtain it. Experience teaches us, that this promise is not to
be understood in as large a Sense as the words seem to intimate, without any
exception or restriction; for many things we may ask of God, which becomes not
his Wisdom and Fatherly care over us to grant; and our ignorance is such, that
we may petition for things with Confidence and Faith, which will be prejudicial
to our selves, and God's glory on Earth. I cannot think that it is Christ's
intent, to encourage us to offer up such Prayers, with an assurance of
obtaining our irregular and inconsiderate desires; therefore for the better
directions and comfort of a devout Christian, let him know that he may safely
be confident, and fully persuaded, that all Prayers tending to the salvation of
his Soul, for the obtaining of grace, forgiveness of his sins, strength against
temptation, God will in his time grant him his Request, if he be sincere, and
affectionate in his Prayer, according to our Savior's Words, Math. 7.11. What
Man is there of you, whom if his Son ask Bread, will he give him a Stone, or if
he ask a Fish, will he give him a Serpent? If ye then being Evil, know how to
give good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your Father which is in
Heaven, give good things to them that ask him? And in the Gospel according to
St. Luke, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask him? As God is as willing to bestow such divine Mercies, as Men to
ask; they may be as certain to obtain them, as God is free to grant: But for
other things relating to our present and worldly Interest, we may ask with an
assurance, that God if he sees them fit for our good, will doubtless give them,
but if otherwise, he will make us sensible of his Liberality in another way,
for it is the manner of God's proceeding with his Children and Servants, to
send such returns to their Prayers, as are most for their advantage, not always
answerable to their desires. He keeps back the Blessings which he knows will be
hurtful to them, or prejudicial to the public good; and instead of them, he
heaps upon them others which will prove more really for their benefit. Men
foresee not the danger of God's inferior Mercies, good things may become
hurtful to us through the Devil's malice, the prevalency of Temptations, and
our Corruption within. As many Diseases are fed and increased by that Food
which God has appointed to strengthen the Bodies of the healthful, so likewise
many inclinations grow worse, by those very Blessings which are granted to
some, as the rewards of their Piety: In things therefore that are not always
turned to a good use, and that are neither for the benefit of Men, nor the
Glory of God, I would not have a Petitioner gratify his corrupt Humor so
much, as to be confident of the grant of his Requests; nor to flatter himself
in a vain expectation of that which agrees not with the Wisdom and Love of God
for us. As therefore a devout Christian must offer up such Prayers, with this
clause, (If it be God's good Pleasure) let him not be too confident of
obtaining his Petition in that very manner that he desires it, and with that
improper limitation of the overruling goodness of our God, unless he is moved
by some extraordinary impulse of his holy Spirit in his Soul, to assure him of
the grant, and unless he can discover the events of the time to come, by some
unusual Revelation. Some pious Souls often receive an answer to their Prayers
before they rise up, and God is pleased to comfort their drooping Spirits with
a speedy and a gracious return. As Hannah, who petitioned God for a Son, 1 Samuel
1.18. rose up with a joyful Countenance, and a full assurance that God the
Author of Life, would give her a Child. She had unburthened her self of her
sorrows in Prayer, and her heart and Countenance were no more so sad, because
she had received some assurance of a favorable acceptance, of obtaining her
Petition.

Eighthly, But there is one thing more that a devout Christian must observe in
Prayer to God; that is, the Duty of Perseverance; slack not, nor be discouraged
for the first repulse, or for a delay. God grants not his Mercies, always as
soon as we begin to ask. His goodness is to be courted by our zealous
endeavors, for he grants many times to our perseverance, what he denis to our
Prayers. The Woman of Syrophenicia met with a refusal, and had not her patience
overcome this Obstacle, she had never returned with the glad assurance of her
Daughters recovery: If Jacob had not contended with the Angel, he had never
been honored with a Blessing: An holy and devout importunity, seldom or never
departs empty from God's unwearied Bounty. He suffers for several causes best
known to himself, his Servants to live a while in expectation of those
Blessings which he intends at last to bestow upon them, that his Mercies might
obtain with them a right esteem, and be more highly valued: That their Faith,
patience, confidence in him, and all their Graces might be exercised and tried
the more, and that their ability for Prayer might be increased, by a constanter
exercise, and all impediments of a Communion with our God may be removed; for
that purpose it is to be observed, that his Providence casts us into the want
of many enjoyments, that when we seek them from God by Prayer, both the
endeavor to obtain them, and the receiving of them, might turn to the
everlasting advantage of our Souls and Bodies. Let not therefore the devout
Christian be discouraged, if God answers not his Request as soon as he expects
or desires; for, besides that it is a bold and indiscreet Act, for us ignorant
Creatures to limit the Wisdom of our Creator's liberality, and to prescribe to
him the time and place, of opening his bountiful hand unto us; it is an act of
Cruelty to our selves, and of impiety toward God, to be so impatient for the
enjoying of those things, which may, and doubtless will prove as prejudicial to
us, as injurious to his honor. Take heed of murmuring for the want of Earthly
conveniences. It was the great ruin of the Israelites newly escaped out of
Pharaoh's Bondage, and drew several Plagues upon their heads. As perseverance,
assisted by the virtues of patience and Faith, is a blessed means to obtain and
sanctify God's Mercies, both Spiritual and Temporal, so there is nothing that
turns them sooner into Curses than impatiency, despair, and insolent Complaints
against God's Love or Power. Lift up always, O Christian! thine Eyes and thine
hands in expectation of God's time, as well as of God's Blessings. Be not weary
to wait for the expressions of his Bounty, who is never weary to do thee good;
he is not so unmindful as thou think him to be; his delays or refusals are
more for thine advantage, than the enjoyments of those mercies would be, which
thou desire with so much disrespect and impatience. As the knowledge of his
power and goodness requires our confidence and reliance upon him; his infinite
Wisdom demands from us, a resignation of our selves and interests to his
disposal, without distaste or insolent complaints of our proud nature, which
grace teaches us to check. The first ought to encourage our perseverance in
Prayer, as the consideration of the last Attribute of God, should teach us to
quiet the irreverent dissatisfactions of our discontented minds.

One thing more I would have a devout Christian observe, in public and private
Prayers to God's divine Majesty, to offer them with the humility of the Body,
as well as the devotion of the Mind. I have observed that our Nation chiefly,
and every Congregation is full of irreverent and disrespectful Clowns, when we
make our Addresses to God, either in Prayer, or praising of his holy Name. They
observe not that decency and respect, which is due to the Excellency of our
heavenly Father in his Worship, but appear most scandalous and profane in the
Eyes of Men, whatever may be their inward disposition, which I conceive is to
be gathered from the outward gesture of their Bodies. They come into God's
presence in such a familiar manner, as if there were no difference between them
and their great Creator, as if their Bodies were not as much obliged to worship
him as their Souls, as if their outward behavior were not to be concerned in
their Devotions to God; and at the times of Prayer, they show forth so much
contempt of God, and of the Religion they profess, that none would take them to
be Christians, that understands not their Names, and knows not their Persons;
and further, I have observed that some of the more religious sort, both in
private and in public, when they address themselves to God, omit sometimes out
of a profane and irreligious Custom, the outward humility which the Body is
obliged to render to its Creator and Benefactor in his Worship.

For the redress of this open Profaneness, and for the prevention of the
dishonor that may reflect from hence upon God and our Religion, in the Eyes of
the World: Let me entreat every devout Soul, never to offer to speak to God in
Prayer, without observing and expressing that humility with his Body, which
God's incomprehensible Majesty, and our vile condition requires indispensibly
from us all; from the highest to the lowest: Reason as well as Holy Scripture
enjoins this observance; for if the whole man is bound to render Hommage to
God, as he seems to intimate by those Sacrifices under the Law, which were to
be offered entire, without any diminution; it concerns us to express the inward
qualification and disposition of the Soul, with the outward action of the Body,
and make the World sensible of the sincerity and piety of our intentions;
justice and equity require this from us; for seeing we have received our Bodies
as well as our Souls from the Almighty hand of God, it is but just that they
should acknowledge his Sovereignty by some significant posture, when the Soul
appears before him to do him reverence, or to crave his merciful assistance: It
is but just, that this outward part of our selves as well as the inward, should
make some returns for all the divine favors that relate immediately to its
subsistence; it is but just that this Body of ours, which is one day to be
glorified in God's heavenly Sanctuary, should now glorify God by the humblest
and most devout postures and actions.

I confess it is the usual manner of Superstition to enjoin the cringings of the
Body, more than the devout qualification of the Soul; but I am sure that it is
a clownish and unmannerly Religion indeed, that suffers Men to approach in holy
Duties to God, without expressing any reverence with the Body. If you please to
enquire into the behavior of the holy Men of the Old and New Testament, you
shall never find them praying in an irreverent posture, neither sitting nor
leaning. Old Abraham worshipped before God, Genesis 22.5. This worshipping is an
outward action of the Body, as well as the inward of the Mind; as may appear by
Genesis 24.52. where Abraham's Servant is said to have worshipped the Lord, bowing
himself to the ground, when God had prospered his journey. When the Israel^tes
heard Moses's Message to them, and God's purpose to redeem them out of Egypt,
they bowed their Heads and Worshipped, Exodus 4.31. King Hezekiah bowed himself
before God in his public Addresses, 2 Chronicles. 29.29. St. Paul likewise was upon
his knees in prayer with the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Acts. 20.36. And
Christ our Savior, whose Example should prevail upon our negligence, was never
seen in Prayer to God the Father, but either prostrate, or kneeling upon the
ground. This Humility of the Body is so essential a part of the public worship
of God, that its observance alone, has caused the Holy Scriptures to give the
Name of Worshippers of God, to the Vilest of Men, who were never acquainted
with the internal and hearty Worship, as may be observed by what is recorded of
Saul and of others, 1 Samuel 15.31. And it is said of the Israelites, 2 Chronicles.
29.29. And when they had made an end of Offering, the King and all that were
present with him, bowed themselves and worshipped. And in the next Verse,
Moreover Hezekiah the King, and the Princes, commanded the Levites to sing
praise unto the Lord with the words of David, and of Asaph the Seer, and they
sang Praises with gladness, and they bowed their Heads and worshipped. Likewise
in the 8th. of Nehemiah and the sixth Verse. It is said, that Ezra blessed the
Lord the great God, and all the People answered Amen, Amen, with lifting up
their Hands; and they bowed their Heads and worshipped the Lord with their
Faces to the ground. The public Worship of our God, was never yet performed by
any Primitive Church, without the outward humility of the Body, and the outward
expressions of respect, as well as with the inward devotion of the mind; Reason
and Religion require it, and the constant practice of the People of God in all
Ages, both in the Jewish, and the Christian Church, is an undeniable Evidence
to prove the necessity of it. What means therefore the negligence, the
profaneness, the irreverence and unmannerly behavior of some that are styled
Christians? Is not the practice of Naaman the Syrian, who could bow himself in
the House of Rimmon his false God, a reproach to us? Does not the humility and
the respect which the Heathens constantly pay to their Divinities, upbraid the
Clownishness of some of our Countrymen? There are three Postures of Humility
very decent in Prayer, and other parts of God's Worship, Standing, Kneeling, or
Prostration to the ground. When ever therefore we appear before God, either to
pray to him, or to praise his holy Name, our Body must be in one of these
postures, unless any natural or accidental weakness or impediment may justly
deserve a dispensation: Likewise the lifting up of the Hands and Eyes unto
Heaven, are expressions of Devotion, as ancient as the first People of God.
Think not that the honor of your Blood, the excellency of your Persons, or
your eminent promotions, ought to excuse you from this outward humility of the
Body. God requires it at your hands in the 99th. Psalm and the fifth Verse.
Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool. And the Royal Prophet
calls upon all devout Souls in the 95th Psalm. ver. 6. O come let us worship,
and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker. In the next words, this
Religious Prince labors to stir you up to this Humility, to this part of
Piety, by reasons drawn from God's Sovereignty, his Power and Right over us,
For he is the Lord our God, and we are the People of his Pasture, and the sheep
of his hand. Has thy God any Interest in thee, O Christian? Have thou any
respect for his Holy Name? Do thou look upon him as thy Creator, Protector,
and Benefactor? Has he received thee into his Church, and to the hopes of
eternal Rewards? Is this Body of thine to be admitted into his heavenly
Sanctuary, in all the Company of his Holy Angels, to worship and bow before
him? Then prepare thy self for this future and happy Employment. Express thy
thanks for all his innumerable benefits, by thy Reverence and Devotion to him
as thy God, with the outward Humility of the Body, in all thy Addresses to his
glorious Majesty, whether it be in public or in private; but chiefly in the
public Prayers of the Church. There not only the Honor of our God, the Credit
of our Profession, the interest of our Brethren, whose Devotions are apt to
grow cold by the sight and sense of our negligence; but your own Interest also
as well as your Duty, calls you to this outward respect, for an unmannerly
behavior deserves the Curses, contrary to those Blessings which we are there
to beg of God: However, you can never expect in reason to be benefited by the
Churches Prayers, if you will not vouchsafe so much as to be outwardly
concerned. O Christians! let not any popular mistakes, nor any Schismatical
prejudices rob you of the advantages which you might hope to obtain from God,
by a devout, humble and affectionate attendance, at the offering up of the
Excellent Prayers of our Church, for your good and happiness. But if all these
Reasons cannot prevail upon some stiff, necked, and invincible Souls, so far as
to cause them to be dutiful and humble in God's presence at the hour of Prayer,
let them consider that in our civil Conversation, the want or the omission of a
due respect is a disgrace to the Person that should render it, for it causes
Men to be branded with the odious Names of Clowns, Ill-bread, Brutish and
uncivil People. Now they are the worst of Clowns, that are so in Religion, that
know not, or will not render the Hommage that is due from their Bodies to their
God: If therefore the respect that we have for him, is not able to oblige us to
a Civil Behavior, and decent Postures and Gestures in Prayer; let the shame of
Men, if we be not insensible to that likewise, cause us to behave our selves
with decency, with respect in God's presence, as becomes Men of Reason, and
Christians of good breeding and extraction, and not as Brute Beasts that have
neither manners nor understanding. But of all Men, none are more engaged than
such as Officiate publicly, and are the Mouths of their People, to offer up
their Prayers with all the decency, humility, and outward Devotion, which might
serve to excite the Auditors to a due respect; for as their Persons are eyed by
the whole Congregation, their Example is not without followers. It has a great
influence upon all that are present, either to encourage or discourage them in
their public Worship: Therefore in their disrespectful offering up of the
Prayers of the Church, they are not only scandalous in their own Persons, and
guilty of dishonouring God, disgracing their Religion, profaning the public
Worship, but they are likewise guilty of all the contempt, negligence and
unmannerly behavior of their Attendants, if it happens through their shameful
and irreverent Praying. Let therefore my Brethren of the Clergy seriously
consider the apparent danger they are in, by an omission of this Duty: I am
persuaded that our Nation alone had never fallen into that extravagant humor,
to loath the Godly Forms of Prayer, which all good Men, both at home and abroad
highly esteem, were it not for their disrespectful handling, and reading of
them, whose Duty it is to recommend and grace them by their p^actices. Good
things when they are delivered by a slovenly hand, are usually rejected; and it
is the weakness of the Common people, to value things not according to their
true intrinsic worth, but according as they appear outwardly to their Senses:
A Prayer that shines with the gay clothes of Wit and invention, and a good
delivery, shall meet with acceptance, and draw many sighs, and groans from an
ignorant Soul, though otherwise never so full of imperfections, when many will
scarce afford an hearing to the solid and divine Prayers of the Church. How
many in our late Days, have delighted to listen to the unadvised and
blasphemous Prayers of the Sons of Tumult and Division? How many have spent
their Days under the Pulpits of those bloody Saints, without any discovery of
weariness, whereas they now Complain of tediousness, when in our ordinary
Devotions we employ a few minutes to implore God's divine Mercies, according to
the most approved and religious manner? How comes it to pass that the
extemporary productions of many idle and wicked Fancies, have been far more
esteemed amongst many of us, than those wise and excellent Prayers, composed in
the beginning of our Reformation, by such as have sealed the Protestant and
Christian Truths, with their Blood? Those Prayers, I say, which are fitted to
all Capacities, recommended to us by the Piety and Practice of the Ancient,
Catholic, and Othodox Church, and which are not to be mended by any humane
endeavors. This question gives me an occasion to speak to thee my Christian
Reader, of some few particulars concerning Prayer, which the present
dissentions amongst us render very seasonable.

First, I shall speak in vindication of public Forms of Prayer, against the
new Modes of Praying ex tempore.

Secondly, I shall enquire into the true Causes of our unreasonable distastes
at the public Forms, enjoined by authority in our Church of England.

Thirdly, I shall offer to thee my Christian Brother some directions, how thou
shall use this Liturgy, with Comfort to thy Soul.

Fourthly, I shall examine what praying by the Spirit is in the sense of St.
Paul, and of the Holy Fathers.

Amongst the ancient Heretics, I find none so bold as to attempt the total
subversion of God's Divine Worship, or to bring in any other mode, but that
which was generally embraced in the places where they lived: They ventured to
oppose some certain Articles of our Christian Belief, or to introdu^^ vicious
and irregular practices in the Church. They made it their business to corrupt
either the judgments or the manners of Christ's Disciples, and by that means,
to render them more unsit for God's great design in our Redemption; but they
never offered to overthrow the whole Service of God, or to thwart the common
practices recommended to them, by the well-advised Piety of their Predecessors.
This strange attempt was reserved for these last and worst Ages of the World;
and this kind of impiety which could never find entertainment amongst the
Primitive Enemies of God, and of his Truth, has been greedily embraced by some
in these latter days, under the usual deceiving pretense of purity and
Religion, as if they alone were to be esteemed Religious, who slander, condemn,
blaspheme, and contradict the religious Practices of the rest of Christians, as
if irregularity, and an affected sigularity, were the best means to render them
acceptable to God in his Worship. For that purpose we have seen them, to our
great grief, cast out of the Church, all the godly Forms of Prayer, which the
Wisdom and Piety of former Ages have recommended to us; and because they could
not spy in them any sufficient cause to condemn and reject them, we have seen
these over zealous brethren, generally exclaim against all Forms, as unlawful,
irreligious, and Popish, leaving every one to the irregular dictates of their
Passion, and presumptuous minds. A mistake of a most dangerous consequence,
that opposes the practice of Christ, and of the true Church of God in all
Ages, since the beginning of the World; for if you please to examine Holy
Scriptures, concerning Forms of Prayer, and praising of God, especially in the
public worship, you shall not find a Church, nor Congregation professing the
Truth, without Set Forms, in the first Ages of Mankind, it is said when Enos
Seth's Son was born, and that Men began to increase, they began also to call
upon the Name of the Lord; Cen. 4.26. which words are (...) simply to be
understood, of their addressing themselves to God's Divine Majesty, as if
before that time, neither Adam nor Eve had ever minded to call upon him, nor
none of their Children; for both Cain and Abel had been taught to worship God
with the Fruits of their labor, and the increase of their Substance; which
could not be done without calling upon God for a continuance of his Blessings;
besides, it is very unlikely that Adam, a Man created in an Estate of Holiness,
who could not be insensible of our dependency upon, and want of God's daily
mercies, who had seen his wonderful Power in the Creaton of the World, should
forget to teach his Children to call upon God's Holy Name. But these words are
to be understood, of their calling upon the Holy Name of God in a public
Society, and with set and prescribed Forms, and in a manner answerable to their
condition. It is to be understood of solemnizing the public Service and
Worship of God, with Prayers, Praises, and Sacrifices, for the obtaining of
God's Blessings, and the acknowledgments of his favors and protection,
according to a certain manner appointed by the Religious Persons of those days;
therefore in the Original, the word employed to signify in this passage,
calling upon God, is (...) derived from the root (...) to meet together, and
assemble, or from the root (...) publicly to read and declare, or cry out;
because that this calling upon the Name of the Lord, of these first Men of the
ancient World, was performed in their public meetings, wherein there was a
Service and ordinary Worship, appointed and observed by the distinct reading of
Prayers and Praises; which infer sufficiently, that they had public places
appointed, persons in whom the care of Religion was entrusted, and a common
manner prescribed to them in writing, which they were to read in the audience
of the People. Further, it may be worthy of our Observation, that the Prophet
David when he speaks of calling upon the Name of the Lord, in many of his
Psalms, he uses the same significant word (...) as in that most remarkable
Verse of the 116 Psalm and the 13 Verse, where he speaks of that Cup of
Salvation, which was usually taken by the Jews in the public Sacrifices, a
Type of our Christian Eucharist, I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call
upon the Name of the Lord. This calling, signifies meeting together in the
public Worship of God, and offering to him, reading those Forms of Prayers
appointed by the Church: For it is the custom of God's Holy Spirit, in relating
the passages of former times, to allude by the expression, to the manner and
circumstances of those Actions that are mentioned. Thus David, in the 79th.
Psalm Verse 6. desires God to send down his Judgments, and pour out his Wrath
upon the Heathen that have not known him, and upon the Kingdoms that have not
called upon his Name; he makes use of the same word, (...) derived from the
same root; as if he should say, send down thy Judgments upon the Kingdoms which
call not upon thee in public Meetings; and where there is no set nor appointed
Worship, for the Inhabitants to use in glorifying thy Name. And in many other
Psalms, David uses the same Expression, which imports a public Assembly, and
the reading of the Praises and Prayers in his Divine Worship, when he was wont
to call upon God. This Observation is confirmed by the constant Practice of all
the Heathens, in the Worship of their Gods. Both the Greeks and the Romans had
their constant Forms of Prayers and Praises, which yet are extant in the
Writings of their Poets. It seems that they had received this judicious and
pious Custom from the first Men of the World. And what God's People were
accustomed to do to the Honor of the true God; these Heathens did commonly
practice the same in the service of their false Gods, as may be observed by
their Hymns, and other Ceremonies in their Worship.

But this religious use of set Forms was in the Jewish Church, by the
appointment of Moses, and of the succeeding Prophets, as may be easily proved
by the song of Triumph composed by Moses and Miriam, Exodus 15. after Pharaoh's
overthrow in the Red Sea; The 9th Psalm is a Prayer of Moses.
by the words and Ceremonies to be used in the eating of the Paschal Lamb; by
the other Institutions and passages of the Ceremonial Law; and chiesly by the
Psalms of David, which Hezekiah restored in the public Worship of God; for it
is said, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. That he set the Levites in the House of the Lord, with
Cymbals, with Psalteries, and with Harps, according to the Commandment of
David, and of Gad the King's Seer, and Nathan the Prophet. Observe what is
added in the next words, For so was the Commandment of the Lord by his
Prophets. It seems in the Jewish Church, the observing of a prescribed Form,
was no Human institution, but proceeded from God's Holy Spirit. And in the 30
verse it is said, that Hezekiah the King, and the Princes, commanded the
Levites to sing Praises unto the Lord, with the words of David, and of Asaph
the Seer. It was for that good purpose that David composed all his Divine
Psalms, that they might be of a constant use in the praising of, and the
praying unto our great God. And after the Jews return from Babylon, Nehemiah
commands the same use to be observed, Nehem. 2.45.46. And as it was not lawful
to change these Forms, so likewise it may not be lawful for any, but such only
as were inspired of God, or were to take care of Religion, Man. de Missa. Lib.
1. cap. 5.
to introduce in God's Divine Service, any new Forms, as may be easily proved.
But this use of Set Forms of Prayers and praising of God, is not Jewish, it is
grounded upon such solid and moral Reasons, that have recommended it to the
Christian Church. St. John the Baptist, in imitation of the Pharisees, gives a
Set Form of Prayer to his Disciples. And Christ our Savior, to comply with the
desires of his Followers, teaches them a Set Form, opposite to the long and
tedious Forms used by the Scribes and Pharisees, Luke 11.1, 2. And not only in
this particular, but also in the receiving of the Paschal Lamb, Christ shows
himself to be no Enemy of Forms, and Humane Institutions, when they tend to a
Godly purpose, as may appear by the singing of the Hymn after the Celebration,
and by the posture of leaning. And St. Paul likewise, in imitation of his great
Master, commands Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. That Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men. That is, that he
should appoint in the Churches of his Diocese, such Set Forms of Prayer, as
might be offered up to God, For Kings, and for all that are in authority, that
we may lead a quiet and a peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty, for this
is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. That this was the
intent of St. Paul, may appear by the practice of the Christian Churches in the
next Age to the Apostles; for in the Ancientest Fathers, we read of the Set
Forms of Prayer, See Conc. Laodicea, can. 19.8. Miletan. Con. can. 2.
commonly used in God's Public Worship. And we have yet extant some of those
Primitive Liturgies of the People of God, differing in many things; for the
Wisdom of God's Holy Spirit has left the Composure of these Prayers, to the
Rulers of the distinct Churches, that they should appoint such Forms as were
most agreeable with the Tempers and Manners of their People, such as will
encourage Devotion and Piety, and serve best for the Promotion of God's Glory.

Likewise in these later Days, since the beginning of the Reformation, all the
Churches of our Brethren beyond the Seas, have their Set Forms of Prayer, from
which it is not lawful to vary, and which are appointed by the authority of
their Rulers. Never any attempted the changing of them, their People never
mutined against them, or against Forms in general. Never any person was allowed
in public, to prefer his own Fancies to these Prayers commanded to be used in
the Church: But in the Churches of every Nation, there is a constant and an
universal Uniformity in the Public Worship of our God. And this good Order is
Religiously kept without any fear of Superstition. This Universal Practice of
all Ages, Churches, and Nations, that have instituted, and constantly used Set
Forms of Prayer in God's Public Worship, is sufficient to justify the
Religious Orders of our Church, from all scandalous aspersions of our mistaken
Brethren.

But Reason and Religion, and the general good of Christian Societies,
recommended this Practice and Use to us as well as to them: I suppose no person
can deny, but set Forms are absolutely necessary for the information,
instruction, and benefit of the more ignorant and younger sort, who must be
taught how to ask their Conveniences from God's Bounty, and in what Name to
make their Addresses to his Divine Majesty, for without this information from
Men, we find them not in a Capacity to pray and speak to God, as they should,
unless they be inspired from above, which is not usual: To remedy their
ignorance and weakness, the Church of England commands constantly the use of
Set Forms of Prayer in public; that by a frequent repetition, we might imprint
them in the memories of Persons not able to read, and that otherwise have no
means to learn them. Therefore generally to discourage or condemn the use of
Set Forms of Prayer, is to deprive a great part of Christianity, from the
comfort and advantage of praying to God; and it is to discover an Enmity
against Religion, which no good Disciple of Christ can possibly harbor. I
could here show many horrid inconveniences that would happen amongst us, had
we no Set Forms of Prayer, but for brevity sake, I omit the mention of them,
for I conceive it is not so much at Set Forms of Prayer, that our Zealots
quarrel, as it is at their public use in God's Divine Worship, and the
exclusion of all others of their own, or other Men's Fabric, at such solemn
times and occasions: But let Men's abilities and gifts of Prayer be never so
signal and extrordinary, I dare affirm, and can easily prove by Scripture and
Reason, that they are not to be allowed to cause their own Inventions to justle
out the usual Service of the Church. That Forms of Prayer are to be preferred,
whether they be declared memoriter, or read in a Book, to all the most
excellent extemporary speeches or Prayers; and that constant and settled Forms,
in a well governed Church, are agreeable with the Word of God, and the common
good. Were there no other reason to recommend them, but that decency which St.
Paul desires to be observed in Christ's Church, in all its public Practices
and Divine Worship; it would be sufficient to make us embrace an Uniformity
both in manner, as well as matter; for how ridiculous would a Nation appear to
all unbyassed Souls, if there were no order; if every Congregation should be
differing in their actions; if one Minister should read when the other sings;
if one should spend the Sabbath in speaking, and another in praying; or if one
should pray for one thing, another for the contrary; or if the prayers were
discrepant; if one Minister should pray in one manner; others follow the
dictates of a Rubric of another make; what a wide Gate would this deformity
open to all kind of Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies? And how ridiculous should
we appear to all Foreign Churches? We have already experienced sufficiently the
danger of this general liberty allowed to all Men, to pray what they list in
the Ears of the People. For, not to mention the Extravagancies that some have
been guilty of; the Whimsies and Blasphemies that they have bolted forth; the
Devil has made use of this Engine to overthrow the Faith of many silly Souls,
by insinuating the most dangerous and damnable Errors with the gift of praying
extempore. In the late unnatural Rebellion, Men took occasion in their
extemporary Prayers, to vent, not only the most pernicious mistakes, but also
disobedience to the Civil Magistrate; and from the Pulpit have poisoned many,
to our sorrow, with most horrid and Antichristian Principles, which to this
day no Reason nor Remedy can cure.

But if no such danger were to be feared from extemporary praying, if all Men
so employed had the Integrity to intend it only to God's Glory, and the public
quiet; yet such Prayers cannot have that mature consideration, nor those
judicious expressions as a well Meditated Prayer, judiciously composed and
Examined. And does it become the respect we owe to so wise a God, to be so bold
as to present unto him any thing that comes first upon the Lips, the hasty
productions of our unadvised Fancies, or the irregular expressions of our
minds, without considering before, whether the things we petition for, and the
manner of asking be acceptable to him, and agreeable with his revealed Will and
Word? And in regard we are so apt to mistake, and are so full of infirmities;
does it not become our Christian discretion, to weigh, and seriously to
examine, what we are to say to so Wise and Divine a Majesty? that our
weaknesses might not hinder the effects of our Prayers, especially in a public
Congregation, where our mistakes may have many ill consequences, where not only
God and our selves are concerned, but also many of diverse tempers, Capacities
and Estates, whose Indigencies we represent to a merciful God? Now if Forms of
Prayer are to be therefore used, let any Man of Reason judge impartially, which
are the most proper, our own or the Churches? the fond productions of our
private Imaginations, or the judicious Prayers composed by the grave Rulers of
our Christian Congregations? I doubt not but several have had, and yet have an
extraordinary Gift in Praying, to move and stir up the Affections of their
Hearers. This Gift therefore which proceeds from the Holy Ghost, for the
benefit of the Church, requires that we should suffer it to perform that good
which is thereby intended. This may be done on certain occasions and times, and
immediately before the Sermon. And I suppose that no moderate Christian will
then prohibit such gifted persons, to employ that ability which they have
received from God for the advantage of the public; if they make use of it
discreetly, judiciously, and soberly, without affectation or vain glory, or
ostentation. But there is no allowance therefore to be given to the pride and
vanity of others, to prefer the fond composures of their indiscreet Fancies to
the pious and regular Prayers of the Church. And it may be justly feared in
such Cases, that voluntary and new Prayers expressed with vehemence, may cause
ignorant and foolish Men, who are quickly weary with the ordinary Devotions, to
disesteem, slight and neglect them, and to be continually craving those
extemporary Ejaculations of gifted Men, and that from persons insufficient; who
may be thereby tempted to gratify the others humor to their own and the
public hurt. However the gift of praying is not hindered by our public Forms,
from performing the benefit which is thereby intended; but foolish Men are
thereby restrained from those mischiefs which they might bring upon themselves
and others, by so great a Liberty as they have had during our Anarchy.

Moreover as it should be the intent of all Humane Constitutions in every
Society, to aim directly at the general good of all, and specially in the
Church, to aim at the Benefit and Comfort of the weakest and dullest
capacities, as well as of the quickest apprehensions; such public Prayers
ought to be received, which suit with the meanest abilities. Now I dare affirm,
that these extemporary Prayers are not of that nature. They may be so happy to
please the Corrupt Humor of the Hearer with the novelty of the invention, with
the vehemence of the expression, with the pleasantness of the affected Tone;
but they are not so fit to be publicly offered up to God, as the known,
approved and ordinary Prayers of the Church, and are not able to prevail so
much upon our affections, were we but inwardly moved with a right zeal for
God's Glory: Neither can we so readily say Amen to such sudden Prayers,
proceeding from these gifted Men, as to those with which we are perfectly well
acquainted, and which we know to be agreeable with God's will; for in such
cases we have need at every expression to make a judicious reflection whether
what is said is true or false, right or wrong, before we can heartily subscribe
to such Prayers; whereas there is no such need in the Public Prayers of the
Church, which we understand before: There we have nothing else to do, but to
stir up the affections of our Souls, that we may join unanimously together, and
offer them up to God. Therefore the gift of extemporary praying, is not of such
use, and carries not with it that real Benefit which some lightly imagine; I am
certain that persons of a weak and slow apprehension, are not so able and apt
to receive benefit from them as from the known Prayers of the Church. The
unusual expressions of other new Prayers, may be better able to move their
Fancy, but they are not so able to stir up the affections of such as bring an
unprejudiced mind, and that look more upon the things, than the manner of
expressing; for other dainty Ears, and of a quicker apprehension, it may be
that a new and eloquent Prayer may be more acceptable and more beneficial than
to the duller sort; but it requires from them a greater Labor and an
extraordinary Motion and Activity of the Soul, as well as an extraordinary
ability to join in such Prayers. And for the persons that utter them, if they
be extempore, without any premeditation, and of a long continuance, I dare
affirm, that they are full of imperfections and confusion in the composure, and
that the persons that speak them, are far from the disposition needful in
Prayer. Whilst their Hands and their Eyes are lifted up, their Souls and its
Faculties are employed in seeking for fit words to declare the conceptions of
the mind; and in the mean time it thinks not of, and is not able, as it should,
to call upon God, and concern its inclinations in the Requests that are
presented to him. For sudden Ejaculations and Emissions of the Soul and Mind to
God, the same reason holds not, because there is not the same order,
contrivance and agility of the Soul required. For these and other causes, Set
Forms either before us in a Book, or recorded in our Memories, which may as
suddenly supply us with the Words and matter, are the best methods of praying
to God, chiefly in his Public Worship.

But if we have any regard to God our merciful Creator, I think there is no
person so simple as to imagine that the Eloquency of the Tongue, or unusual
expressions, can have a greater influence upon him, than the Common Prayers of
the Church. It is not the Tongue but the Heart that God Eyes in all our
Services. The whisperings and private Complaints of the one are heard, when the
loud Cries of the other are rejected. The Door of Mercy flies open at the
beatings of a devout Heart, when it remains bolted at the furious assaults of
the most eloquent Tongue. Therefore as it should be our chief regard in Prayer,
to examine that which is most pleasing to God, not that which gratifies our own
Humor: We should choose those Prayers to offer up to him, wherein our Hearts
may be as well concerned as our Tongues. In order thereunto, as the Set Forms
of Prayer are the greatest helps that we can procure, both to the learned and
the unlearned, to the wise and the ignorant, I see no reason wherefore Men
should be deprived of them, and extemporary Prayers set up. Those Forms I mean,
where things are spoken, and not only words; where the Conceptions are plainly
expressed, and the Prayers fitted for the use of the weakest Capacities. They
can never be too plain, nor too easy; and the Wise and the Learned ought not
to think it a trouble to condescend in their Public Worship, to requests
worded in a manner answerable to the meanest abilities; for Christianity
requires from them an Union with the weakest of their Brethren, who is in as
great a likelihood of God's mercy, and obtaining God's Glory, as persons of the
greatest Reach and Judgment.

I know, that it is the common use of our Dissenting Brethren, to upbraid us in
our Devotions, with too much Formality, in regard of our being so fond of Set
Forms, with an exclusion of all new composed Prayers. I heartily wish that we
our selves, the Clergy and the People, did not give cause for this aspersion;
but that it may not deceive the ignorant with its first plausible appearance,
let me tell them, that we are not guilty of Formality, nor to be condemned for
it, because that we use set and prescribed Forms, but because we use them not
right, with that Devotion, Respect, Humility, and inward Affection, as becomes
Christians and Petitioners of the God of Heaven: Because in our Public
Service, we repeat only the Words, and mind not the uttering them with the
affections of the Soul; because some make it only a trade to go to Prayer,
others run them over as a Task, and too many mind the Form, but few mind the
Substance of Prayer; that is, to express and offer them up to God with those
inward qualifications and outward humility, that I have now recommended to the
practice of our Christian Brethren. This causes me to pass to the second
particular, that I have promised to examine. The causes of the Peoples Contempt
of our Liturgy, and their neglect of the Forms of Prayer, enjoined in our
Church of England.

I could name a great many Causes that we our selves give; but I shall reduce
them all, for brevity sake, to these six following.

First, I must accuse the Clergy, both high and low, great and small, for
having given the greatest cause of the contempt of our Liturgy and Rubric, by
their indifferent Practices: By their over hasty reading of them, and by their
omission of that respect which they should outwardly express, and that devotion
which is due to God; they give occasion to many, to slight the very Prayers
themselves. As they are the Peoples mouths to God, they should be the Peoples
Examples and Patterns, to show them how to beg God's Mercies, as well as to
endeavor to obtain them for their relief. And the greater care they should
take to observe all the motions of reverence, because their practice has so
great an influence upon the Congregation, and is of so great a consequence,
that they oblige Men to esteem those Prayers that are offered up to God. For
this reason, a person that officiates in the audience of a Congregation, should
read over the Prayers, not as we peruse a Story in a Book, but with his Hands
and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, and upon his knees; he ought to pronounce the
Prayers, as if he were speaking to God's Divine Majesty, visibly present, and
to deliver them with the most apparent signs of sincerity, of reverence and
earnestness imaginable: Endeavor to grace the godly Prayers of the Church,
with thy graceful and comely delivery, with thy decent and respectful postures
and gestures, and let the Eyes of the Assembly learn from thee, my reverend
Brother, the manner how to pray, as well as the words and expressions of
Prayer; O! let not the negligence and sloathfulness of so many be laid to thy
charge, but strive to be zealously affected thy self, that this disposition may
be communicated to thy hearers. I speak to you chiefly, whose office and
happiness it is, to sing daily praises to God, in Cathedral Churches. Think not
that you have sufficiently discharged your Duty, if you have observed your
distances, your tunes, and pleased the Auditors with your melodious Voices: O!
Remember, my Christian Brother, that thou must likewise please thy God with the
harmony of the Soul, and tune as well his praises with the inward affections,
as well as with the outward concerts of Music. Take heed lest thy behavior,
or thy negligent discharge of thy Duty, give scandal to our dissenting
Brethren, who are too apt to be offended at the least sign of weakness, which
thou may discover at such a time.

Secondly, Another cause of the contempt of our Liturgy, given by the Clergy,
is the negligence of the Superior and wealthiest Clergy, who seldom read the
Prayers of the Church themselves, unless it be some small portion, but commonly
employ their Deacons, or the meanest persons of the Church, to offer up those
Prayers that are of the greatest concernment to us, and the chiefest of the
Rubric. As if that Office were too mean for their Promotions and Dignity,
whereas it is the most glorious Employment that we Men can pretend to: It makes
us like our divine and great Savior, who intercedes for us in the presence of
God, and offers up our Requests. Is there any that names himself a Christian,
that scorns to imitate the Author of our Salvation, and to offer up the Prayers
of their Congregations to God? No person can be too worthy for so excellent an
Employment; and because the usual method observed in Cathedrals, cannot well be
changed; I could wish that the Superior Clergy, the Bishop, the Dean, and the
Canons, would sometimes perform those parts of Devotion, which they have
totally appropriated to the meanest of their Foundation and Society; that
thereby they might remove from the minds of Men, the disesteem of our Prayers,
which they are apt to conceive and entertain thereby. For as in the Days of
Jeroboam, Men took occasion to contemn Religion it self, when he had made the
lowest of his People, the Priests of his High Places, and the promoters of
Religion; so likewise in our time, Men, especially our Enemies, are more
inclinable to despise our excellent Prayers, because they are most employed to
offer them up to God in the name of the People, who are in a mean station in
the Church, and have but sorrowful abilities.

Thirdly, I must not forget another cause of the Peoples despising our Godly
Prayers, which many Ministers who are too highly conceited of their parts do
give. It Is in mangling, cutting short, and leaving out the Prayers of the
Church, to make more room for the delivery of their own proud conceptions,
either in Prayer or a Sermon, contrary to the Public Injunctions of our
Superiors; for by this action they declare openly their own disrespect of the
Forms of Prayer, their unwillingness to use them, that they are thereunto
merely compelled, and their too high esteem of their own inventions. And when
the People see them hasten them over so speedily, they are wont to be
prejudiced with strange conceits of these excellent Prayers, or at least, not
to esteem nor use them as they ought. Therefore I would advise my Reverend
Brethren, not to shorten the public Prayers, but carefully, diligently, and
constantly to observe the Rules commanded; and which they are the more engaged
to obey, because their disobedience is apt to encourage and foment the Peoples
disregard of these Prayers, which they might use with so much advantage to
their Souls, had they that affection for them which they really deserve.

Fourthly, The public behavior of many of the Nobility, Gentry, and persons
whose Examples are regarded, is another cause of the Peoples disesteem of our
Liturgy. When Men of Learning, of Wealth, and of Honor, assist at the
Devotions of their Brethren, without expressing any respect for them, and
without bearing any part in the Service of the Church, others are discouraged
from the use of it. This we see almost in every Congregation, some of the Chief
are commonly distasted at some part of our praying or praising of God, in
which, they will show no sign of devotion; or it may be, the Gentlemen of the
Parish are not so religious as they should be, therefore they think it
sufficient for them, if they bring their Bodies to the Public Prayers, though
they remain there in God's presence, as so many Stocks or Brutes, without
expressing any Devotion for the Prayers, or any Worship to their Creator. If
these seasonable lines shall happen to fall into the hands of any of you, whose
Nobility and Extraction deserves the esteem of the rest of the Nation; consider
how highly you your selves would be offended, if your Servants and Tenants
should appear before you, to demand your assistance in their wants, with as
much disrespect as you appear before the God of Heaven, unto whom you are but
Tenants for life, or it may be for a shorter time. Would you be ready to reward
their contempt of your person, with the grant of their desires? Would not you
be ready to check their impudency and sauciness, if they should treat you as
they do their Laborers? And what think you, my Lords and Gentlemen, of your
disrespectful and contemptuous approaches before God, your great Creator? Do
not you stand in need of his assistance and blessings? And if you do, is this
the means to obtain it, to slight those Prayers which are presented to God for
the increase of your happiness and prosperity? For your own honor, be not the
greatest Clowns of your Congregation in God's presence; but as you excel the
rest in Nobility of Blood, endeavor to excel them also in your respects to
God, in your zeal and devotion to him; render to him publicly with your
Bodies, that homage which he claims and deserves from you for all his favors.
Interess your selves in our praising of his holy Name, and in our Prayers to
him. Employ the credit of your Estates and Promotions which God's Providence
has given you to promote his Glory and Worship. Why should you be so
unthankful to his goodness, to be a reproach, to his Profession, and not to
honor him who has bestowed so much honor upon your persons? O! Remember that
the higher you are exalted above other Men, the lower you are engaged to stoop
to this good God, chiefly in public, in his Worship before the Eyes of the
World, seeing that your neglect in this case, will not be only injurious to
him, but disgraceful to your noble persons, and prejudicial to all the
assistants.

Fifthly, Moreover the slanders, the filthy jestings, and the irreligious
pastimes of profane Persons, in these last corrupt days, upon the Book of
Common Prayer, have strangely filled many minds (religiously disposed) with
strong prejudices against it: And when they have seen the the greatest
pretenders to Religion, with the Authorty of the Nation, pass a sentence of
Condemnation upon these Forms of Prayer, as well as the prophaner sort; when
they yet see many Wise, Godly and Conscientious Men, stand stiffly in oposition
to their reception, the weaker sort of Men, that commonly judge of things and
persons, by the general Vote, are ready to look upon them as superstitious and
unlawful. The schismatical scrupulosity of the one, and the wicked Blasphemies
of the other, have discredited this excellent Book, among such as are not wont
to examine the true worth of things; for the prophaner sort, it is too well
known, that there is nothing so sacred or holy, but they have offered Violence
to it. God and his Sacraments, his Laws and Constitutions, Christ and our
Redemption, Heaven and Hell, our present Enjoyments and suture Hopes, are all
turned into Ridicule by those monstrous Wits, whose Religion and Faith is
limited by their Senses. No wonder therefore, if they continue to abuse the
constant Prayers and Service of the Church. But certainly the Religion of those
persons is not well grounded, when they are to be scoffed out of it; and their
belief is not well settled, if every profane jest can oblige them to call it in
question. If we may be persuaded by these frothy wits to change our religious
Customs, Ceremonies and Prayers, we shall quickly become as wicked as
themselves, and banish Religion it self out of the Land. They are no competent
Judges of our Devotions who were never devout, but rather their malicious
expressions should confirm Men of discretion, in their esteem of those pious
things which they condemn, because they were never inclinable to Piety, and
their Tempers are repugnant to it, and to those Godly Rules that reproach them
for their licentiousness. Let these considerations therefore strengthen the
weakness of such as are apt to be thereby persuaded to a dereliction of these
Godly Forms.

And for the other Enemies of our Common Prayer, their Conversations seem to
insinuate the equity of their Judgments, because they are persons of a
religious behavior, and good manners; their prejudices therefore against our
Rubric, are more dangerous. But if a judicious and pious Soul would take the
pains to sift them out, and examine the Causes of their invincible prejudices,
they shall either find none, or such slender ones as may cause us to wonder at
their stiffneckedness and strange fancies. Such, I am sure, as renders them
most ridiculous to all foreign Churches of Christ. Their most ordinary and
popular Complaint is, that it is Popish, and taken out of the Mass Book. An
Error which any Man will acknowledge, if he will but compare our Prayers with
the Popish Prayers of the Liturgy of Rome. Can that be Popish which opposes
all the Errors and mistakes of the Papists? which teaches us to pray for God's
assistance and direction against all the Heresies, Plots and Conspiracies of
the Pope? which was in use in the Christian Church, before ever there was any
Antichristian Pope at Rome? Can that be reckoned to be Popish which is
agreeable with the Revelations of the Holy Spirit, with the Doctrines and
belief of the best Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, and which their most
Orthodox Divines Embrace as most consonant with their Faith and Piety? The
Creed, the ten Commandments, and the Lord's Prayer, may with as much likelihood
be said to be Popish, or to be taken out of the Mass Book, because the Papists
have them in their Breviarium. To all unprejudiced persons this accusation
appears a mere Calumny, unless any of those refined Souls could spy out, and
show us any particular in the Common Prayer which savours of the Romish Errors,
and tends to promote the Pope's Interest amongst us. But it is the usual
practice of abusive tongues, when they cannot instance any certain Crime, to
bring their accusation in gross, that their malice may be less discernable, and
their charge may be more weighty. But let not the vain and groundless conceits
of Popery and Superstition deter thee, my Christian Brother, from making use,
with Comfort to thy Soul, of these Godly Prayers. Let not these mistaken
Brethren infect thy judgment with the same troublesome Error. Examine and try,
search into every Corner of this Book, and see whether thou can find any
color of Popery; that is to say, any sign of those Errors which are in
Controversy between us and the Papists. Let not their impostures prevail so
much upon thy discretion, as to cause thee to take for Popery, what is
agreeable with Christ's true Religion and Doctrines. It has always been the
glory of our Church of England, to be most conformable, of all other Churches,
to the belief, Government, and Practices of the Primitive and first Churches of
Christ. Therefore in this of the Liturgy, our Church recommends that manner of
praying which is most like that of the first Ages, and which is most answerable
to our Government and condition; as our glorious Martyr, and our late Sovereign
of Blessed Memory, declares in vindication of the Prayers of the Church in his
incomparable Book.

All other accusations as well as this, savor more of malice and displeasure,
than right Reason, and tend to this ungracious end, to abolish Order and Method
in Prayer, and to introduce a sad and unreasonable Confusion in our Worshipping
of God. Let therefore every good Christian take heed, if he himself has such
an invincible prejudice against these Forms enjoined in our Church, that he
cannot use them himself with any Comfort to his Soul, that he disturb not
others minds with the same Schismatical mistakes, and spread not abroad what I
could wish were consined to the bottomless Pit. Let him not hinder others from
the Benefit which they may reap from a hearty and zealous Offering up of these
Prayers to God. Abstain, my Christian Brother, from Blaspheming that which thou
do not perfectly understand, or that which thou hate without a just cause.
Draw not others into the same prejudice, and be not uncharitable, to think our
Devotions not acceptable to our good God, because thou have an implacable
displeasure against them. Think not that Piety is confined to thy Breast alone,
and to those of thy Sect. Lay aside, I beseech thee, that bitterness, that
peevishness and froward temper which makes thee fret at our good Order, and
Christian Discipline: If thou perceivest any faults, coldness, dullness, or
unhandsom Actions in private persons, charge not their miscarriages upon our
Church, or Rubric; but be so reasonable, not to proclaim thine unreasonable
distastes, to the prejudice of others and thy self.

Sixthly, I cannot forget to mention another Cause of Men's contempt of our
Forms and Rubric, which is, That they are brought up in the ignorance of that
manner of presenting them to God, which might cause them to meet with true
comfort and real benefit. For I know some that have constantly attended at the
Public Prayers of the Church, and have for many years scarce omitted any
opportunity that did invite them; yet because they knew not how to use them as
they should, they have not at any time found that inward content which they now
think to receive from new Modes of Prayer; and at last have totally forsaken
them, crying out most bitterly against their former Formality, luke-warmness,
and indifferency in Prayer. As if that unfit temper proceeded from the Prayers,
and not from the ignorance of their minds, which when it is strengthened by
prejudice, Education, or Interest, is the greatest cause of their
dissatisfaction at our Prayers used in the Church; and that which deprives them
of the advantages which they might receive from them. This Ignorance is the
greatest Enemy of our Liturgy, and of our public peace; which if any person be
willing to expel, for his own, and the Churches benefit, let him seriously
consider, and make use of these directions, which will show him how to offer up
our Prayers with comfort to his Soul.

I have already set down general directions to pray well, which every good
Christian ought to learn to practice in all Prayers presented to God; Third
particular.
but besides those which suit with all tempers and sorts of Men, I suppose that
some advices besides may be given more particularly, and more proper for those
persons amongst us that are dissatisfied with our Prayers and Liturgy, and
prejudiced against it. Some advices, I mean, that may have a special regard to
their causeless mistakes and the Prayers of the Church. And truly I judge many
stand in great need of these directions, who are well skilled in other kinds of
Devotion; for prejudice here suffers them not to learn, or at least not to
practice what their affection teaches them in other Cases to perform without a
Teacher; if we may have the Charity to believe what they affirm, That they are
truly and zealously affected in the Prayers which are of their Ministers
Composure, and that they can join their hearts in Devotion with them; for I
very much question whether those persons that seem outwardly to be so disposed,
are really so in their hearts, and whilst they are, or may be delighted with
the Prayer, whether their Souls are truly in a praying temper.

First, Endeavor to be heartily reconciled with the Godly Forms of Prayer
recommended in our Church, employ Reason and Conscience to persuade thy self,
my Christian Brother, to embrace what Duty commands, that Duty which thou owe
to Authority, and thy interest obliges thee to practice: Why should prejudice
keep thee always blindfolded? Why should Men of perverse judgments and corrupt
designs, impose upon thy judgment such gross mistakes? Why will thou dote upon
thine own Errors, and entertain them with so much stiffness, as if thy
Salvation did thereupon depend; those Errors I mean, that cause thee to look
upon our Prayers and Devotions as superstitious, and make so great a breach in
the Church where we live? Make it thy business to understand the true ground of
thine and others displeasures at our Forms of Prayer. Take not things of that
high concernment upon trust, and captivate not thy discretion to the judgment
of others never so learned, but with the assistance of Reason, and holy
Scripture rightly interpreted, labor to lift out the Truth. To these and such
like endeavors, make use of Prayer to the God of peace, that he may expel and
drive away all the Mists of Error, which keep thee at a distance from our
manner of worshipping our great God. Consider the necessity of those things
that are therein desired, the integrity of their first Composers, the
approbation of foreign Reformed Churches, the Commands and Injunctions of the
wise Governors of the Church and State, who have no other intent, in all their
Laws relating to this purpose, but thy Salvation and the public Peace and
Uniformity. Is it possible that thou excellest them in discretion and judgment,
and that they are all mistaken in the good end which they purpose to
themselves? Without this reconcilement, it is not possible for thee to receive
any benefit from our Prayers by joining with us, for thy Soul will never offer
up heartily to God that for which it has a strong aversion.

Secondly, Overcome in thy Soul all inward displeasure which thou have
conceived against the Person of thy Minister officiating, or distastes at his
behavior and actions. What if he be openly scandalous, or at variance with
thee; Let not his guiltiness cause thee to be guilty of irregularity, or
neglecting thy Duty to God, and the interest of thy Soul. Let not your mutual
dissatisfaction cause you to be dissatisfied with God and his Worship. Such
Wicked Varlets as Hophni and Phineas, are too apt to cause many to slight the
Offerings of the Lord; but they are not therefore excusable before God, who
requires an obedience to his Laws, from every distinct person, and allows not
the vitiousness of the one to be pleaded for the disorderly behavior of the
other.

But certain it is, that whilst thou art inwardly displeased with thy Minister,
thou can never conjoyn thine heart with the Godly Prayers which proceed out
of his mouth; whilst thou art offended with his person, his Prayers and his
Words will never benefit thee much. I shall not examine the many frivolous
causes of distastes, which the Men of our days entertain against the Clergy;
but this I dare affirm, That it is both the Duty and Interest of a Parishioner
to smother his anger and displeasure conceived against his Minister, specially
at the time of Divine Service, when he is drawing near to God in Prayer, if he
will be in a possibility of praying right. Look not on him at that time as
thine Enemy, but as thy Friend, who prays for thy necessities as well as his
own; look not on him as one at a distance from thee, but reconciled in the
common Duties of Religion. God forbid that the usual differences of Men about
Worldly Interests, should separate us in God's presence from one another, and
cause our variances to be eternal. If therefore we are likely, notwithstanding
our present debates, to meet unanimously to worship God's Majesty for all
Eternity, and sing to him angelical Halelujahs hereafter, why may we not now
suppress our displeasures, stifle our passions, and reconcile our selves in the
Worship of our great Creator and common Benefactor? For that intent it concerns
thee not to mind so much the Person, as the Petitions, not so much the Minister
as God, for whose sake, and at whose command thou art ready to forget the most
sensible wrongs, and check the strongest passions of hatred and displeasure.

Thirdly, Think not that the vicious behavior of any in the Congregation, will
be a prejudice to thy Prayers, or hinder their accptance. It is the common
excuse of Men that are willing to excuse themselves from the Duties of
Religion, That in our public Assemblies all sorts of persons are promiscuously
admitted, and that they cannot join in Prayers with the openly debauched, or
with persons that are known to be scandalous. But this vain pretense proceeds
many times from a proud conceit of our own Sanctity, and favors of the
Pharisees temper in the Gospel, who had so much of impudence in his Prayer to
God, that the Publican's Humility was preferred before him. God that sees all
our actions and tempers, knows how to put a disterence between thy relegious
behavior, and the Vices of a wicked Christian. It Is not thy Neighbor's
ungodliness that can prejudice thy Devotions. Why should thou be offended
with that which God allows; and the public Unity and Peace of the Church
requires? We could wish that in our public Assemblies all were Saints and
Angels; but seeing that is not to be expected, to cull and pick out every
vicious person, or such as may be thought to be so by some ill-willers, I am
afraid scarce any would be left. We must therefore bear with that which is not
to be avoided, and take heed that we disturb not the public quiet more than
the vicious and the profane, by our indiscreet and Schismatical niceties.

Fourthly, If thou will offer up the Prayers of the Church with benefit to thy
Soul, and with the affections of thy Heart, carefully observe the motions of
the Body enjoined in the Common Prayer; who knows but that this submission, and
this custom will have a speedy influence upon thy mind to cause thy Soul to
join in the same respects to God. Certain it is, that the nearness of Relation
between them, will beget a mutual compliance between the actions of the one and
the affections of the other, so that the often practicing of things must needs
reconcile us to those performances, and remove the strongest prejudices that
are not grounded in reason, nor strengthened by divine Revelation. If therefore
any weak Brother cannot at present comply with the Devotions of the Church of
England; if he finds an inward repugnancy for the public Prayers, which
hinders him from receiving the comfort and benefit thereby intended, let him
follow and try my advice but a few Months. Let him force his Body to observe
all the motions of Respect commanded in the Rubric. Let him stand up when we
give glory to God, and sing forth his praises. Let him kneel in Prayer, and
outwardly observe a due reverence, and he shall find that his former aversion
will insensibly wear away, and by degrees he will bring his Soul to a hearty
and religious compliance with those godly Forms of Prayer, which before he
could never use with any satisfaction to his mind; he shall find his unhappy
humor of discontent evaporate it self, and his Body draw after the Soul and
its faculties, to a sincere worshipping of our good God, in the manner that is
practiced amongst us.

Fifthly, To use the Prayers of the Church with that devotion that is needful,
a frequent meditation upon them is very requisite. A Meditation, I mean, upon
the necessity of those things that are there desired; upon the advantage of
Uniformity and Unity in God's divine Worship; upon their agreeableness with
holy Scripture, its Doctrines and Expressions; upon the express Commands of the
King and the wise Councils of our Nation, under four or five Kings
successively, who unanimously enjoin the use of these Prayers in the public
Worship of God; upon the decency and reasonableness of the Ceremonies, Order,
and manner of our Service; upon the frivolousness and Folly of all Objections
against it; upon the obstinacy and invincible hatred of all Objections. A
meditation also is requisite to this purpose, upon several matters suitable to
these godly Forms of Prayer. Such Meditations, I mean, as may elevate the Soul
to prepare and dispose it for a Holy Communion with God, and inflame our
affections, in order to a more zealous offering up of the public Prayers of
the Church to the Divine Majesty. Besides, to persuade the judgment and remove
all mistakes, I recommend to thee the perusal of a Rationale upon the
Common Prayer; that if by any means thou may be persuaded to a religious and
devout conformity in public to the Order of our Church.

But all this while methinks I hear a sort of Zealots amongst us, Extol and Cry
up the Praying by the Spirit, 4. Particular.
and that in opposition to the reading of the Forms prescribed by the Church. I
must speak a word to rectify their mistakes, and to prevent the mischiefs
which are thereby intended. For this good purpose I shall, First, examine what
Praying by the Spirit is, in the sense of St. Paul. Secondly, I shall prove
that for the most part, in all Extemporary fluencies of Prayer, though they be
the gifts of the Spirit, such persons as use them at that very instant, can
scarce be said to pray in the Spirit. Thirdly, I shall plainly demonstrate,
that the easiest and surest way to Pray in the Spirit, is to take the
assistance of well composed Forms of Prayer, and to have them either in a Book
before our Eyes, or well imprinted in our Memories. They are in a grievous
Error, that imagine that St. Paul's praying in or by the Spirit, opposes the
Practice of our Church of England, and strengthens the irregular Devotions of
the gifted Brethren. For if you please to Examine the meaning of St. Paul, you
shall find that he never intended any such matter. In the 6th. Chap. to the
Ephesians, and 18 ver. he exhorts them to pray with all Prayer and Supplication
in every Season, (...), in the Spirit, which he cannot understand of the
Prayers proceeding from the extraordinary inspirations or abilities bestowed
upon us by God, the giver of every good gift; because such inspirations are not
common to all, and every one has not such a quick Fancy or voluble Tongue, to
be able to pray in this manner; so that every Person is not in a capacity to
fulfill this Command, which, as all other Commands of God, is proportioned, and
has a special regard to Men's faculties and abilities. Therefore seeing these
words are directed to every Christian, they relate not to the gift, but to that
which is commonly styled the Spirit, or rather to the Duty of Prayer, which
every Christian may peform by using endeavors. St Paul's meaning therefore is,
that we should in our Prayers to God, not be content with the Lip Service, but
inwardly heartily, and affectionately, to pray to him, and employ all the
abilities of the Soul in offering them up to God; for in this part of our
Devotions, we must observe the same method, as in the others, and act with the
same abilities. Now St. Paul in the 5th Chap. to the Ephesiens, and the 19th
ver., advises them to make Melody in their Hearts to the Lord. Here is that
spiritual Service required from us, a serious, real, and hearty Worship,
wherein the Soul is concerned as well as the Body. Likewise our Savior Christ,
in answer to the Woman of Samaria, tells her, that God is a Spirit, and that
they that will worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. That is in
opposition to the Corporal appearances of the Jews at Jerusalem, an inward and
soul Worship, without which all our most assidual attendances upon holy Duties,
are frivolous and vain. In the same sense, we are to understand St. Paul's
praying and singing with the Spirit, in 1 Cor. 14.14. for he expressly says, if
I pray in an unknown Tongue, my Spirit prays. He caleth it his Spirit, that
is, his Soul, which must be concerned in all our Prayers to God, either by
composing them and offering them, or else by presenting the Prayers already
composed in such a manner, with the understanding and affections, that they may
proceed from us as our own.

I confess St. Jude's words, ver. 20. seems to favor the contrary
interpretation, when he advises to pray (...), in the Holy Ghost. Which words
the admirers of new Modes and extemporary Prayers, understand of the gift of
Prayer, that we should depend upon the Spirit of God, and expect from his
secret inspirations, the matter and manner of our Prayers, without limitting
our selves, and this unlimited Being, to any certain Form. That we should make
use of those expressions as proceed immediately from his divine suggestions.
But this can never be the meaning of this wise Apostle; for though it were
true, what this interpretation supposes, that all the faithful have the gift
of Prayer, and are inspired with the Holy Ghost. That in that Duty he governs
their Tongues and Fancy, and furnishes them with proper expressions, words, and
matter, which I confess may happen in extraordinary occasions; yet in our
ordinary Devotions, to expect such extraordinary movings of God's Holy Spirit
in our Souls, not to contribute any thing of our selves, but our weaknesses and
unpreparedness, and wholly to depend upon the Holy Ghost, is a presumption and
indiscretion which agrees not with God's usual methods, of acting with his
Creatures, neither in Nature nor in Grace; for his Blessings and Power appear
commonly in our Religious endeavors, and if he gives the Form and Beauty to
any thing, he takes the matter from those things that he has already made.

But take notice, that St. Jude advises us to pray, not by the Holy Ghost, but
in the Holy Ghost. That is, either in that method and manner, or according to
those Rules which the Holy Ghost has given us in his holy Word; for the Greek
word (...) signifies according. The meaning therefore is, That we should pray
for those things that agree with the Revelations of the Holy Ghost, that we
should observe those particulars outwardly and inwardly, as may recommend our
Prayers to God, and employ those graces which the Holy Ghost has bestowed upon
us, for a more zealous offering up of our Prayers to God. A true Christian may
want the gift of Prayer, but no true and sincere Christian can want the Spirit
of Prayer in the state of regeneration, nor those inward abilities which are
requisite for Prayer. For this inward breathing of the Soul toward Heaven, is
the very life of a Child of God, and a principle of all Spiritual motion.
Though he is not always in the same disposition and a fit temper for Prayer,
because these abilities may be hindered, and obstructed by some powerful
impediments; nevertheless the work of regeneration is no sooner begun in us,
but we are taught by the Holy Ghost, to call God Abba Father. Therefore St.
Paul teaches in his Epistle to the Romans, chap. 8. v. 26. That the Spirit
helps our Infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot
be uttered. Observe Romans 10. v. 1.
This and all other passages that mention praying in, or by the Spirit, may
encourage us to take with us the assistance of God's Holy Spirit in our
addresses to him, and employ the abilities which he has given us for that good
purpose. They may take notice of our own natural imperfections and weaknesses,
and advise us to make use of the Spiritual helps that the Holy Ghost gives us;
that we might pray to God in a manner acceptable to him. But there is none that
forbids the use of those Forms, which God's holy Spirit has Established in our
Church. There is no passage nor Text of Scripture, that requires thee to wait
for a sudden inspiration from above, that disallows of a judicious and
religious preparation, or of prescribed Prayers, composed by Men as much
enlightened by the Spirit of God, as any now alive. Why therefore may not the
use of these Prayers, be called praying by the Spirit, if I offer them up in
that devout manner as God requires? Why shall I prefer the new Modes of Men,
whose abilities and integrity I know not perhaps, to those that I am sure are
agreeable with God's Will and Word? Why shall I reject the old Prayers of the
Holy Ghost, and be so impatient to hear new, which I know not from whence they
are, till I have taken the pains to examine them?

If therefore I am an auditor, what reason have I to refuse the Prayers of the
Church, composed by the directions of the Spirit of God, to be of a constant
use in the Public Worship of our great Creator, to be so fond of new Modes and
new Prayers of Men, that pretend to a divine inspiration, but how truly I know
not? God's Holy Spirit is no favourer of the pride, presumption and sanciness
of those persons that rush into God's Public Worship without a due
preparation. And if they be prepared both for matter and expressions in the
public Prayers which they pronounce, what reason have I to prefer this Prayer
composed by this private Person, though with the assistance of God's Holy Spirit,
to the religious Prayers of the whole Church, allowed of by so many wise,
learned, and Godly Divines, enlightened also doubtless with the same Spirit? Is
that the Prayer, by, or in the Spirit? And is not this likewise, if I perform
it in a Spiritual manner, and offer it up with my Soul and affections? O! how
idle and frivolous! How vain and impertinent are these prejudices against our
Set Forms of Prayer!

Secondly, But these persons that are so much admired by ignorant People for
their praying by the Spirit, in Prayers of any long continuance, are admired
for that which they themselves cannot perform. For if they pray extempore
without prepararation, some in the Congregation may perhaps really pray to God,
but the persons, that pronounce the Prayers, whilst their fancy is so busily
employed in seeking for matter and expressions, can never oblige the affections
of the Soul to offer their Prayers up to God in that devout manner as is
required. This Prayer therefore, in regard of the Speaker, is but a Sp^ech and
no Prayer, let it be never so Eloquent, and never so much able to stir up the
Affections of the hearers. Our minds cannot be totally employed in two actions
at once; whilst our apprehensions are distracted to seek for words, and fit
expressions; they cannot be fixed upon that Divine Being, unto whom we make our
addresses; nor cause in the Soul that humility and those affections, which at
such a time are necessary; they cannot mind the greatness of their Wants, the
necessity of a speedy supply, and the usefulness of those things that are
petitioned for. Their Souls cannot be at liberty to express the homage due to
God's greatness, and an earnest affection for those Blessings that they stand
in need of. All their care is to move the Tongue and not the Heart, whilst the
one is busily employed, the other is unconcerned in the Service.

I cannot think that there are any of such an extraordinary, and quick
apprehension, as to be abe to furnish their Organ with plenty of matter and
expressions, and at the same moment, to mind all those things that are needful
to keep our Souls in a sit disposition for Prayer. It Is not possible to divide
this single Being into so many parts. Such an activity seems to me almost as
great a miracle, as that of the Ubiquity of Christ's Humane Body, and is
subject to the like absurdities. The Unity of the Soul, ^^d the Unity of all
its Faculties, require^ a single Object at once. It may be so quick as to sly
to another in an instant; but this change, and this motion of the apprehension,
incapable of two or three Objects at one single instant, plainly discovers the
impossibility of praying well, and keeping the Soul in a worthy disposition,
and the affections in a sit temper, in extemporary and long Prayers; because
the mind that should take this charge, and the care to summon the affections to
the performance of their Duty, is busily employed in other matters. Now without
this conjunction of the affections, and this concernment of the Soul, no
Devotion nor Prayer can be said to be spiritual, or performed with, or in the
Spirit; for though this should be understood of the holy Spirit of God, it is not
to be imagined that he will act in us without our assistance and cooperation,
and if he did, the Devotion is his, and none of ours.

For these and other Reasons, it is a matter of great difficulty, to keep the
unruly and wandering thoughts of the mind, and the several affections of the
Heart, with the other parts of the Soul, in a praying temper, in all
extemporary and long Prayers: Thirdly, Therefore the easiest and surest way to
pray in the Spirit, is to take the assistance of well composed Forms, and to
have them either in a Book before us, or well imprinted in our Memories. This
is a Consequence deducible from what we have already said concerning that
praying in, or by the Spirit, intended by St. Paul and St. Jude. But if there
be any so strongly prejudiced against Set Forms, and so much bewitched with the
pretended praying in, or by the Spirit, as to refuse to acquiesce to what we
have already alleged, let him seriously consider, That there can be no praying
in the Spirit, whatever interpretation we give to the passages of Holy
Scripture concerning that purpose, whether we understand them concerning the
Gift, or in relation to the Duty and Spirit of Prayer, without a real and
hearty compliance of the Soul with every expression; without an inward sense of
the things petitioned for, and without a devout composure of all the parts of
the Soul. Now if you enquire how this is produced in us? I must tell you that
it is not without our assidual endeavors, for the mind ought to have a
continual eye upon the Soul and disposition, it ought to recollect and call
back our wandering thoughts, and labor to express both a feeling of its wants,
and a dutiful reverence for the Majesty of God. This being of an absolute
necessity, in order to a zealous offering up of our Prayers in the Spirit, it
is needful that the mind should be at liberty for that purpose. Now let any Man
of Reason, seriously sider whether it has not more freedom in the use of Set
Forms, imprinted either in our memories, or our Books, than in extemporary
praying; whether it is not easier for the Soul in such a case to act its part,
and contribute to the Devotions, than in such Prayers where it has so many
Offices to perform? Grant it possible, that some of an extraordinary ability,
learning, and natural parts (which I cannot imagine to be) should be able to
discharge the inward Duty of the Soul in Prayer, as well as the outward, in
extemporary Prayers. Consider whether they cannot with more ease, pray with the
assistance of Set Forms. And why shall they be denied of those helps in a
business of so much weight and difficulty, wherein the holiest and most devout
Soul comes far short of that perfection and exactness which God's greatness
requites at our hands?

Secondly, That must needs be the easiest and surest way of praying by the
Spirit, which is offered to the weaker sort of Christians, as the readiest help
to their Devotions; for the duties of Religion are always proportioned to the
slender abilities of such persons: both God and the Church are wont to
condescend to their mean gifts, and furnish them with such assistances as they
want for the discharge of the Offices required from them. Now from the
beginning, Set Forms of Prayer have been allowed in the Churches of God to
these persons, because it is well known, that they are not able to express
themselves and their several wants to God as they should, and in that manner as
becomes us mortal Men. If therefore this manner of praying is, as it is
generally confessed, an help to the weaker kind of Christians, why may it not
be also to the stronger? No doubt but such a one may use these helps with more
advantage: A staff is good in the hand of a feeble body, to make it walk with
more assurance, and is likewise as beneficial to a strong person that
undertakes a long journey. The difference is, that the one cannot possibly walk
without it, and the other may march a few steps, and it may be, proceed on in
his way without it, but for more ease and better convenience, it is sit in a
tedious march, that he should have the assistance of a Staff, which may succor
his infirmities, and may comfort his wearied Limbs. Therefore it is not a
sufficient cause to oblige us to reject useful things, to say Men may be
without them. I think it wisdom not to cast away such beneficial helps to our
Devotions, as are Set Forms, because we may be so fond of our abilities, as to
think our selves able to compose some of an higher strain, and more passionate;
some that may gratify our own and the Peoples corrupt humor, which usually
despises things that are common, when they have not well considered their
worth.

Thirdly, Consider how apt our thoughts are to be wandering, and our minds to be
drawn aside from our Devotions. Therefore that is the easiest and surest way of
praying well, which sixeth our minds, and settles our thoughts upon the weighty
business in hand. Now I dare affirm, That there is nothing so well able to do
this good office to us, as Forms of Prayers judiciously composed, either
imprinted in our memories, or before us in a Book; for in the former method of
praying, the Soul is kept from wandering to and fro; and in the latter it is
tied and limited by the sense of seeing; and though in such cases it may take
the liberty to step aside, and escape out of the other senses, yet we must all
acknowledge, that a Judicious Christian can, by the assistance of his Senses,
be better able to limit and stop the wanderings of his mind, and the unruliness
of his thoughts, than when he has little or no use of them. To conclude,
Nothing but the pride and self-conceitedness of some, the prejudices and
foolish humors of others, have taught men to reject and contemn our set Forms
of Prayer, established in our Church of England; which, both for matter and
manner, are the best Liturgy that ever was used either in the Primitive or
Modern Churches of Christ: And there is nothing that hinders Men from using
them with comfort and advantage to their Souls, but their strong displeasures,
their frowad tempers, and their itching Ears; a Disease which has infected the
heart and fountain, as well as the Sense and Organ of hearing.

Let me therefore entreat thee, my Christian Reader, seriously to peruse these
Reasons that I have mentioned, and let not any popular Mistake, nor the
pretended Inspirations of the Spirit, discourage thee in the devour use of the
Prayers of our Church, chiefly in the public Worship of thy God; where Reason
and Religion require from thee Uniformity, and Unity with the rest of thy
Brethren. And in thy private Family I would have thee to use the same Prayers;
such, I mean, as are proper for that place and purpose.

I know that several Pious and Learned Men have lately, and in the former Age,
furnished our Nation with Books of this kind; but I think that their religious
labors, fitted for those times, and answerable to their private designs, will
not hinder this present Treatise from being useful in its kind, for the
prevention of the Mistakes lately crept in amongst us, and the mischiefs that
are intended by our Enemies at home and abroad. I find them busily employed in
contriving our ruin, and in poisoning our people with strange Principles, by
spreading in the Country new Pamphlets, printed for that evil purpose. I wish
that we were as watchful for our own preservation. The best means for that
intent, is to employ the same policy, and to furnish our People with new and
fresh advices, which may serve as Antidotes against the Venom of their Enemies
and ours. Such Treatises therefore as this, I think to be very seasonable for
our divided times. I am certain that it is much wanting in the place where I
live, and to the people committed to my Charge. My first design was only to
have a regard to their private wants, at the requests of one of my
Parishioners; but when I considered, that though Providence has given me a
particular inspection over the Inhabitants of a small division in a Wilderness,
it is my Duty to aim in all my actions at the general good, I resolved to
recommend to the public, such a Treatise as might serve, and be useful to all
Families in our Reformed Church; and in it to have a general aim at the benefit
of all Christians; for I think that there is none in the state of Grace, or
within the limits of Christ's Church, but he shall in this short Tract find
Prayers and Advices which may suit with the condition and temper of his Soul.

You therefore that desire that Religion should flourish amongst us, neglect
not its chief Duty, but see that it be carefully observed in your own practice,
and that of those recommended to your care. As soon as your Children begin to
speak, teach them to cry Abba Father, which art in Heaven. Call upon them
Morning and Evening, to implore Protection and Assistance. Let their Tongues be
used betimes, to tune forth the Praises of their Maker, and acknowledge the
Providence of God. Remember that Piety, with the Blessings of Heaven, is the
best and most durable portion which you can procure to your little ones. And
the only means to obtain it, is carefully to practice this and all other Duties
of Religion. As they grow to years of Understanding: Let them proceed on in
learning the Prayers that are sit for their capacity, and suitable to their
Abilities. Let them know that their chief dependency is upon that Almighty
Being, who has created the World, and put them into it, to serve and worship
him. This daily practice of seeking to God in Prayer, will keep youth from all
those extravagancies and vicious actions, by which the Gallants of our time are
become a reproach to Christianity and Humanity it self. Thou shall never have
the displeasure to see thy Son and thy Daughter either unruly in their
behavior, or profane in their discourse, or corrupt in their Lives; if thou will, when they are young, train them up in the constant and continual
observance of this Duty of Prayer; for there is nothing more proper, and of a
greater force, to keep the Souls of Men from the temptations of our days, and
from all disorders, as this Correspondency with God in Prayer. Man therefore,
in this respect, is like a Watch or a Clock, the least neglect disturbs the
Motion, and steals him insensibly into improficiency or an ossence. Pray
therefore, O Christian Man or Woman! and pray without ceasing: In prosperity
and adversity, let your requests be made known unto God: Be not silent when God
requires you to speak: In whatsoever estate Providence may cast you, make use
of those Prayers that are answerable to your condition. If you can offer up the
Prayers of our Church with any satisfaction to your minds, use them rather than
others. But if your prejudices be so strong, and your aversion so invincible,
that you cannot yet relish them, use the other Prayers more agreeable to your
affections. However, neglect not this most important, this most weighty, and
most indispensible Duty, but perform it with all the Care and Devotion that
God's greatness, and thy mean condition requires from thee.

And I beseech the God of all Goodness, to hear thy Requests, to grant thy
Petitions, to comfort and refresh thy Soul and Body with Spiritual and Temporal
Mercies; and that this Treatise may be as useful to the Public, as it is
intended by

M. D.

A Morning Prayer FOR A FAMILY. According to the Book of Common Prayer.
O! Lord, who have promised that before we call, thou will answer, and whilst
we are yet speaking, Isa. 65.24. Psalm. 6.1. Psalm. 25.1^. Psalm. 51.10.
thou will hear. Rebuke us not in thine indignation, neither chasten us in thy
displeasure. For thy Names sake, be merciful to our sins. Make us clean Hearts,
O God, and renew a right Spirit within us.

O! Lord, we beseech thee, mercifully hear our Prayers, and spare all those who
confess their sins unto thee, that they whose Consciences by Sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O! Almighty Lord, and everlasting God, vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to direct,
sanctify, and govern both our Hearts and Bodies, in the ways of thy Laws, and
in the works of thy Commandments, that through thy most mighty protection, both
now and ever, we may be preserved in Body and Soul, through our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

PRevent us, O Lord! in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our Works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally, by thy Mercy, obtain
everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

BLessed be thy Holy Name, O Lord, for thy continual and daily Mercies granted
to us, for thy Protection and Preservation till this time, for the safety and
quiet. Repose of the last night, for the welfare and Health of our Bodies, and
for all thy Temporal Blessings which thou heapest upon us. Gracious God, we
acknowledge these and all other Mercies which we enjoy, to be undeserved
Favors proceeding from thy bountiful hand, and fatherly goodness: Continue
them we beseech thee to us, and all other things needful for our Souls and
Bodies; and give us grace, in the use of them, to glorify thy great Name, and
to be truly thankful in our Hearts and Lives for all expressions of thine
unwearied Liberality. All this we beg for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O God, the Protector of all that put their trust in thee, without whom nothing
is strong, nothing is holy, increase and multiply in us thy Mercy, that thou
being our Ruler and Guide, we may so pass through things Temporal, that we
finally lose not the things Eternal, for Jesus Christ his sake, our Lord. Amen.

GRant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that the Course of this World may be so
peaceably ordered by thy governance, that we and thy whole Church, may joyfully
serve thee in all Godly quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

LOrd of all Power and might, who art the Author and giver of all good things:
Graft in our Hearts the love of thy Name, increase in us true Religion, nourish
us with all goodness, and of thy great Mercy keep us in the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Merciful God, bless and preserve we pray thee, our Princes, defend them from
all their Enemies, direct them in all their Counsels, assist them in all their
religious purposes, grant them and the Church amongst us, peace and prosperity
in this Life, and everlasting Happiness in the life to come. Bless all the
Royal Family, the Nobility, the Magistrates, the Gentry and People of this
Land. Grant us Pea^e and Truth, and preserve us from Heresy, Schism,
Superstition, and Idolatry, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as w^ forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from all Evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

Another Morning Prayer for a Family, when Business is most urgent.
TUrn thy Face away from our sins, O Lord, and blot out all our Offenses.

Make us clean Hearts, O God, and renew right Spirits within us. Ps. 51.

Almighty and Everlasting God, mercifullly look upon our Infirmities, and in
all our dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy Right Hand to help and
defend us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, whose Blessed Son was manifested, that he might destroy the Works of
the Devil, and make us the Sons of God, and Heirs of Eternal Life, Grant us, we
beseech thee, that having this Hope, we may purify our selves, as he is pure,
that we may walk in newness of life, and follow the Examples of his Patience,
Piety and Holiness, that when he shall appear with Power and Glory, we may be
made like unto him, in his glorious Kingdom. Amen.

O Lord, be merciful to us and our Nation, bless the King's Majesty, and our
Queen, with Life and happiness, their Counselors with Wisdom, their Armies
with Victory, their Subjects with Peace and Prosperity. Bless the Nobility, the
Clergy, and Commonalty in their goings out and comings in. Bless us, we beseech
thee, and all our Relations, with Spiritual and Temporal Mercies, And all these
Blessings we beg for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose perfect Form of Prayer we
sum up all our desires, as he has taught us,

OUr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass, against us. And
lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from all Evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God the Father, and the
Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all. Amen.

Another Morning PRAYER for a Family.
O Gracious God, the Creator and Protector of Mankind, whose continued goodness
we have lately experienced in the safety and preservation of the last Night. We
bless thy Holy Name, for this and all other expressions of thy Mercy to us; we
acknowledge, that as thou art the Author of our Beings, it is thy good
Providence that maintains and defends them from all dangers and Enemies that
incompass us about. It is thy watchful Eye that sees all their contrivances to
destroy us: It is thy Wisdom that knows how to defeat their Craftiest purposes:
It is thy Power alone, that can disappoint and oppose their wicked and hellish
Plots. We are not ignorant, O Lord, of their malice, and our continual dangers,
dangers that proceed from the contrivances of Spiritual and Temporal Enemies;
we desire therefore to be heartily thankful, for we are really sensible of thy
merciful protection hitherto, and to ascribe all the Honor and Praise of our
preservation and deliverance, to thy Wisdom and Providence alone. But, O
merciful Father, let this expression of thy goodness, the foundation of all thy
Blessings, be still continued to us; we are sensible of our undeservings, our
sins and wickednesses are multiplied, our provocations and ingratitudes have
been many; our many deficien ies in all our Duties, might justly cause thee to
leave us to our selves for the future, and expose us naked to the subtilties
and power of our Enemies, who would quickly devour us. But we implore thy mercy
at this time, and entreat thee to forgive us our Trespasses, to pardon our
Infirmities, and to pass by all our Transgressions, for the Lord Jesus his
sake. In his Name, and through his Merits, we approach with all humility to the
throne of thy grace, to beg the forgiveness of all our Iniquities, and the
continuance of thy protection and Mercies, Temporal and Spiritual. How weak are
we of our selves? How soon cast into our Graves? and what is Man, that he
should be able to defend us, when the least blast deprives him of Life and
Being? Thou art therefore, and thou alone, O great God of Heaven! thou art only
able to defend us in the following course of our Life, from visible and
invisible perils: Let thy Mercy be continued to us, shelter us from the
malicious designs of all our Enemies, frustrate their wicked purposes; lead us
in all our ways, direct us in all our paths, bless us in all our undertakings;
we live in a crooked Generation, in a world that overflows with sin and
wickedness, and our Conversation is amongst evildoers, let therefore thy
Wisdom and thy fear so possess our Souls, that we may not be drawn away by the
Vices of the Age, nor entangled in such Labryinths of Sin, as might endanger
our eternal welfare. Suffer us not to be enticed with the allurements of
unlawful Pleasure and Profit. We trust not to our selves, O Lord, and our own
frail resolutions, because we have broken them so often, that we have cause to
mistrust our selves, and to rely chiefly upon thy merciful guidance. Let thy
Truth direct us, and thy Spirit lead us, as well as thy Power protect us, from
the invasion of Error and Vice; give us a right understanding of thy Will, an
unchangeable resolution to practice it; suffer us not to be drawn aside neither
by fear nor by profit, from the profession of that pure Religion, in which we
have had the happiness to be instructed. Give us all grace to value and prize
this thy great Mercy, that we are Christians, and such Christians as have the
benefits of thy sacred Oracles. O let us not be so unworthy to forsake that
Religion, in which only we are to expect Salvation. Give us Grace to follow the
Blessed Rules of good living that we have learned; keep us from sin, and of all
sins, chiefly from the sins against our own Consciences and knowledge. Give us
peaceable Minds, quiet dispositions, with a willing resignation of our selves
to thy Wise Providence in all things, wean our Hearts and Affections from the
World; let not its Vanities possess any longer our affections. Let the
knowledge that all things shall work together for our good, cause us to submit
without murmuring, to all the Crosses that we may meet with. And as our time
here below is but of a short continuance, give us grace to mind our latter end,
to prepare for our dissolution betimes, to live always in expectation of
another, and a more happy life, where we shall never see neither Sorrow nor
Pain.

Bless us, we beseech thee, in our Callings; prosper us in all our lawful
endeavors to serve our Generation: And let us so demean our selves in our
bodily and daily Employments, as that we may not forget in them to serve and
glorify thee, our God, which is the great and chief Employment of our lives:
Suffer us not to mispend our precious Talents, but, according to our Abilities
and thy Mercies, let us so dispose of them, of what kind soever they be, that
thy Truth and Holy Name may be glorified thereby, and the ends for which thou
have given them answered.

Bless this Family now prostrate before thee; with our years increase all our
Graces, sanctify and prepare us for thy Enjoyment; purify and cleanse our
Hearts, and mercifully continue and augment all thy Blessings upon us. Take
into thy protection and favor, the tender and weaker part of it, the Infants
and Children; provide, we beseech thee, for the welfare of their Souls, as well
as for their Bodies, imprint thy holy fear in their Hearts, that they may
glorify thee in their Lives.

Bless all our Relations wheresoever they be dispersed; let thy Mercy and Truth
guide them all the days of their Lives: Bless this Nation unto which we belong,
punish us not according to our just deservings and provocations; lay not upon
us the guilt of innocent Blood. But pardon the extravagancy of our lives, and
cause a real Reformation to be practiced, as well as professed amongst us; thou
give us Temporal Mercies in abundance, continue thy Spiritual to us; suffer
not our Enemies to deprive us of thy Truth and Gospel; watch over us, and
disappoint all their wicked purposes for our Ruin, and give us all Hearts to
be truly thankful for the many Favors, Blessings, Mercies and Deliverances,
which from time to time in all Ages thou have heaped upon us and our
Forefathers.

Bless more especially, the person of our gracious Prince, and thine anointed,
grant him a long and a prosperous reign, guard him from the barbarous purposes
of all Murderers; save him from all their Plots and Conspiracies; direct him in
his Councils; prosper him in his Designs; and give him and us all Grace, to lay
seriously to heart thy merciful proceedings toward us.

Bless all his Relations, enlighten them with thy Truth, sanctify them with
thy Grace, and direct them by thy Spirit, that they may embrace, as well as
know thy Sacred Truth, and govern themselves according to its Holy Precepts.
Bless thy Church dispersed throughout the whole World, preserve every Member of
it from the Malice of the Devil and his Agents, increase daily the number of
its true Professors. Let thy Gospel and thy Salvation be published in all
Nations, bring back the Jews, and accomplish the number of the Gentiles; and
open the Understandings of all Men, that they may see the reasonableness and
excellency of that Religion, which Christ has recommended to us; and not only
see it, but embrace and practice it, setting aside all prejudice and partiality.

Turn the Hearts of our greatest Enemies, subdue our unruly Affections,
reconcile our Differences public and private, and give us all Grace, that we
may truly serve and glorify thee in our Lives. All this we beg for the Merits
and by the Mediation of our most Blessed Lord and Savior, in whose Words we
sum up all our imperfect Petitions, in that most perfect Form which he has
taught us.

OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass, against us. And
lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from all Evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God the Father, and the
comfortable Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

Another Morning Prayer for a Family, when Business is urgent.
O Merciful God and Heavenly Father, by whose goodness we are yet alive; Thy
Holy Name be praised for the safety and quiet repose of our Bodies the last
Night, and for our preservation until this moment, which we acknowledge to be a
Mercy proceeding from thy Power and Providence. We are sensible, O Lord, of our
own weakness and frailty, unable of our selves to withstand the assaults of our
Spiritual and Corporal Enemies; from thy Mercy therefore we humbly Beg this,
and all other Blessings needful for our Souls and Bodies; that thou would be
pleased to be gracious to us, and forgive us our Sins, and protect us from all
dangers in the following course of our lives, defend our Souls from all
assaults of Sin and Satan, keep us in the Profession and Practice of thy Holy
Religion, without wavering; strengthen our Minds with a Divine Knowledge, and
our Wills with thy Celestial Grace, that neither Error nor Vice may be able to
prevail upon us. Defend also our Bodies from all the Snares that are laid for
us. Let our lives be precious in thy sight, sanctify all thy Mercies to us,
and the more we are laden with thy Temporal Blessings, let us be so much the
more thankful, and ready to obey thy Holy Laws; send down thy Blessing upon all
our actions and endeavors, in the Callings in which thy Providence has placed
us: As our chief aim is the Promotion of thy Glory, be pleased to assist us in
the advancing of it. Preserve our Minds from all inward troubles, murmurings
and disturbances, and arm us we beseech thee with that unchangeable Spirit, as
may contemn the Losses and Crosses of the World; for that purpose captivate our
affections to thee and thy Service; take possession of our Hearts, and suffer
them not to dote too much upon these lower Vanities. O Lord, as our Treasure is
in Heaven, let there be the end of all our desires, and the center of all our
Actions.

Gracious God, we pray thee not only for our selves, but for the whole
Catholic Church, and for that part of it planted in these three Nations. O!
let not our Enemies triumph over us, but watch over and preserve thy Son from
all the Conspiracies of the Devil and his Agents: Reunite our Divisions, and
make us all of one Heart, and of one Mind: Preserve the King and Queen's
Majesty in Health, Peace, and Prosperity: Give his Counselors Wisdom, his Army
Victory, and all his Subjects Happiness and Plenty.

Take into thy Protection, all our Kindred and Friends, defend their Bodies
from dangers, and their Souls from Schism and Error. Be merciful to all Men, as
thou have Created Mankind for Happiness, discover to them the Means appointed
by thy Wisdom, to bring them thither, and give them Grace to embrace the
gracious offers of thy Providence.

All these Mercies, and others which thou know most needful for our
wellbeing here, and our Glorious Being hereafter, we humbly beg by the Merits
and powerful intercession of thy Christ, and our Savior, who has taught us
thus to Pray,

OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from all Evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Loveof God the Father, and the
Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

A Morning Prayer for a single Person.
ALmighty God, by whose Gracious Providence I am yet alive, and escaped out of
all the dangers and difficulties of this mortal life, by whose merciful
Protection I have been preserved the last Night from all Corporal and Spiritual
Enemies: I adore thy Divine Mercy and Goodness, so visibly expressed in every
moment of my life. I praise thy Holy Name for this, and all other favors
received from thy Wisdom and Power; I glorify thine infinite Majesty, and
acknowledge thee, O! my God, to be the Author of my Preservation, as well as of
my Being; of my self I am not able to resist the least danger or Enemy; were it
not for thy watchful Eye and Power, I had been long ago in my Grave; but thy
goodness has yet spared me, notwithstanding my unworthiness, and the many
Provocations of my Life: O Merciful Father, thy Blessings have been heaped upon
me in abundance, though I have returned thee for them all, nothing but
ingratitude and Sin; when I make a Reslexion upon my self, and thy liberality,
upon my past behavior, and thy manifold Blessings bestowed upon me from day to
day; I cannot but wonder at the infiniteness of thy Mercy, which could not yet
be exhausted, nor discouraged by my unthankfulness; but let the Sense of thy
Love to me, change and alter the temper of my Soul, the resolution of my Mind,
and the Actions of my Life; suffer me not to presume upon these outward
Expressions of thine Affection to me; but let them inflame my Soul with a
sincere Love for thee my God, and with a fervent zeal for thy Glory: Suffer me
not to be overcome by the powerful temptations of the World, nor to be drawn
aside by the allurements of Sin. I am so sensible, Lord, of the weakness of my
own Nature, as not to trust upon my strength, which has so often yielded to
wicked enticements; assist me therefore, my God, with thy Divine and Holy
Spirit, defeat the Devil's Power, disappoint all his malicious purposes, and
lead me through this wicked World in thy Faith and Fear. Continue also thy
Protection to my weak Body, preserve me from all dangers and Enemies, defend me
from all Bloody and Cruel Souls, that I may live here below in the Service of
my Generation, and in glorifying thee my Creator. Bless me in the Works of my
Calling, give me a contented Mind, satisfied with the Events of thy Providence;
that I may not complain of any thing that shall happen contrary to my desire,
and expectation, and a full resignation to thy Will and Pleasure. Suffer not my
Soul to be too much in love with my self, nor with any thing here below, that I
may avoid the pernicious Vices of Pride, self-conceitedness, Covetousness,
Ambition, Lust and Vanity, which in these latter days possess Men's Minds, and
hurry them into the Labyrinths that lead to Hell and Damnation. O Lord, I
resign my self into thy hands; I desire to depend upon thee, to be governed by
thee, and to live for thee. Enlighten therefore my Understanding with thy
sacred Truth, sanctisie my Will and Affections with thy Blessed Spirit, and the
longer I live, let me draw nearer, to thy likeness. Strengthen my Soul with an
assurance upon thy Love and Protection, and pacify all the disorders of my
Passions, that whatsoever inconveniency I meet with in my conversation here
below, I may enjoy a quiet and peaceable Temper of Spirit, which is so
acceptable in thy sight; in Prosperity and Adversity, in Sickness and in
Health, grant me an equality of Mind, not pust up with the one, nor cast down
with the other; but give me Grace, that bearing willingly my Cross after Christ
my Savior, I may press forward toward that Immortal Reward, which thou have
prepared for them that love and fear thee. In whatsoever condition thy
Providence shall be pleased to bring me, give me, I beseech thee, a disposition
suitable to it, that in following the Holy Example of my Glorious Redeemer, and
imitating his Goodness, Piety, Charity, Patience in suffering, Holiness and
other Virtues, I may glorify thy Name on Earth, grace the Profession of thy
true Religion, and prepare my self for Eternity; for that purpose, grant that I
may employ all my Talents in those good uses for which they are designed, that
when I shall render up my accounts to thee, I may not be ashamed of my Actions.
O let my mind be fixed upon that terrible day, that I may live in expectation
of it, and order my Soul and Body ready for my dissolution.

I humbly beseech thy Divine Majesty, to be gracious, not only to my self, but
also to all my Relations; receive into thy Favor and Protection, all those
that are committed to my Care, or that are near or dear unto me in Blood and
Affinity; preserve their Souls from the Vices and Infection of the times, and
their Lives from dangers and Enemies, and give them all Grace, to serve and
Glorify thee their God on Earth.

Send thy Blessings upon the Societies and Kingdom unto which I belong, forgive
our National sins, suspend thy judgments that we have deserved, and if in thy
Wisdom, thou think fit to chastise us, destroy us not utterly; set bounds to
the rage of our Enemies, and let all thy proceedings toward us, make a sincere
Reformation in the Land: Deprive us not for every of the Comfort of thy Word
and Ordinances, but protect this thy Church from the incroachings of Schism and
Idolatry.

Be merciful, O Lord, to our King, defend his Person from all his Enemies, and
let not their wicked Designs prosper against him, but give Wisdom to his
Counselors, Success to his Undertakings, Victory to his Armies, Grace and
Fidelity to his Officers, Truth and Loyalty to all his Subjects, and Health and
long Life to his Majesty: Be gracious to all his Relations, make them Examples
of Piety and Godliness, discoverr to them the truth of thy Gospel, and give
them all Grace to employ their Credit and Authority in promoting thy Glory, and
encouraging thy true Religion against Error and Vice amongst us: Give us a
Learned and Religious Clergy, a Wise and Pious Nobility, a sound and Virtuous
Gentry, and let all such as are in any Offices of Trust, remember their Duty to
thee, O God; their Obligations to their Prince and his Subjects, and act with
that Faithfulness and Integrity, that they may discharge a good Conscience, and
approve themselves before thee as well as before Man.

Be gracious to all Nations, send them the light of thy Gospel, banish from
them all Mists of Error and Heresy, pacify the Tumults of the World, and give
them grace to acknowledge thee the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent, to be the Universal Savior.

These and all other Mercies, for them and thy whole Church, I humbly beg for
his sake and Merits, who is dead, risen again, and sits at thy Right hand, to
make intercession for us.

OUR Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our daily Bread;
and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from all Evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

Let thy Grace, thy Power and thy Truth, preserve and accompany me all the days
of my Life.

A Morning Prayer for a young Person.
O Heavenly Father, my great Creator and Protector, thy Holy Name be praised
for all thy Mercies, chiefly for the quiet rest of the last Night. At every
moment I feel the expressions of thy goodness; thou ceasest not to show me some
tokens of thy Liberality, since thou have given me this Being. O merciful God,
how great and many are thy Mercies to me in these few Minutes that I have spent
in the World; I perceive that thou art the inexhaustible Fountain of all good,
and the boundless Ocean of all perfections: To thy Divine Majesty therefore, I
make my Address, to supply the daily necessities of this weak Body and sinful
Soul, which proceed from thee. Forgive, I beseech thee, O my God, the mistakes
and frailties of my youth. As I am sensible of my frequent miscarriages, cause
me also to be sensible of thy Mercy and Pardon. I am entered into the World in
a state of imperfection, I carry about me strong Inclinations to Sin, and the
breach of thy Sacred Laws, which I cannot shake off in a moment; but gracious
God, blot out all mine Iniquities, and assist with thy Divine Spirit, the pious
Resolutions, and Religious temper of my Soul, Thou have promised not to quench
the Smoking Flax, nor break the bruised Reed, not to cast away a Creature for
some imperfections, but to encourage the hopeful beginnings of Piety in Man:
Perform this thy Promise, O my God, in my sinful Soul increase what is good;
rectify what is amiss; sanctify and purify this inner part of my self, from
all the fleshly Pollutions that I may be guilty of; enlighten my Understanding
with a right knowledge of thy Will and Word, give me thy heavenly Wisdom, and a
clear apprehension of those things thou requirest from my Faith and Practice.
Suffer me not to be carried away by the inticements of Heresy and Error; but
as thou have caused me to be born, and initiated by Baptism into the profession
of thy true Religion; give me grace to resist all the Temptations that may
endeavor to draw me from it, and to continue in it to the last moment of my
days. Sanctify my Will and Affections more and more, keep me from the
Infectious air of wicked Company, and vicious Conversation; suffer me not to be
carried away with the Vices of the Age, but strengthen my Resolutions in thy
Faith and Fear, grant me that discretion and prudence, that I may perceive the
Snares laid for me, and know how to shun and avoid them, that I may lead an
innocent harmless, and righteous Life; keep me out of the Labyrinths of sin and
wickedness, in which many are insensibly entangled; and as my great Task in the
World is to serve thee, enable and assist me in the Prosecution of that design;
make me to see the Vanity of the World, and all Worldly advantages, that my
inexperienced Soul may not be bewitched with any deceitful enjoyments, but that
I may settle my affections upon thee, my God, and live continually in
expectation of my approaching Change, and of the immortal Possessions, where
true Joys are to be found.

I beseech thee also, Merciful Father, to send and continue to me all things
needful for my weak Body, grant me Life and Health, that I may glorify thee on
this side the Grave, as thou will glorify me on the other side. Enable me to
serve my Generation, and to do good in the World, that I may not be said to
live in vain: Increase my Gifts and Talents and thy Temporal Blessings, and
give me a Heart to dispose of them according to thy Will. Preserve me from all
dangers and Enemies; suffer them not to prevail upon me, but limit their malice
and rage. I trust upon thy Power and Protection; let me have the experience of
it at every step that I shall make, and accompany all my endeavors and actions
with success and blessing. Strengthen my Soul with a reliance upon thee, and a
submission to thy Will in all things; prepare me to bear the Crosses that thou will lay upon me, and assist me through the troubles of the World, by thy
divine Spirit; imprint thy fear in my tender Soul, give me a sense of thy
all-seeing Eye and infinite Presence, that I may dread thy justice and Power,
as well as I love thy Mercy and goodness, and be kept from any extravagancies
of Life; that I may walk continually as in thy presence, and in expectation
either of Rewards or Punishments, according to my actions. Grant me, I beseech
thee, O overflowing Goodness, all the conveniences of this Life; sanctify
what thou have already given, and make me useful, and a Comfort to all my
Relations. Be merciful to them also, I pray thee protect, preserve, and keep
them in these troublesome times; defend their Bodies from Death and danger, and
their Souls from Error and Vice; preserve the King's Majesty and all the Royal
Family, in Health and happiness. And send to all this Nation a continuance of
Peace and Prosperity, with a real Reformation of their Lives. Grant these and
all other Mercies, necessary for them and thy whole Church, through and by the
Mediation and glorious intercession of my Blessed Savior, who has thus taught
me to sum up all my imperfect Prayers.

OUR Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from all Evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Let thy merciful kindness, O Lord, be upon me, like as I do put my trust in
thee. Psalm. 33.21.

A Morning Prayer for a younger Person.
O Almighty God, who have saved me alive till this time, preserved me from my
Mothers Womb, and guarded me from the dangers of the last Night, thy Holy Name
be praised for this and all other expressions of thy Mercy and Goodness to me;
give me grace to employ this Life which thou sparest me to thy Honor and
Glory; keep me from Sin and Temptations, and whatsoever might prejudice my Soul
or my Body. I recommend my self into thy hands and protection; save me from the
Dangers and inconveniences of this Life; grant me thy Wisdom and thy Fear,
increase in my Soul all knowledge, give me a right understanding of thy Will,
and Grace to practice it. Preserve me from the Vices of the Age, from the
Allurements of Sin, and the Corruptions of the Times: Season my tender Soul
with a Love for thee, my God, and a sincere dread of thy Power and Divine
Majesty. Protect me in the Profession of thy true Religion, and Bless me with
Spiritual and Temporal Blessings; and grant me that holy Resolution and Temper,
that I may so live in this Life, and so spend my days, that I may attain at
last to Everlasting Life.

Preserve my Parents, Relations, and those whom thou have placed over me, in
Health and Prosperity; send them an increase of all thy Blessings; save the
King's Majesty from all his Enemies, grant him Health and Prosperity, and the
whole Nation peace and happiness, for Jesus Christ his sake.

OUR Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from all Evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

The Lord preserve my going out, and my Coming in, from this time forth, and
for evermore. Amen. Psalm. 121.8.

A Morning Prayer for a Child.
UNto thee, lift I up mine Eyes, O thou that dwell in the Heavens. Psalm.
123.1.

Thy Holy Name be praised, for the last Nights Rest and Preservation, protect
me also this day from all dangers, Bodily and Spiritual, keep me from sin,
teach me thy Ways, grant me thy true Wisdom; increase my abilities to serve
thee; bless me in my endeavors and actions, sanctify my Soul and Body; give
me the understanding of thy Word and Laws, and a Heart to practice them; keep
me in the Profession of thy true Religion, and from the Wicked designs of
Schism and Idolatry; imprint thy fear in my tender Soul, and a sense of thine
infinite Presence, that I may glorify thee here on Earth, O my Creator and
Heavenly Father, and at last, attain to that Glory which thou have promised to
those that shall obey thy sacred Commands. Bless and preserve my Parents,
Kindred and Relations; save the King's Majesty, and grant him Health, and
Prosperity. All this I beg from thine infinite goodness, for Jesus Christ his
sake, my only Savior and Mediator, who has taught me thus to Pray.

OUR Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from all Evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

Blessed be the Lord God of our Israel, from everlasting, and World without
End. Amen.

An Evening Prayer for a private Family, according to the Book of
Common Prayer; with some Collects for the Times.
O Lord, correct us, but with judgment, not in thine Anger, lest thou bring us
to nothing. Hide thy Face from our Sins, and blot out all our Iniquities. Jer.
10.24. Psalm. 51.9.

ALmighty and most Merciful Father, we have erred and strayed from thy Ways
like lost Sheep. We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
Hearts. We have offended against thy Holy Laws. We have left undone those
things which we ought to have done; and we have done those things which we
ought not to have done, and there is no Health in us. But thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us, miserable Offenders. Spare thou them, O God, which confess their
faults. Restore thou them that are penitent; according to thy Promises declared
unto Mankind, in Christ Jesus our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for
his sake; That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the
glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

Lord, Let this be repeated by all the Family.
have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. And forgive us all our Sins.

OUR Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation. But deliver us from all Evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

O Lord, show thy mercy upon us.

And grant us thy Salvation.

O Lord, save the King and Queen.

And mereifully hear us, when we call upon thee.

Endue thy Ministers with Righteousness.

And make thy chosen People joyful.

O Lord, save thy People.

And bless thine Inheritance.

Give peace in our time, O Lord.

Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.

O God, make clean our Hearts within us.

And take not thy Holy Spirit from us.

ALmighty and everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and do
forgive the sins of all them that are penitent; create and make in us new and
contrite Hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of thee the God of all Mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, from whom all Holy Desires, all good Counsels, and all just Works do
proceed, give unto thy Servants that peace which the World cannot give, that
both our Hearts may be set to obey thy Commandments, and also that by thee we
being defended from the fear of our Enemies, may pass our time in rest and
quietness, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

LIghten our Darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend
us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the Love of thy only Son our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

ALmighty God, who see that we have no power of our Selves to help our
selves; keep us both outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls; that
we may be desended from all Adversities which may happen to the Body, and from
all evil Thoughts which may assault and hurt the Soul, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, who alone can order the unruly Wills and Affections of
sinful Men, grant to thy People that they may love the thing which thou
command, and desire that which thou do promise, so that among all the
sundry and manifold changes of the World, our Hearts may surely there be sixed,
where true Joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord, who never failest to help and govern them, whom thou do bring up in
thy steadfast Fear and Love, keep us, we beseech thee, under the protection of
thy good Providence, and make us to have a perpetual Fear and Love of thy Holy
Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, whose never failing Providence orders all things, both in Heaven and
Earth; we humbly beseech thee, to put away from us all hurtful things, and to
give us those things which be profitable for us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

BE merciful, O Lord, to this Church and Nation; punish us not accordto our
deservings, but let thy Mercy protect and save us from the Evil hands of all
our restless Enemies; continue thy Word and Gospel amongst us, remit our
senseless Divisions; open the Eyes and Hearts of all our Dissenting and
disaffected Brethren; that they may embrace thy Truth; set aside all Prejudice,
and join with us thy Servants in the sincere Worship of thee the true God: All
this we beg for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

O God, for as much as without thee, we are not able to please thee, mercifully
grant, that thy Holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule our Hearts,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, who art a strong Tower of defense unto thy Servants, against
the face of their Enemies: We yield thee Praise and Thanksgiving, for our
Deliverance from those great and apparent Dangers wherewith we have been
compassed. We acknowledge it thy goodness, that we are not delivered over as a
Pray unto them; beseeching thee still to continue such thy Mercies toward us,
to discover all hellish Plots contrived against our King, Religion, and
Country, and to disappoint all the black Designs of our Bloody Enemies; that
all the World may know that thou art our Savior and mighty Deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord our God, who upholdest and governest all things in Heaven and Earth,
Receive our Humble Prayers for our Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queen,
set over us by thy Grace and Providence. And so together with them, Bless the
whole Royal Family, with the Dew of thy Heavenly Spirit, that they ever
trusting in thy goodness, protected by thy Power, and Crowned with thy gracious
and endless Favors, may continue before thee in Health, Peace, Joy, and
Honor, a long and happy life upon Earth, and after Death obtain everlasting
life and glory in the Kingdom of Heaven, by the Merits and Mediation of Jesus
Christ our Savior. Amen.

BLess, we beseech thee, O Lord, our Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, with true
Knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by their Preaching and
living, they may set it forth and show it accordingly, enable them all to be
faithful in their great trust, in the maintetenance of thy true Religion,
against the Incroachings of Popery, Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness. Bless
the Lords of the Council, and all the Nobility, Magistrates and Gentry, with
Grace, Wisdom, and Understanding of thy Will and Word. Give to all Nations
Quietness and Peace, and to this thy People give Unity and Happiness; help the
weakhearted, raise up them that fall, subdue Satan under our Feet: Comfort all
that are in Tribulation; preserve all that are in danger; show thy pity to
Prisoners and Captives: Provide for the Fatherless, the Widows, and all that
are Oppressed. Have mercy upon all Men. Forgive our Enemies, and turn their
Hearts. Preserve for our Use the kindly Fruits of the Earth. And endue us with
the Grace of thy Holy Spirit, and amend our Lives according to thy Holy Word.
All this we beseech thee to grant us, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

From our Enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our Afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our Hearts.

Mercifully forgive the Sins of thy People.

Favorably with mercy hear our Prayers.

O Son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ, graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

As we do put our Trust in thee.

WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and
for the Glory of thy Name, turn from us all those Evils that we most
righteously have deserved; and grant that in all our Troubles, we may put our
whole Trust and Confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in Holiness
and pureness of Living, to thy Honor and Glory, through our only Mediator and
Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious Favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our Works begun, continued and
ended in thee; we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally, by thy mercy, obtain
eversasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, who have given us Grace at this time with one accord, to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three
are gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their Requests: Fulfill now,
O Lord, the desires and Petitions of thy Servants, as may be most expedient for
them; granting us in this World knowledge of thy Truth, and in the World to
come life everlasting. Amen.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

An Evening Prayer for a whole Family, suitable to the times.
O Merciful God, here we thine unworthy Servants are prostrate before thee, at
the close of this day, laden with thy manifold Mercies, to acknowledge the
Weaknesses and miscarriages of our Lives, and to bewail the linfulness of our
Natures. Our Iniquities are many, and our Transgressions are multiplied every
day. We feel within us a forward inclination to that which is unlawful; we
carry about us a Body of Sin, and the least Temptation draws us aside from thy
holy Ways. How negligent have we been of thy Commands? How vicious in our
Lives? How careless in our Duties? How unthankful for all thy Mercies? We can
give no account of the number of our mistakes, for they are numberless.
Therefore we humble our selves before thee in a deep sense of our own
sinfulness and unworthiness; we cast away all confidence and reliance upon our
own Merits. But we come to thee with a Confidence upon Christ's Merits,
trusting upon his promises and gracious invitations; For his sake, O merciful
Father, forgive us all our Trespasses, magnify thy Divine goodness, by the
pardon of our great and heinous Offenses: Look upon the Atonement made for us,
and in consideration of the precious Blood of our great Savior, spilt for our
Redemption; accept of our Persons, and Prayers at this time. Take not away from
us only the guilt, but also the Corruption of Sin, that we may not continue in
our Provocations against thy Divine Majesty. As thou have given us a sense of
our Ignorance and Weakness; give us the proper Remedies to these two Evils,
enlighten our Understandings more and more with thy Blessed Truth; purify our
Wills from all unregenerate affections; sanctify and change the whole frame of
our Souls according to thy revealed Will. For that purpose, grant us we beseech
thee, good God, an increase of all our Graces, give life and growth to these
Seeds of Holiness and Immortality; strengthen the Interest of Piety in every
one of us, with a holy dread of thy Power and Justice, and a blessed Love for
thee our God, who only art lovely. Open our Eyes, that we may perceive the
Beauty, and Excellency of Virtue, and the filthiness and danger of those sins
we have been most inclinable to practice. Let the woeful circumstances of our
Bosom Lusts, visible by our own experience and others Examples; reclaim us
betimes to an Obedience to thy Sacred Laws; make us truly sensible both of the
shame that attends upon Sin, and of the misery that consequently follows it,
that we may begin the great Work of Repentance betimes, and vigorously
prosecute it, till we have brought under all our irregular inclinations, which
are so imperious in the Children of disobedience. Make us clean Hearts, O God,
and renew a right Spirit within us: Purify our sins from all Infection, from
all Evil Thoughts, wicked Affections, and sinful designs; above all, keep us
from the reigning sin of Hypocrisy, that we may be sincere in our Profession,
and that we may not deceive our selves, by thinking to deceive others. As our
great business on this side the Grave, is to serve thee our great Creator, and
prepare our selves for Eternity; assist us mercifully in our endeavors
relating thereunto, direct, comfort, and succor us against all Temptations;
give us Hearts and Lives, that we may adorn the Gospel of our Savior Christ.
Let neither the inticements of Sin, nor the suggestions of the Devil, nor the
allurements and Vanities of the World, draw us away from thee, our good God,
nor from the Profession of thy sacred Truth. Keep us from evil Examples and
wicked Company and Persuasions, and from the Corruptions of the time. As thou
have been gracious to our Forefathers in this Land, in preserving them and
their Religion from all bloody designs and attempts; continue thy protection to
us their Children: Preserve thy Gospel in this Nation; defend us from Heresy,
Idolatry, and Schism: Unite us all in love and affection one toward another,
and in conformity to thy Will in all things. Remove the differences and
prejudices that are amongst us, that we may embrace one another, as Brethren
designed for the same Happiness; sanctified by the same Spirit, and redeemed by
the same Christ.

O gracious God, watch over us we beseech thee, let not the Craft and Power of
our Bloody Adversaries prevail, or overcome the Professors of thy Gospel.
Defeat all their wicked endeavors against our Prince and his People, and
discover and disappoint all their Plots. Let Religion and Truth flourish in our
days, and keep us all from Profaneness and Error. Send thy Blessings to this
Family, here humbled before thee, and to every member of it. As thou have
received us into thy Protection, grant us a continuance of it this Night
especially; Let the Eye of thy Providence be awake over us, to shelter and
preserve us when we shall be asleep. Keep us all from fearful Dreams and
Apprehensions, and sinful Fancies. Let nothing injure either our Souls, or our
Bodies; bring us safe through the shadows of the Night, to behold the Glory of
another day, and feel again the manifold expressions of thy great goodness to
us. O Lord, we depend upon, and trust only in thee. Thou alone have been the
Savior of our Persons that belong to thee, defend them we beseech thee from
the malice of the Devils, and the attempts of Bloody-minded Men, and from all
accidents and dangers whatsoever, that we may yet live to praise and glorify
thee here on Earth, and do service to our Generation.

Send thy Blessing to all Princes and Magistrates, especially to our King and
Queen, and all Governors under them in Church or State; preserve them from all
Rebellious Designs and Attempts of our Enemies, and give them grace to employ
their Credit, Power, and Authority in the maintenance of thy Truth and Honor;
and in the suppression of Atheism, Vice, Profaneness, and whatsoever agrees
not with sound Doctrine. Give success to their pious endeavors, Victory to our
Fleets and Armies, Life and safety to all the Noble Souls that watch over us,
or fight for us. Disappoint all the Wicked designs of Antichrist, scatter and
subdue all his Bloody Agents, and let thy Gospel and will be known to all the
Nations under the Sun.

These and all other Mercies convenient for our Souls and Bodies, we humbly
beg, for the sake and Merits of that immaculate Lamb, who is dead for us, and
now makes intercession at thy right hand; and we conclude these our imperfect
Prayers, with this most perfect Form.

OUR Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Tespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation; But deliver us from Evil; For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

THE Peace of God which passes all Understanding, preserve our Hearts and
Minds in the Knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
The Blessing of God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be with us all
evermore. Amen.

An Evening Prayer for a single Person.
O Being of Beings, the great Creator of the World, and preserver of Mankind,
by whose gracious goodness I am now alive, and brought safe through the many
dangers and inconveniences of this mortal Life, to the close of this day. I
humbly acknowledge thy Providence, and merciful Protection: Thou have fed me
with thy Creatures, defended me by thy Power, instructed me in thy Truth,
admitted me into thy Church; for these, and all other Mercies received from thy
Bountiful hand, I return thee my homage and Thanks, and confess my self
unworthy of the meanest of thy Favors, by reason of the many Provocations that
I am guilty of. O Lord, I have sinned against Heaven, and against thee, and am
no more worthy to be called thy Son; my Transgressions are multiplied every
day, and mine Iniquities are without number. How easily have I yielded to the
Power of Temptations! how often have I broken thy sacred Laws! Gracious God, be
merciful, be merciful to me a Sinner; blot out all mine Iniquities, and forgive
me for the sake of my dear and only Savior, who is dead, and intercedes for
me. Accept his Sacrifice and Mediation for my poor Soul, grieved with the sense
of Sin. Give me true Repentance, and that Frame of Spirit and Holy Resolution,
unto which thou have promised in thy Holy Word, mercy and forgiveness. As thou
have begun the Work of Reformation in me, perfect it, I beseech thee, by the
continual influences of thy Holy Spirit; forsake me not, good God, nor leave me
to my wretched self, but let thy Truth and Wisdom direct my Understanding, and
thy grace govern my Will in the practice of Piety. Suffer me not to be overcome
by the mistakes and inticements of Sin and Satan; defend my Soul from all
wicked impressions and infections of the World. As thou have redeemed me for
thy self, let not Vice nor Error draw me from thee, nor the dangerous
Allurements of Earthly Vanities; but as my dependency is upon thy Power, let my
expectation of Happiness be from thy Bounty, and my delight be in fulfilling
thy holy Will. Strengthen and increase in me all goodness. Let every day bring
me nearer to thee, and to that Purity and Holiness, without which no Man shall
see thy Face. Time, that carries me apace to my cold Tomb, minds me of an
Eternity, of a Resurrection, and the last Judgment. Prepare me, I beseech thee,
for this last Account, and that terrible Day, wherein every Man shall give up
an account of his Actions, before a Righteous and Impartial Judge. Grant that I
may find Mercy and Favor at the hands of my great Redeemer, and be admitted
into the Joys of his Paradise.

And as I am now going to lie me down to refresh my weary Body with rest,
blessed God, be merciful to me this Night, protect me from all dangers and
Evils. Suffer not the Malice of the Devils, nor of Wicked Men, to hurt this
outward Tabernacle, nor the precious Soul that is within; keep from me all
troublesome Dreams, and Thoughts; and whether sleeping or waking, let my Soul be
armed with a reliance upon thy Goodness and Power; grant me a moderate Rest,
that I may be better enabled to serve thee in my Generation, and proceed on in
the Employment, unto which thy Providence has called me. In which, let my
chief aim be to advance thy glory, rather than my own fordid Interest, and to
mind the careful management of all the Talents which thou have put into my
hands, that I may, as a good Servant and Steward, improve and increase them.

Look in mercy upon all my Relations, wheresoever they be; let thy Grace, thy
Truth and Goodness, accompany and protect them, during their abode here below.
Crown with the choicest of thy Blessings, our Religious King and Queen, shield
them from the wicked attempts of all their Enemies, and give them long Life,
Health and Prosperity now, and at last receive them into everlasting happiness.
Bless all their Royal Relations, give them all Grace to be instrumental in
promoting the Interest of thy Truth, Godliness and Virtue; that they may answer
the good ends for which thou have put much into their Hands. Bless all
Governors and Magistrates, give them Grace to prefer thine Honor and Glory to
all other Corrupt purposes whatsoever. Defend this Nation from all Plots and
Conspiracies, defeat the Designs of all our Enemies, and disappoint all
Combinations against it. If thou will afflict us, good God, let it be for a
time; take not thy Truth and Gospel from us and our Posterity; and sanctify
all thy Judgments and Mercies to us, that they may effect and produce in us
that Reformation, and those Graces for which they are intended. Spread thy
Gospel and Truth all over the World, pull down Antichrist, let all Nations
understand thy Will, and readily submit unto it. Be merciful unto all Sons and
Daughters of Affliction; comfort and succor all sick Persons, and such as are
grieved with the loss of Goods, Friends or Relations. Be thou their good God
and Savior in thy due time, giving them grace to submit to thee, to trust upon
thee, and to expect from thy mercy alone, a seasonable and proper Remedy to all
their pressures and troubles. And now, blessed Lord, I recommend my self again
into thy merciful hands, and conclude these my imperfect Prayers with that most
perfect Form recommended to us by my good Savior, in whose Name I beg, a^^ for
whose sake I entreat thee, O merciful Father, grant me these my Requests, and
all other Mercies which thou know needful for my Soul and Body.

OUR Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Tespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation; But deliver us from Evil; For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

An Evening Prayer for young Persons and Children.
O God, who have received me amongst thy Children, instructed me in thy Truth,
and called me to be a Professor of thy Holy Religion; Great and merciful
Creator, who have been my Proteor and Defender from all dangers, look down in
mercy upon me, and continue thy Favors to me, the remaining part of my Life. I
see and experience every day the manifold expressions of thy goodness. Thy Holy
Name be praised for them all. Give me more and more a Sense of thy
mercifulness, and a grateful heart; that in these tender Years I may learn my
great Duty, to serve and glorify thee on Earth, and prepare my self for an
Eternity; for this purpose increase my knowledge, and the graces thou have been
pleased to bestow upon me, through a good Education of my Religious Parents.
Bless all my endeavors and theirs; imprint thy holy Fear in my tender Soul;
preserve me from ill Company, from the Vices and Errors of the Times; make me
truly constant and faithful in the Professionof that Holy Religion unto which I
am called. Give me a right Understanding of its divine Precepts, and grace to
practice them in my Life. Let thy Word be my Rule, thy Truth my guide, thy
Spirit my Comforter, and thy Glory my Reward. Preserve me, I beseech thee, my
good God, from the Evils unto which I am subject; and let my Soul and Body be
precious in thy Sight; especially this Night, into which I am entering, let the
Merciful Eye of thy Providence preserve me, during its mournful shadows, from
all Spiritual and Temporal Enemies. Let thy Holy Angels guard and protect me,
and bring me safe to the next day, to behold and admire the Wonders of thy
Creation and Providence in the World. Make me useful in my Generation, bless
all my undertakings and endeavors in my Calling, that I may by it advance thy
Glory, and do good both to my self and others. And because our natural Poverty
is such, that without thee, and a continual supply from thy Bounty, we cannot
possibly subsist; gracious God send me all things needful for my Soul and Body;
let me not depend too much upon the plentiful Provision of these earthly things
already made for me; but as thou art the Life and Soul of all thy Creatures,
and without thy Blessing, our greatest plenty of good things is altogether
unprofitable, let the expectation of this Blessing encourage me to depend
wholly upon thy favor, and stir up my industry in the duties of my Calling,
and in the service of my Country.

Bless all my Relations and Parents, more especially [here name such as are in
Affliction] grant them long life, health and happiness, preserve the King's
Majesty, all my Governors and Teachers, enable them all in their places to
glorify thee their God, and do good to this Nation and People: Defend us all
from our Enemies at home and abroad, and suffer them not to triumph over us,
but continue in our days Peace, Truth, Justice, Plenty and Prosperity. These
and all other Mercies I humbly Beg for Christ Jesus his sake, my only Savior
and Mediator, who taught us thus to pray.

OUR Father which art in Heaven; hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation; But deliver us from all Evil; For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

LEt thy grace, thy Truth and Goodness be with me, preserve and keep me now and
for evermore. Amen.

Prayers before Meal.
SEnd down thy Blessing, good God, upon these thy Creatures that we are now to
be partakers of; enable them to feed our Bodies, and recruit our weakness, and
strengthen us to serve and glorify thee on Earth, that we may receive from
thee the Rewards of thy Servants in Heaven. This we beg for Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

Another Prayer before meat.
GRacious God, we see by these fresh Expressions of thy Bounty, that thou art
never weary to load us with thy good things. Sanctify them unto us at this
present time, and us to thy Service, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Profitable Meditation at the sight of a Table spread or covered with Food
for our Bodies.
HOw often have I tasted and felt the goodness of my God! He is that full Ocean
of Mercy and Sweetness, from whence these Streams proceed by various
dispensations and Methods. He is that bottomless Fountain that never will be
exhausted. Here, here are tokens of his Love to us, and care of our
preservation, before our Eyes: These Creatures are sent to mend the daily
breaches of this outward Tabernacle, to recruit our Mortal Weaknesses with a
fresh supply, to corroborate the decaying strength of Nature with new Spirits:
We see, by experience, that these Bodies that God has made, he is careful to
maintain, and by the Influence of the Heavens, and the Fruitfulness of the
Earth, to furnish with all their Wants. O wonderful Providence! How full and
plentiful are thy Stores! that so great a share is appointed for me. How rich
is that Bounty, that when all my Fellow Creatures, so many Millions in Number,
are provided, vouchsafes me so great a Lot and large Portion. He can never
want, that entertains a good Correspondency with the great Purveyor of Mankind,
whilst the Avenues and Conveyances are open. O shut not up thy mercy from us;
for let my Estate be never so great, and the Provision for my Body be never so
large, alas these poor senseless Creatures cannot benefit me without thy
Blessing accompanies them; these morsels may as soon choke as feed me; without
that invisible Virtue which thou alone can send along with them; I humbly
crave it at thy good hands, my good God; let not my Sins sower or poison these
thy Mercies; let me not trust too much upon these outward assistances of Life
and Health, but as by thy daily proceedings, thou have taught me to depend
chiefly upon thy Liberality, let me look up to, and expect from thee daily food
and nourishment; grant me a thankful Heart, never to forget so great a goodness.

But the sweetness that I am going to relish, minds me of the sweetness of that
Bounty from whence it proceeds, and of the greatness of thy Divine Wisdom, that
has baited all necessary actions of our Life with a natural delight and
pleasure. How ravishing must the Fountain of Goodness be, seeing these drops
conveyed unto us, at such a distance, are so pleasing to our Palats. God that
now entertains my Being so far from his immediate presence, intends one day to
draw me nearer to himself, to live with him for ever; then the Divine Goodness
shall refresh and comfort me without the cold assistance of inferior things;
then the smiles of God's Countenance shall be conveyed to us, not by
Reflections and at second hands, but more immediately; we shall then see as we
are seen, and solace our selves (during the numberless Ages of an Eternity) in
the presence of this good God, where we shall want neither Food nor Raiment,
but these corrupt Bodies shall be freed from all the slavery of the Elements
and dependency upon them; for we shall depend upon our God alone, and him only
shall we serve. For this Corruption must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal
must put on Immortality. O that I might have always in mind that final end of
Mankind, and use these thy Comforts, but not abuse them by excess and gluttony.
These Bodies which thou have so wonderfully made, and preserves with such care,
are of that Excellency, and designed for those Noble and Divine purposes, that
they must not be disgraced nor polluted with Vice. These Creatures thou have
appointed for our Refreshment, not for the dishonor or ruin of our Bodies. If
our Tables overflow, how many of our poor Neighbors are in want? Have thou
sent this plenty for me alone? Is it not that I should praise thee in the use
of so much as is needful for my self and Attendants, and that I should
distribute the rest to such as are in need? I will imitate this thy Liberality,
my good God, and be a faithful Steward of these inferior Mercies.

But this Food of my Body minds me of that of my Soul. I have another more
Spiritual and Divine Being that I must feed and cloth. Gracious God, forget
not that Immortal and better part of my self, but nourish it with Wisdom and
Truth, that I may grow in Grace and in the knowledge of thee my God. Remove not
the Candlestick of thy Gospel from us; suffer not Schism and Idolatry to
prevail and smother thy true Religion in their horrid Abominations, but let
Truth and Innocence overcome at last; maugre the furious attempts of Men and
Devils; feed this precious Soul with that Bread which comes down from Heaven;
increase in me all Virtue and Goodness, and preserve both my Soul and Body to
thine Eternal Kingdom. Amen.

Another Prayer before meat for a Child.
GOOD God bless me and these Creatures that we are to receive, that in a
moderate use of them we may be enabled to serve and glorify thee on. Earth,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Useful Meditations AND PRAYERS, Upon GOD and his DIVINE ATTRIBUTES.
A Meditation and Prayer upon the Incomprehensible Being and Presence of God.
O Adorable Majesty! Being of Beings, Creator and Supporter of this Great
World! How wonderful must be the source of all these visible Wonders! How
glorious the chief Lord of so large an Empire, and of so many differing sorts
of Creatures, that fill all the Elements and every Corner! We are sensible of
thine infinite Presence, yet can conceive no shape nor being like thy Divine
Majesty. The Pictures of all thy Perfections are scattered and represented in
every thing that is made, and thou have left an impression of thy Wisdom and
Power in every part of this large World; yet none can represent thee, O great
God, as thou art. We see, fell, and are perfectly sensible of thy Divine
Footsteps left upon every Creature; yet our weak apprehensions cannot entertain
any Idea that may answer thy Greatness. O Spirit of Spirits, how is it possible
that so weak a Creature as I am, who can understand nothing but by the Ministry
of these weak Senses, should be able to comprehend the infinite and
incomprehensible God, whose glorious Presence dazles the Eyes, and surpasses
the Understandings of the perfectest and noblest Creatures that are above. O my
God, fill my Soul with an holy dread of thy greatness and Power. Suffer me not
to receive any base impression or filly Imagination of thy Divine Being; and as
thou art Incomprehensible, let me not presume to form in my mind any Image, nor
to have before mine Eyes any Picture, with a design to represent thee. Let
thine Universal Presence be always present with me, but in such a manner, as I
may not be guilty of Spiritual Idolatry, or of harboring any mean thought of
thy Glory. O merciful God, thou requirest these Services from us, poor
Creatures, and have promised thine assistance to us in time of need; put
therefore my Soul into an Holy Temper, fit for thine acceptance, and let these
Ejaculations and Emissions of my Heart and Mind, proceed from an Humility and
Fear of thy presence, that they may not be unworthy of thy Grace and Favor.
And the nearer I approach unto thy Mercy-Seat, vouchsafe to look upon the
necessities of my Soul and Body, and grant me those Requests that thou, O my
God, in thine infinite Wisdom, know most needful for me, for the sake, and
by the mediation of my Great Savior, whose intercession for me I humbly
implore. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer upon the Immutability of our Great God.
O Unchangeable Being, the Author of all these changeable things that appear
before our Eyes, Thou art that immutable God, upon whom we may safely depend.
Every thing that thou have made directs our Eyes and Contemplations to thee, as
the surest foundation of all our hopes and expectations; and the nearer the
Creatures have the Honor to approach thy glorious Throne, the more they are
fixed and secured by their Rights of Creation from all Unconstancy and
Mutability. This wide World and all Sublunary things are unsettled, and rolling
from one State to another, tumbled and tossed, changed by many Accidents, so
that we cannot rest nor settle our expectations upon them. But the Heavenly
Globes continue since their first make, unchangeable through so many
Revolutions of Ages; though they also, for the sin of Man, shall suffer an
alteration by thine overruling Power. But those Spiritual Beings that inhabit
beyond and above our Prospect, are yet less subject to mutation; all their
Perfections proceed from thine overflowing abundance: Thou only, O my God, art
the Creator and Benefactor of their Immortal Natures: They are all subject to
some weakness, and are circumscribed and limited, but thou alone art the
unlimited and unchangeable God, always enjoying an happiness never to be
obscured or lessened by the most violent endeavors of all thine Enemies. Thou
art always continuing in that Glorious state, that nothing can possibly
Eclipse. Thou art immutable in thy self, immutable in thy Designs and
Resolutions, immutable in thy Promises and Truth, and immutable in all thy
Divine Perfections. O my God, give me grace that I may settle upon thee my
Faith and hope, and rest upon thee alone, for all my present and future
advantages. I have no other Rock to build upon, but thy Power and Mercy; no
other Truth to trust to, but thy revealed Word. O that I may embrace it with
that immutable Resolution, that may admit of nothing contrary to the same, that
my Soul may be fixed only upon thee my good God, and look with contempt upon
all other Objects. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer upon the Eternity of God.
O Eternal and Everlasting God, before the Heavens and the Earth, before the
Sun and all the rest of the Luminaries that are above had a Being, thou did
subsist of thy self in a full enjoyment of an unchangeable Felicity. From all
Eternity to all Eternity, thou art the same glorious and Incomprehensible
Being, who never fails them that seek thee in Spirit and in Truth. Let the
World change and alter, and the Generations of Creatures succeed one another in
their appointed times. Let all inferior things roll and pass away. Let them
have their beginnings, their growth, perfections and decay; thou art the same
and Eternal God, who never had any beginning, nor never can have any end. Thou
alone art that independent Majesty, upon whom all other things lean, and from
whom they expect the Supplies and Recruits to their decaying and failing
Natures. Thou art the first Source and Spring of all Motion and Power. O my
God, thou have granted to my Soul and Spirit an immortal Nature to continue for
ever, as thy self, and I am going apace to this boundless Eternity; and as I am
thine Image and Creature, O that I may live with thee for ever; cast me not
away into endless Torments, make me an Eternal Monument of thy Mercy and
goodness, receive me into thine everlasting Rest, for Jesus Christ his sake.
Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer upon God's Almighty Power.
O Dreadful Majesty of Heaven, wherever I cast my Eyes, thy Power shines
before me clearer than the Sun at Noonday. In the make of this great Fabric
of the World, and in the disposal and continuance of all the several Parts, how
visibly does thine extraordinary Power appear! the Heavens and all the Elements
are Witnesses and Trumpeters of thy glorious Power, which nothing can oppose or
stop. The Devils that are revolted from thee, do yet own, and are subject to
thine Omnipotency; they are held fast in Chains, and are so restrained by thine
Almighty Hand, that they cannot possibly move without thy permission. When I
cast mine Eyes upon the Seas, and consider the vastness and fury of the Waves:
When I look up to Heaven, and see the many glorious and large Globes of Light,
some settleed and fixed, others rolling in their several Spheres, O my God, how
wonderfully does thy Power appear to me in all these things. And as thou art
the only Original of all Virtue and Power, I have reason to conclude, that all
Creatures together cannot stop thine hand, and that there is nothing impossible
with thee; as thou have been able to Create all things, thou art able to govern
and rule their unruliness and greatest Fury, to the setting forth of thy Glory;
and whatsoever thou have promised thou will surely perform, and art fully able
to accomplish. O Almighty Creator, give me a real sense of thy Power, that I
may stand in awe of it, that I may trust upon it in time of need, that I may
believe in thy Word and Promises, that my Soul may rest and rely upon thee
alone, and never doubt of thy Protection, and of thy Power to save me, Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer upon the Wisdom of God, and his infinite Knowledge.
O Infinite Being, thy Wisdom is answerable to thine Almighty Power, and has
the same Creatures to manifest and set it forth. Wherever I see the one, I must
needs take notice of the other that is obvious to every Eye, in the disposition
of all things that are made in their fashion, and composition; in their
Inclinations, and tendencies; in the design and purpose of their Creation; in
their mutual Correspondencies and Government, and in the Laws and Rules that
they observe. Is there any of so dull an apprehension, that cannot observe a
more than ordinary Wisdom in all these particulars? Can we see the Sun, Moon
and Stars, observe their appointed and annual Motions and Stations, without
variation, and not think upon thy Wisdom? O Almighty God, who have stretched
forth the Heavens like a Curtain, and rulest over all. Well may I cry out with
the Blessed David, in admiration of all these Blessed Wonders. In Wisdom have
thou made them all. But what need have I to look at such a distance for the
Footsteps and Evidences of Divine Wisdom. In my Body and Soul, and in every
Member, wherein the Great World is Epitomized, and the Incomprehensible
Attributes of the Unity and Trinity shadowed out, here are wonderful and
surprising expressions of thy Wisdom, that I carry about me. Wherefore, O my
God, have thou opened mine Eyes, and bestowed upon me an understanding Nature,
to observe all these things; but that I should meditate and admire thy great
Wisdom that shines before me brighter than the Sun. O Eternal Wisdom of Heaven,
as I am thine Image, grant me a share of this Wisdom; imprint in my Soul such
Habits of Wisdom and Knowledge, that I may fear and admire thy Divine Majesty,
and the rather, because thine all-seeing Eye is every where, to take notice of
my behavior and actions. There is no darkness nor shadow of Death, where
Iniquity may hide or retreat from thy Knowledge. All things are naked and open
before thee; thou have a perfect insight into all the Inclinations of my Heart
and Soul, and fore-seest what shall happen in this great World, with the
several Causes. O wonderful Knowledge, that comprehends the Sparrows in the
Market, and the Lillies of the Field, and the meanest Beings, that owe all to
thee a subsistence. O wonderful Wisdom and Knowledge, that extends it self over
all the parts of this great Fabric, and nothing is exempted from the benefits
that are procured thereby. Give me, O my God, such an understanding of this
infinite Knowledge, and of thine All seeing Eye, that I may stand in awe of thy
Divine Presence; that I may fear to displease thee; that my Soul may be always
in such a disposition, as becomes a Creature and a Servant of so Holy, so
Powerful, and such an All-seeing Majesty. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer UPON THE Goodness of God Manifested in Nature and
Providence.
O Universal Goodness, that opens thy Hand to all things that have a Being, and
furnishest so many Sorts of Creatures out of thine overslowing abundance, with
so much sweetness and variety of Pleasures: How full must be the Stores, out of
which so many Millions are continually supplied! From what overflowing Ocean of
Delight and Joy, proceed so many Streams that yield a sufficiency to all, and
yet there is an overplus left for more! O wonderful Goodness, that know how
to supply every Creature with that which is most suitable to its Appetite and
Nature, and give a contentment to the several species, according to their
Capacities and Tempers. Through how many differing Channels does this
inexhaustible Goodness convey to us the necessaries and conveniences of Life.
Man, of all sublunary subsistencies, seems to be the chief Favorite of the
Divine Goodness, other things and Creatures have their short allowances, in
comparison of Man. It is upon him that thou do heap the Riches and
Satisfactions of the Earth. It is to him thou have granted thy most signal
Favors. It is in his Bosom that thou do empty all varieties of sweetness and
Earthly Comforts, without any regard to his deservings. O Impartial and
disinterested Goodness, that expects no returns, but such as may give thee the
Glory, and us the Benefit, and may be a means to sanctify and increase our
Blessings. How ready should we be to comply with this inexpressible Goodness,
and answer the Expressions of thy Favors, with such easy, cheap, and
profitable returns! Should we be backward to acknowledge that which every
moment we may be sensible of, and when the bare acknowledgment will produce
unto us fresh Recruits, and greater tokens of Love from thine unwearied Bounty.
O let me never forget thy goodness, my good God, expressed and experienced in
my Creation, and thy Providence in making me a rational Creature, and giving me
an immortal Soul, with all the Endowments and Faculties which cause me to excel
all other visible Species; in providing so well for me, and defending me in my
Infancy, from the dangers unto which its infirmities are exposed; in bringing
me to an age of discretion, and supplying all my Wants with fresh and continual
Blessings; in preserving my Body and Soul from all Evils, and Enemies, unto
this Moment; in blessing my Labors and augmenting the Provisions for my
subsistence. I am not able, O Celestial Good ness, to reckon up the chief Heads
of thy continual Favors. O that I may learn to imitate this Heavenly Goodness,
and to express it in my behavior and actions to my fellow Creatures. Is it for
me alone that thou have given so many and so great Blessings? should I not
impart and bestow them upon those that want Supplies? Must I ingorge and
swallow all? Must I keep with a tenacious hand what thou sendest to me, that I
may convey it further with discretion to such as are not so plentifully stored,
that they also may have cause with me to praise thy Holy Name and liberality.
Give me not only good things, but also as good and distributive a mind, and as
liberal a hand to send them abroad, that other my fellow Servants may likewise
feel and have a sense of thy bounty to me and them.

O! Divine Goodness, make me to be like thy self, and bring me nearer to thy
self, that what I now experience at a distance, I may find in thee, in a nearer
approach unto thine Eternal Presence. This sweetness that I relish in thy
Creatures invites me, and promises greater and more unspeakable delights, when
I shall appear before thee my God, who art the only Source and inexhaustible
Fountain of all sincere pleasure and joy. Give me such an heart to manage and
behave my self amongst these Earthly Comforts, that I may not forfeit my right
to the Heavenly; but that I may lay up in store for my self such a good
Foundation against the time to come, that I may lay hold on Eternal Life. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer upon the Mercy of God, in the Redemption of Man, by
the Lord Jesus Christ.
O Supernatural Goodness, it is in this Action that thou have discovered to all
intelligent Beings the unfathomed depths of Love, Kindness, Mercy, Liberality,
and Compassion. Here it is that the Divine Bounty appears in its greatest
Splendor. Is my God come to visit me in my decayed Estate? Does his mercy
stretch forth a hand to fetch me out of that Abyss of Misery, into which I was
with the rest of Mankind falling irrecoverably? Has he so much love and
humility as to cloth himself with the rags of my mortality, that I might be
lifted up, and one day adorned with the Crown of his Glory. O blessed exchange,
that bespeaks a mercy and love in my Savior, beyond my apprehension! What
wonderful and surprising Methods appointed by the Divine Wisdom, to bring to
pass this happy end! Give me leave, with the Wise Men of the East, and the
Shepherds of the Fields, my merciful Savior, to visit thee in thy Nativity,
and from thence to view the footsteps and proceedings of this stupendous
Mercy, as they appear in every part and passage of thy Life and Death, of and
our Redemption. O Merciful God, the wonder of thy mercy in thine Incarnation is
clearly seen in the greatness of thine abasement, in the conformity to such an
apostate, and offending Nature, in submitting to the weakness of our Humanity,
and engaging thy self in a Race full of the most grievous Sufferings, without
the ordinary conveniences of Life to sweeten the bitterness of thy griefs, and
mittigate thy sorrows. How merciful do thou show thy self to such as wanted
thine assistance. Thy mercy gave eyes to the Blind, feet to the Lame, health to
the Sick, soundness to the Distempered, deliverance to the Possessed, pardon to
the troubled in mind, and life to the dead. Never any did seek unto thee for
help, but thy compassion did as soon grant it as it was desired, unto them also
whose estate rendered them incapable of thy most signal favors: Not only thy
Friends, but thine Enemies too have felt and experienced the tenderness of thy
mercy. What tears of compassion did thou not shed at the sight of Jerusalem's
Sins, and at the consideration of its approaching Judgments! How full of mercy
was thy just indignation, to behold the hardness of the Jews hearts, after so
many, and such aparent Miracles, the Evidences of a Divine power and
approbation! How full of mercy was this dying Savior, to pray for his Enemies,
at the very moment of loading him with affronts and contempt!

O Divine Sacrifice of Mercy! to live such a painful Life for our sakes, was a
great expression of thy love and mercy; but to dye for us, to pay for the price
of our Redemption, and suffer such an ignominious and grievous Death, was a far
greater. Mercy, O my Savior, leads thee through Death and the Grave, to a
joyful Resurrection. Every step is a step of Divine Mercy relating to us; it
shines most visibly, in releasing our great Surety out of the Grave, where our
Enemies had shut him up; in affording us such an assurance of the
accomplishment of our Redemption, and in admitting our Nature into the
Celestial Mansions. Blessed be this wonderful Mercy, in that it has called us
to, and made us partakers of the Benefits of our Redeemer's Death and Passion,
and gives us such fair hopes and assurances of a Glorious immortality with and
by him. I beseech thee let me never be unworthy of so much goodness. And seeing
thy mercy, O my God, has looked upon the greatest of Sinners, shall I doubt
of; or question whether it will be extended to me? Seeing it was designed for
my benefit, and this good Savior bore my Sins upon his Cross, shall I exclude
my self by my unbelief? shall I lessen that which is infinite and unspeakable,
and that which I ought to magnify by my confidence upon it? Prepare me for the
reception of it, forgive and pardon all my Sins, admit me into thy favor, and
into the number of thine Elect. Give me such visible Evidences, that I may
rejoice in thy Salvation; confirm my faith, and strengthen my reliance upon the
tenderness of thy Compassions; and as thy Mercy is extraordinary to my Soul,
let me not be cruel to my fellow Servants, but courteous, compassionate, kind,
and merciful to them; that I may be a real imitator of thee my great God and
Savior, and copy out in my actions the expressions of thy wonderful mercy to
my Soul. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer upon the Justice and Holiness of God.
O Dreadful Majesty! as we gratefully acknowledge thy mercy and goodness to be
infinite and unspeakable to us, poor men; so we humbly adore thy Divine
Justice, and know it to be most terrible to such unworthy Creatures as provoke
thy Displeasure. Thy forbearance may suffer the wicked to Flourish and Triumph
in impiety; but certainly, as thou art a wise God, thou have appointed a time
for a retaliation, and to render unto every one according to their deeds. Shall
men live and act in defiance of thine Almighty Power? Shall they violate thy
Sacred Laws, and tread under foot thy Divine Authority? and shall not thine
All-seeing Eye take notice, and thine affronted Majesty be sensible of such
heinous Crimes. I appeal to the Consciences of the most obdurate Wretch, and
vilest Contemner of a Deity, whether the fears and disquietness of their inward
Being, which we call the Soul, the Spirit, or the Mind, do not suffiently
witness, and tell them there is a Superior Justice to which they are answerable
for their offenses. In Nature this Divine Wisdom and Justice shine together in
the great Fabric of the World, in that excellent order of the several pieces,
in the disposition and tendencies of the Created Beings, in the Laws Rules and
Orders that preserve them from decay: And thine Almighty Power, O my God, is
seen in the preservation and support of all these things, in the midst of so
much, and such violent Commotions, as well as in their Creation; and shall thy
Divine Justice be wanting in this, in suffering the Rational Beings to break
thy Laws, to contemn thy Power, and spurn at thy Majesty, without a check?
shall they disorder the humane World, and overthrow thy Sacred Constitutions
unpunished for ever? Look back, O my Soul, into former Ages, and see whether
thou can find in the Records of Antiquity any former footsteps of this
Justice: I see it appear visible in the overwhelming the first World, and
commanding the waters of the Seas, and the Heavens, to wash away the first
Generations of Men. How terrible and impartial in drowning so many millions of
all sorts of Creatures for the Sins of mankind! How hot and dreadful was thy
Justice, when that delicions Paradise of Sodom and Gomorrha was by fire and
brimstone from above, turned into a stinking and noisome Lake, that yet to the
World's end shows the Signs and Tokens of a Divine Displeasure! How grievous
was thy Justice in punishing the Nation of the Jews, and that rebellious City
Jerusalem, for the Crimes of its Inhabitants, when hundreds of thousands were
destroyed, their Glory levelled in the dust, and the rest scattered among all
Nations! But what need we search so far for the declarations of thy Justice?
Are not those Scourges of War, Famine, and Pestilence, that sweep away
thousands in a moment into their Graves, without any regard of Crowns and
Dignities; sufficient and visible expressions of thy Divine Justice, O my God!
I see it in the punishment of many vile wretches, in the destruction of States
and Empires, in the overthrowing of Towns and Cities, in the Earthquakes and
Hurricanes, in the wonderful Alterations and Revolutions of the World. I hear
it denounce Death and Destruction to wickedness and iniquity in thy Holy word:
The light of the wicked shall be put out, terror shall make him afraid on every
side, and shall drive him to his feet; his strength shall be hungerbitten, and
destruction shall be ready at his side; his confidence shall be rooted out, and
it shall bring him to the King of terrors, his remembrance shall perish from
the Earth, and he shall have no name in the street, Job 18. The wicked man
shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Ps. 9.17. The
Lord preserves all them that love him, but all the wicked will be destroyed.
Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished, Prove. 11.21. Has
thy Truth, O my God, pronounced these dreadful Threatenings, and many more, and
shall not thy Power and Justice execute them? All the World is at thy devotion,
thou can command the Heavens, the Earth, and all the Elements, to accomplish
thy Will. O Divine Justice, thou art a Consuming Fire, and no respecter of
Persons; the Prince, and the Subject, the Rich, and the Poor shall be treated
all alike, and thou art not to be deceived with the paint of Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation, nor to be cozened with the impudent pretenses of deceitful men.
Thou see, O my God, into the very heart and soul, and can not be imposed
upon, or deceived in the examination of our actions. When therefore I consider
the excellency of thy Sacred Laws, and the aversion that thou have declared
against Sin, and the severity of thy Justice: O Holy and Dreadful Majesty, I
cannot but tremble to think upon my guilt, and the number of mine offenses; to
think that I must appear before thy last Tribunal, before a Glorious and
Impartial Judge, when so many Creatures that I have abused, shall all witness
against me; when my Conscience shall lay before me all my Crimes, and the most
secret Contrivances shall be disclosed, with all the aggravations of thy
mercies, forbearance, and goodnesses. What shall I answer? how shall I escape,
when the Executioner shall be there ready, to drag me away into endless
Torments, from whence there can be no Reprieve? How grievous will it be, to lie
under the heavy strokes of thy severe Vengeance for ever.

O my God, that I may be now so sensible of thy Justice, that I may never
experience it. Make me an eternal monument of thy mercy, that I may never feel
the severity of thy wrath and Justice: Grant me that exemption which thou have
provided, and promised to thy chosen; an interest in my great Savior, in his
Death and Passion, for his sake spare me, and forgive all my Crimes. Accept of
his Sacrifice. I fly from the Terrors of thy Justice, to thine unspeakable
Mercy in Christ, at his Death, and at his Resurrection: Thou have proclaimed
Pardon to all believing Sinners, Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief. I lay
hold on thy favorable Promises, and though I have deserved thy wrath, provoked
thine indignation, stirred up thy vengeance; I expect through the merits and
mediation of my merciful Savior, who has been a sufficient Propitiation for
all our Sins, to obtain forgiveness, and thine Eternal favor, with an
admittance into thy Celestial Paradise. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer upon Plenty and Riches.
O Heavenly Father, how great is thy goodness to me, in bestowing upon me these
Possessions, and Blessings of this Life! in granting to me this Plenty, and
these Conveniences! my Lot and mine Inheritance declares what regard thou
have to me, above all other thy Servants and Creatures; this comes not to me by
chance, neither is it my Labor and Industry that have procured it, but thy
Divine Appointment, and thy Liberal hand, to thy holy Name be ascribed the
praise and the glory of all these things. I hold them with a relation to thee,
my great Lord, unto whom they do really belong, and to whom I must pay my
Tribute, as the acknowledgement of thy Propriety. I look upon my self only as
thy Steward, bound to manage and dispose of these Blessings according to thine
Orders. O that I may be true and faithful, and not alienate to the service of
Sin, to the gratifying of my Lusts, or the pleasing of the Devil, what
appertains to thee my God. As thou have increased my stores, increase in me thy
grace and wisdom, that I may manage these Talents to thy honor and service:
Humble my Soul under such a load of earthly Blessings; am I more deserving than
so many thousand others, who are not so well supplied and furnished! what
obligations have I laid upon thee, my God, to lift me up above so many that I
see below me? to favor me more than thousands who are in want! to fill me with
all these good things, when others are empty! how greatly am I indebted to thy
Bounty! how shall I discharge my self, and make suitable returns? with these
earthly Comforts, bestow upon me thy heavenly blessings; sanctify them to me,
that they may not be an increase to my guilt, but rather a a means of
Salvation: Bestow upon me a contented mind, a poverty of Spirit in the midst of
all this plenty, that I may enjoy it with moderation, and dispose of it with
discretion. Wean mine affections from the World, and all these Vanities, that
they may be a preparation for greater and more lasting Riches, which thou have
laid up in thine Heavenly Sanctuary, for them that love and fear thee. If these
things are so sweet and pleasing to us now, conveyed to us at such a distance
off, and attended with much labor and sorrow, how sweet and ravishing will
that plenty, and those riches be, which thou will grant at a nearer approach!
when thou shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, and there shall be no more
labor to get and preserve them, no fear to lose them, nor trouble in the
enjoyment. What a glorious prospect have thou given us in thy holy Word, of
greater and more excellent Possessions, of an Inheritance far more worthy of
mine acquisition, if I now render not my self unworthy of so wonderful a
bounty, by ill actions, or too great a fondness of this present World. I am
certain, my good God, what thy Truth has declared, thy Power and Liberality
will one day perform in us, and for us; for thou have created me for happiness.
If I will accept of it, thou have designed, provided, and purchased happiness
for me. Whilst I live in this World there is but a shadow in the midst of all
these good things that I embrace of true felicity. The Cares and Encumbrances,
the Miseries and Calamities, the Pains and the Aches, and the Fears and
Apprehensions are continually disquieting our minds in the greatest plenty of
outward enjoyments, and the temptations of Sin and the World, will not suffer
me to be truly happy: Neither can my Soul, an Immortal and Heavenly Being,
Created for the Vision of God, be content without thee, O my Maker. The joy
that I now feel is in that relation and interest that I have to and in thee for
all these possessions, and these enjoyments; I look upon my self but as a
Stranger and a Pilgrim, my Country is Heaven. When thou shall call me thither,
let not these Honors and Dignities, these Riches, and this outward Splendor,
these vain and deceitful Pleasures incumber my Soul, or cause it to look back
upon these deceitful appearances; that I may be ready to shake them off, and
willing to depart, to visit thine Eternal Presence; where my blessed Savior
the Lord Jesus Christ will receive and welcome my Soul in the Companies of
immortal Spirits and Angels, and bestow upon me the Heavenly and everlasting
Riches, and true Honors, Things that eye has never seen, ear has never
heard, and can never enter into the heart of man. Preserve I beseech thee, my
good God, my Soul and Body to thine Eternal Kingdom, where all these wonders of
thy Power and Bounty are carefully laid up. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer upon the Consideration and Sense of Poverty, and Want.
O My Creator and Redeemer, my God who have granted me a Being, and placed me
in this station of Life, destitute of all Worldly Comforts; I adore thy Divine
Wisdom, and am content to undergo all the troubles and inconveniences that
thou shall think sitting to put upon me: I doubt not, but as I am thy Creature
and Servant, as my good Lord and Master, thou will provide for my subsistence;
and if the allowance be but small, it is more than I deserve at thy hands;
however, it is enough, if I can have but a satisfied mind. Thou have promised
to supply my wants from day to day, and give me meat, drink, and raiment,
without which I cannot continue in this Life, why shall I doubt of the
performance of this thy declaration? thy stores are full, and thou art rich in
bounty, able and sufficient by various means to recruit all my wants; if the
supplies come but sparingly, and thou do allow me but a small pittance; if I
receive from thee by Retail, what others have from thee by Wholesale, it is thy
will and pleasure that my dependence might be more upon thy Goodness and
Providence, and that I may be always looking up to thee for the Conveniences
and Necessaries of Life. Thy Wisdom, O my God, know what is best for me,
what is most proper to exercise my patience, says, reliance upon thee, and my
submission to thy holy and heavenly will. Who knows, but if I were placed in
the midst of plenty, I should abuse thy temporal mercies, and employ them in my
own Damnation; now I have no such debt to answer for. Thou have recommended
unto me contentment in this estate, by teaching me to pray only for my daily
bread; if it be but course, it is such as proceed from thy liberal hand, and
fine enough to maintain this Earthly Tabernacle, that must shortly become food
to the Worms of the Earth. O my God, by these troubles of Life it is thy
pleasure to wean mine affections from the World, and that I may place my chief
happiness beyond the Grave, that I may live in expectation when thou will call
me out of this painful and laborious Life, to mine Eternal Rest, where I shall
be no more exercised but in the praising of thy Glorious Majesty, in the Quires
of Heavenly Spirits. I am satisfied, O my Heavenly Father, in thy Love and
Goodness, which has never been wanting to me since I was in this World. I look
upon my mean estate and poverty, to be an argument of the reality of thy love
and kindness, seeing a Lazarus upon a Dunghill, was as dear unto thee, as the
richest and noblest of thy Children; seeing so many of thy chosen Servants, of
the Worthies of former Ages, have in this present Life wandered about in Sheep
Skins, and Goat Skins, being Destitute, Afflicted, Tormented; and have suffered
greater wants, and more pressing necessities than I am reduced to. But shall I
murmur at thy wise and good Providence, when I am reduced to the Condition of
my great Savior, mine Emanuel, who humbled himself to the form of a Servant;
my God, who was contented to lead a Life on Earth, without having any place to
lay his head; a man of grief, and acquainted with sorrow, despised and rejected
of men. It is an honor for me to be made conformable, in some respects, to my
Redeemer; and a sign that thou will not give me all my good things in this
Life, but in another: The more thy Bounty is sparing of thy mercies to me, the
more I expect it will be liberal, when I shall depart hence, into another
estate. They wisdom will manage thy liberalities to me, because thou see
that I have not yet discretion to manage them my self, and because, perhaps, I
should not be able to encounter with, and resist the strong temptations unto
which a greater plenty would infallibly expose me. I submit in all humility, O
my gracious God, to the Wisdom of thy Providence, give me an heart and mind
answerable to this Estates sanctify all thy dispensations to me, that knowing
that I have no other friend but my God, I may put my whole trust and confidence
in him; that having nothing of Worldly wealth to entangle and incumber me, I
may march the more ready and speedier to my Heavenly Country; now I see that I
have no Earthly Pleasures and Delights to embrace, I may lift up my Soul to
thee, and embrace thy promise of a better Estate hereafter. Keep me from
craving too eagerly more than is thine allowance, or from murmuring at mine
hard Condition in this Life, or complaining of my Sufferings: Keep me from
seeking, by indirect means, to remedy my wants, from invading other men's
Rights, from Thievery and Stealing. Let me, as my whole dependence is upon
thee, wait thy leisure, O my good God, and stay till it shall please thee to
increase my Provisions; and let my Estate be never so low and mean, and my
necessities be never so pressing and urgent, let me know how to want, and how
to abound; let me never be deprived of thy favor, and heavenly mercies, let me
never lose the sight of thy gracious Countenance; let me enjoy, and have well
secured to me an interest in my Christ and Savior, and in thy Celestial
Paradise, whither he is gone to provide and prepare a place for me. There is
riches enough for me, and true honors, not subject to Worldly Casualties;
there are pleasures at thy right hand, that will make me quickly forget all the
toil and labors of this earthly Estate. Bring me, in thy good and due time,
out of this troublesome Life; and receive my Spirit into thine heavenly
Sanctuary. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer, at the enjoyment of Prosperity.
O Divine Wisdom, and Almighty Creator and Preserver of my Soul and Body; I
bless thy Holy Name for all these Prosperous Successes, for answering my
Prayers and Expectations with plentiful and gracious Returns. I acknowledge
them to proceed from thee my good God, and to be expressions of thy great and
unwearied mercy. Not unto us, not unto us, but to thy holy Name be ascribed all
the honor and glory. What could my industry, labor or care do, if thou did
not accompany them with thy continual Blessings? Thy hand has been visible in
acting for me, in delivering me from dangers, and giving me such a prosperous
Career to run in; thou my God art my Rock, my Fortress, and my Savior, unto
whom I am indebted for all these Temporal Favors. I am not worthy of the least
of thy Mercies; the more therefore thy Goodness is expressed to me, so much the
more let my Soul be humbled before thee, that I may not soon forfeit nor
misconster these gracious proceedings of thy wise Providence to me. What little
dependence is there upon this Sunshine? How soon may the Clouds of adversity,
deprive me of all this Comfort? What a folly is it for me to presume too much
upon inconstancy. There is a continual revolution in all worldly Affairs, and
nothing is settled upon a sure Basis; but seeing the greatest Empires and
Kingdoms have had a succession of Adversities that have followed their greatest
Prosperities close at the heels, what reason have I to build upon that which is
not secured to me, but may vanish in a night, or disappear in a moment? O my
God, I acknowledge that there is nothing assured to me, but thy Grace and
Mercy, which will never leave nor forsake me, either in Prosperity or
Adversity. Let me not therefore betoo fond and enamoured with my present
glorious condition; but, as I am bound, receive it with thankfulness and
humility, and acknowledge thy undeserved Bounty to me. I must be always ready
to embrace willingly the changes and alterations that thy Wisdom shall send to
this flourishing Estate. Let me not be surprised at a bitter Cup that thy
Providence may give me to drink. It is impossible and contrary to our daily
experience, that every thing should continue to us sweet and pleasant for ever.
As the most fragrant Roses have their Prickles and Thorns, and the most serene
Air is subject to be darkened with Clouds, as the clearese Sun to be covered
over with an Eclipse, and the perfectest Health to be interrupted with
Distempers and Aches; so the greatest worldly Successes and Prosperities have
their Interruptions, their Thorns of Cares and Disturbances, their Clouds and
Eclipses to darken them. I am therefore sensible that all these Favors are but
for a little time, while it shall please thee to continue them: O let me not
lose them by Pride and Insolency, or by a wanton abuse of thy temporal
Blessings. Let not these thy Mercies corrupt my Mind, and aggravate or increase
my Sins, or cause any disorder in my Behavior; but rather let this Earthly
Prosperity make me truly sensible of the many and great Obligations that I owe
to thee, my good God; and cause me to be more ready and more resolved to serve
thee in my Generation, and advance the Honor and Interest of my Lord Jesus
Christ. But in this flourishing Estate, let me not forget the Tears and
Afflictions of Sion; in this Peace and Plenty let me be mindful of my
distressed and persecuted Brethren; that, if I am able to relieve and comfort
them, others of thy Members and Servants may be the better for thy Mercies to
me; that these temporal Blessings may make way for, and prepare me for the
reception of the Eternal; and that when it shall please thee to remove me by
Death, I may not be degraded, but rather promoted in thine Eternal Kingdom,
according to thy gracious Promises. Amen.

A Comfortable Meditation and Prayer for such as are in Adversity, and
afflicted with Losses and Crosses in the World.
O Eternal God, and Admirable Majesty, whose wise Dispensations and Orders of
Providence are various; it is thy will that I should be encompassed about with
Evils and Troubles. Have thou appointed to try my Patience and Obedience by
these Afflictions? Will thou lead me through these Briars and Thorns? Must I
suffer all these Losses and Crosses, and drink this bitter Cup of thy
displeasure? I am content to do it, seeing it is thy Holy Will; and am
persuaded, that all these things shall turn to mine advantage at last. My
Griefs indeed are increased, and my Sorrows are multiplied. Nature cannot but
complain at the sight and sense of so much Misery; but I will give a check to
my natural Affections, and will bring them to yield submission to thy Heavenly
Wisdom. What Noble Examples have I before me of those Worthies of former Ages,
who have been as severely treated and tried as I am, or like to be, and yet
these were thy chosen and thy dearest Children; and shall I misinterpret these
Corrections from thy Hand, and think them to be signs of thy Wrath? Shall I
murmur to be handled as my great Savior was, and drink in the same Cup of
Affliction with him. He swallowed the very dregs of Bitterness and Grief, but
thy Mercy and Goodness has sweetened my Cup with an infusion of some
contentments that are yet left me. Thou have not removed all my Delights, thou
have not taken from me all the former Expressions of thy Bounty; if thou
afflictest me in one part of my self, thou do comfort me in another, and thy
Corrections are not so grievous as to deprive me of all help and satisfaction.
O, my God, I humbly acknowledge that I deserve a severer treatment from thy
Justice than I have yet experienced, and find that thy Mercy does spare my
weakness, and alleviate the burden that thou have laid upon me. I trust that
thou will not send greater Afflictions than I am able well to bear; and in due
time thy Wisdom will give me ease and deliverance. But I see by these
proceedings the Sins and Provocations that I am guilty of; by these Losses thou
do mind me of that Idolatrous Affection that I gave away to these vanities.
By these deprivations I perceive I abused these temporal Mercies; by this
Adversity thou do render my abode in the World uneasy, that I might long and
seek for Heaven, and prepare my self for thine Eternal Rest. Blessed God, grant
that I may rightly understand these excellent Admonitions of thy Providence;
but never suffer me to be so weary as to hasten, or be any ways instrumental in
procuring my departure: I will wait thy leisure and time, and suffer thy Divine
Hand to dispose of my Soul and Body. I reverence, O my God, all thine Orders,
let them be never so grievous, and let them take from me never so many worldly
Comforts; I received them first from thy Liberality, and it is but just I
should resign them to thee again when thou requirest. Naked I came into the
World, and naked I must return back again. Whatever, O Heavenly Father, thou
do condemn me to lose, let me never lose thy Favor; that will make a
sufficient amends for all my other Crosses, and procure me greater advantages
than the World can afford. Sanctify, I beseech thee, all the Actings of thy
Providence to me. Cause me to make that improvement that is designed. Wean my
Heart and Affections from the World. Increase and strengthen thy Grace in me,
that my Soul may be supported by Faith and Patience; and in the midst of the
greatest Calamities, enjoy a Divine Contentment. O, my God, I know thou can
remove this Affliction from me, and bring a Remedy to my most sensible Griefs.
I am persuaded that in thy due time I shall see an alteration, I shall see my
Sorrows turned into Joys, my Sufferings into Ease, my Losses repaired, and all
these Clouds of Affliction vanish and give way to the Sunshine of Prosperity.
However thou art pleased to dispose of me, I beseech thee, cast me not away
from thine Eternal Presence. Support me with thy Grace and Goodness in the
midst of all my Troubles. Lead me in the Paths of Truth and Righteousness.
Sanctify my Soul, and prepare it for a departure hence; and when thou shall
loose it from my weak and infirm Body, receive it into thine Heavenly
Sanctuary. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer in time of Health.
O My Mercisul Creator, who have blessed me with a perfect Body, and a healthy
Constitution, free from the pains and aches that I see other men groan under;
thy Holy Name be praised for this great Temporal Mercy, by which I am enabled
to taste and relish a greater sweetness in all my Enjoyments. How unworthy
should I be, if I should misemploy this strength, and this health, in sinning
against thy Divine Majesty! if I should cast it away in the service of the
Devil, and the gratifying of my Lusts! What a folly is it for me to run into
such Debauchery and Extravagancies of Life, as to undermine my Health, and
willingly to part with this rich Jewel, and great Blessing! How shall I answer
for the loss of this Talent, if I take no care to preserve it! and what shall I
say to my great Lord, if I wilfully cast it away! and if I abuse the Creatures
that he has given me to strengthen it, in ruining my Body, and advancing my
Death how Criminal shall I appear! Thou, O my God, art my best Physician, and
the Precepts of good living recommended to me in thy Holy Word, the most
effectual Cordials to corroborate and confirm my health. Thy Goodness has not
only granted it to me, but afforded in Nature means, in thy Divine Oracles
Rules to maintain it. Shall I be so indiscreet not to follow thy wholesome
Directions? shall I slight thy Sacred Advices and Commands? Without thy
Blessing this strong Body will soon decay, and will it not be just for thee to
withdraw it from an unworthy Contemner of thy Holy Laws? shall I rather listen
to the whisperings, and pernicious suggestions of my vile Lusts, and to the
Devil's Temptations, than to thee my good and merciful Creator, who desire,
and have endeavored to encourage my real happiness here and hereafter? What a
madness for a moment of sinful and deceitful pleasure to ruin my health, to
spoil my sound Body, and cast into it the Seeds of Diseases, Distempers, Pains,
Aches, and Death also! Whilst I continue in thy fear, and in the practice of
thy Commands, in the Rules of Sanctity, Sobriety, and Temperance, I have the
assurance of thy Blessing to accompany and continue this great advantage; but
if I run out extravagantly, and follow the evil Customs of this wicked World, I
shall infallibly meet with Plagues, Torments, and Death. My Body is surrounded
by many Enemies, and I carry about me that which naturally will undermine its
strength and vigor; besides, Old Age will bring me at last to my Grave, and
cast my health and beauty into the dust. How weak is this Earthly Tabernacle,
made up of Clay! how soon is it destroyed by the meanest Things! what reason
have I to trust upon my natural strength, when so many young and lusty Persons
are lying before me in their Tombs! and have I not often felt Death knocking at
my doors, sending its usual Summons before hand, to warn me for a preparation,
by frequent Aches and Weaknesses that have seized upon me. O Lord, as thou have
vouchsafed me health, give me grace to preserve it, by avoiding all those Vices
that are apt to ruin it. Let me never depend too much upon it, but upon thy
Sacred Will; sanctify all the means for my preservation, keep me from falling
into mischiefs and dangers: O that I may employ this Body and Health in thy
Service, and to thy Glory. Thou have admitted this Body of mine to be a Member
of the Mystical Body of thy Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, and it is now to be the
Temple of the Holy Ghost. Let me not therefore profane what thou have
Consecrated to such an excellent purpose, and designed for a Glorious end, to
be a Vessel of Honor in thy Celestial Sanctuary. O, my God, let me have always
before mine Eyes my departure hence, and the sinal Resurrection of my Body,
when thou shall grant unto me a Health that shall never be interrupted, a
Strength that shall never decay, a Life that shall continue for ever, and these
dark and infirm Bodies shall rise Immortal, Splendid, Spiritual, Vigorous,
Transparent, Incorruptible, and Glorious. Amen.

A Medittaion and Prayer useful in time of Sickness.
O My Merciful God and Preserver of my Being; I acknowledge this Sickness to
come from thy divine Appointment; these Pains and Aches have their Commission
from thee to torment my weak Body, and render my present abode in this Life so
uneasy. I have justly deserved a severer treatment from thy Justice. I
acknowledge my Transgressions, and my Sins are ever before me; my provocations
are many and great; I have now time to look back upon the sinful Extravagancies
of my former Conversation, I perceive how vainly and foolishly I have spent my
days, how wickedly I have acted in the World, without any regard to thy Divine
and Sacred Laws. These Torments of Body inflicted upon these Members, mind me
sufficiently how I have employed them formerly to dishonor thy Glorious
Majesty. I see that thou have taken notice of my Actions, and do punish me in
that very part that has offended most. O ungrateful Creature, that did
receive from thy God these entire and perfect Members, and from his unwearied
Liberality their Growth, Support, and Maintenance; and were thou so vile as to
make them instrumental in serving the Devil, and thy base Lusts against thy
God, in sinning against his Authority! Well may thy Justice, O my Creator, take
me to task, and cast me into greater Tortures than these that I now suffer. I
have experienced thy Mercy and Forbearance in every moment of my days. When I
added one Transgression to another, and multiplied my Crimes without number.
How many gracious Calls and Invitations had I from thy Goodness to repent and
amend? How mercifully have thou always treated me? And now this disorder of my
Body proceeding from the irregularities of my life past, might draw upon me an
heavier Burden, and more unsufferable Torments, were it not for thy gracious
forbearance. I understand, O my God, this language of thy Mercy. Thou art not
willing to cast me into the bitter and everlasting Torments of that Lake that
burns with Fire and Brimston; therefore these gentle Flames are kindled in my
Body to make me sensible of thy Justice, that I may prevent it by a seasonable
Repentance. This Fever and these Aches admonish and speak to me in that manner
that thou, O my Heavenly Father, usest to speak to thy dearest Children, in
that manner that is most proper for me, and suitable to thy Grace and Wisdom.
Thou art willing to correct, and not to destroy me. Thou do punish my Body
that my Soul may be spared, and live with thee for ever, that the Sickness of
the one may be the Health of the other. I am content to bear all these strokes
of thy Mercy, O my God; I submit with all humility to thy sacred Will. Thou art
my good and most skilful Physician. Thou know what Corrosives and Remedies
are best to be applied to my Soul and Body: Vain is the help of Man without thy
blessing and operation. And though I seek for ease and for my recovery from
these Pills, Potions, Cordials, Recipe's, and Medicines, and from the skill of
the Learned, I must first look up to thee, my God, before I can find any
benefit in these outward means, I crave thine assistance to influence and
sanctify these methods appointed in thy Providence to restore me to Health
again; for I know that my Life depends wholly upon thy Will and Word; and thou
can raise me again from the lowest Estate, from the Gates of Death; and when
all other skill and means forsake me, thou art my God, my best Friend, and most
experienced Physician, who have in thy hands and power the issues of Life and
Death, able to relive, heal, and remedy all my Wants. To thy Power and Mercy I
flee in this time of my distress. I have little other comfort but in thine
unspeakable Goodness, which I beseech thee not to deny to thy poor afflicted
Creature and Servant. Lay not upon me a greater burden than I can well bear;
and with these griefs of Body administer inward Comforts to my precious Soul.
Pardon and forgive all my Sins; reveal to me some assurances of thy Favor;
discover to me some tokens of thy Love in these my bodily Sufferings. Give me a
real interest in my Redeemer, who has suffered much more for me. Increase my
Faith in his Merits and Promises. However it shall please thee to dispose of
this decaying Tabernacle of my Body, have compassion upon my poor Soul, which
thou have created after thine own image; and purchased to thy self with the
invaluable Blood of thy dear Son. After so great an expression of thy tender
Love for me, let me not be disappointed in the future expectations that in
Reason and Justice I ought therefore to entertain, and have of thy divine
Mercy. O my God, restore me to my former Health, that I may yet live in my
Generation to praise and serve thee: Bless all the means used for my recovery;
direct my Physicians in prescrcibing Remedies; and give power to the Physic to
operate and do me good, if thou art willing that I should continue any longer
in this troublesome life. But why should I be desirous to abide in this World of
misery, in this painful and sinful Estate, seeing thou have given me so clear a
prospect of an immortal Life, of a far better and a more glorious Estate,
provided for me with thee, where none of these Distempers and Torments shall
come to disturb my quiet and happiness! O prepare me for this blessed Rest,
wean my heart and affections from this vain and troublesome World; give me an
entire resignation of my will and desires to thy good pleasure. If thou
designest yet to continue me some time longer in this Earthly Tabernacle, grant
me a resolution to live with more circumspection, that I may be more careful of
my behavior, a more religious observer of thy Holy Laws, more zealous and
mindful to work out my Salvation with fear and Trembling. That I may improve
the few moments that I have yet to live, to prepare for a long Eternity, and
not waste my precious time in vanity, as I have formerly done, mitigate I
beseech thee my great pains, take away thine heavy hand from me, and give me
ease, or a sufficiency of Patience to endure what thou shall think convenient
to lay upon me; let me receive these admonitions from thee in that dutiful
manner as becomes me thy poor diseased Servant, that I may never depend too
much upon my present being, but always think upon, and look for my departure,
that I may be always prepared for a removal out of this incommodious Inn, into
that House that is not made with hands, out of this life checkered with so many
Sufferings, into an uniform and blessed Estate, where all these Sorrows shall
be swallowed up in everlasting Joy and Pleasure. O my God, let not thy grace
and goodness forsake me, or leave me to my self, suffer me not through
impatience to hasten my death, or to desire it, before it be thy will to take
me hence. Let me never be guilty of so great a Crime to dispose of my own Life
which thou have reserved to thy self alone, but strengthen my resolution, and
courage to bear, without murmuring or complaining, with a quiet and contented
Spirit what thy wisdom shall judge convenient for me, and to wait with a
Christian temper for my appointed time, when thou, O my God shall put an end to
all my pains, release my Soul out of this crasie and polluted Prison, and take
this immortal Being out of this decaying House, whereof the Pillars and
Foundations have been so terribly shaken by my present Dis^ase, that I have
justly thought it would before this time fall into ruin. Prepare me for thy
self, O my God, and when thou shall call me away, receive me into thy Holy and
Heavenly Sanctuary, where my ever blessed Savior sits at thy Right hand, to
intercede for me. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer when the Symptoms of Death appear.
O Almighty God, and Heavenly Father, I perceive it is thy will to remove me
out of this Earthly Tabernacle, to call me from my present station, out of thy
Vineyard, where I have been employed in thy Service. Lord, I confess my
negligence and carelessness, that I have not been so diligent as in Justice and
Reason I ought: The Task that thou have given me to end, I have but begun; the
World and its Vanities have stole away my Cares, and employed too much of my
precious time; and the pleasures of Sin have bewitched my Soul, so that I have
been, to my great grief, an unprofitable Servant. But, O my God, there is mercy
with thee, and a sufficiency of mercy, to pardon my greatest and most heinous
Offenses. Declare, I beseech thee, the Infiniteness of thy Mercy; in the
forgiveness of my notorious Transgressions; thou art able to save to the
uttermost, all that come unto thee through my Redeemer the Lord Jesus Christ.
Have thou been merciful to a Thief upon the Cross, to a David and a Peter, to a
Mary Magdalen, and the greatest of Sinners, and will thou deny me a share in
this Divine Mercy! O strengthen my Faith in thy Gracious Promises. I Believe,
help thou mine Unbelief. I seek not unto thee with any confidence upon any
merits or virtues in my self or actions, but as the Prodigal Son, or poor
Publican, with an assurance upon thy pure and disinteressed Love, and the Blood
of my Savior, that speaks better things than that of Abel. Cast me not away
from thy presence now in the time of my distress, look upon my groans, my
tears, and sufferings. The pangs of death have already seized upon me, I am
departing out of this miserable World, my Soul is weary of this loathsome
Tabernacle of my Body, I feel my strength decaying more and more, I see the
Grave is ready to receive my Carcass, and the Worms to devour and feed upon it;
let mine immortal Soul be precious in thy sight, wash and cleanse it in the
blood of the immaculate Lamb, slain and buried for my Sins, and risen again for
my Justification.

Farewell vain World, that I have too much adored, and served, thou art not
able to assist me with any comfort or advice in my need, but my dependence is
upon my God, to his mercy alone I seek for shelter and relief. I now perceive
the emptiness of all those things that worldly minds so highly esteem; what
advantage can I receive from my former Riches, from my Attendants and Friends!
The Preferments, Grandeur, and Titles of Honor cannot benefit me in my present
Estate. Death is going to strip me naked, and deprive me of all present
Comforts; I see the folly of my past Labors, and extraordinary earnestness
after these Vanities. Had I but any longer time to continue on Earth, I would
flight these deceitful shadows of happiness; I see another, and more lasting
happiness beyond the Grave, O my God, an Eternal happiness in another Estate,
not subject to any casualty or change, secured to the owners by thine Almighty
Power; grant me that I may attain unto it, that I may be admitted into thy Holy
and Heavenly Sanctuary, that with the rest of thy chosen, I may be an Eternal
Monument of thy Goodness and Mercy. Remove from me all disorderly affections,
complete the good work that thou have begun in me, and accept of the groans and
prayers that I shall breath out unto thee my Heavenly Father at my last gasp;
send thine Angels to Comfort and secure my Soul, and receive this precious
Being into thy Custody and Protection. Defend and preserve me from the malice
and temptation of all Evil Spirits, at this Critical and last moment: Look in
mercy upon all my Relations that I leave behind me, supply the want of my
Presence, with the continual favors of thy good Providence; be thou a Father
to the Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widows, a true Friend to such as are
forsaken; moderate their grief for my departure, with the assurance of a sinal
Resurrection: Keep them all in thy fear and favor, from the Corruptions of the
Age, and bring them to thine Eternal Kingdom.

O my merciful God, I am weary of this wicked World, and painful Life, release
me at thy good and due time; and though I see a mournful Spectacle in the
dissolution of my Body into loathsome dust, I can see further, beyond my Grave,
to the great and joyful Morning of the Resurrection, when thou shall awaken
this sleeping dust of my Body, when thou shall find out every Grain and
Particle of this Earthly Tabernacle, to join it again together, to live with
thee for ever and ever. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, receive me into thy
Sacred Embraces; I will wait thy leisure, send thine Holy Angels to convey my
Soul into thy gracious presence, that I may rejoice for ever with thine Elect,
and glorify thy Mercy. Ease me of my grievous pains, relieve my sorrowful
Soul, comfort it with a Beam of thy Countenance: Thou have redeemed it, O my
sweet Jesus, receive it as thine own purchase; I yield it up unto thee. Turn my
sorrows into joys, my sufferings and agony into pleasures laid up at thy right
hand: Assist me with thine intercession, and plead for me, O my Heavenly
Advocate. Amen.

A Meditation and Prayer for such as are going to the Public Assemblies, to
hear the word of God.
O Eternal Wisdom, what a mercy is this! to Instruct and Teach us at our Doors,
to enable, enlighten, inspire and send Messengers so near our Dwellings, to
direct us in the right way of Eternal Happiness. What a condescension is this,
to speak to us in our own Language, according to our Capacities; by Men, whose
presence express nothing but meekness and love! was it not sufficient, O
blessed God, that thou should open to us the large Book of Nature, to inform
us of thy Will and Sacred Laws, by so many Characters imprinted in every thing
that is made? was it not sufficient for our Learning, to show us thy pleasure
in the several leaves of another Book of Providence, opened to us wide every
day of our Life! but must thy tender compassion of our Natural ignorance,
unmindfulness, and wilful corruption, teach us by such plain easy and
excellent methods, so full of kindness and love! Must the repetition be so
frequent? must thou so often visit and call upon us to study and meditate upon
the Divine Matters! Certainly our minds are too much wedded to the World, and
too much inclined to irregular actions, seeing thou have judged needful to
repeat so often to us our Duties, and we want every weeks instruction to
withdraw our contemplation from Evil and Vanity. Should not our diligence
answer in some respect thy continual Care, O Merciful Wisdom, and as frequently
meet thee, as we are called upon by these Public Summons! Doubtless the
business that we are to mind is of importance, seeing my Creator thinks
necessary to interpose his Divine Authority, and to speak to us himself, though
by the tongue of a Mortal Man. With what reverence and dread ought I to
approach the gracious presence of my God, who vouchsafes to speak and instruct
me in such a loving manner. His Word and Laws should not in reason have the
less power and impression upon me, because of his condescension to my weakness
and Capacity: Should I despise the mercies of my God, that are so great and
wonderful, delivered to me in earthen vessels? O Blessed and Heavenly Wisdom, I
am called away from my Temporal Affairs to wait upon thee, and hearken to the
Divine Matters that shall be proposed, which relate to my Eternal Interest.
Their excellency requires my attention and diligent enquiry for this
supernatural knowledge, which is able to save my Soul. Here thou do reveal
unto me what I am, and what I should be, and what I shall be: Here are
discovered the admirable Mysteries of the Holy Trinity and Unity of the
Incarnation and Redemption. Here thou do unbosome thy self to mortal
Creatures, and show the tenderness of thine affection to us: Here I may have
a prospect of the unspeakable riches of Heaven, and see the Glories that are
laid up for me in thine Eternal Sanctuary. These are Matters worthy of the
Angels prying into; these are Meditations fit for the Heavenly Spirits; and
shall I neglect or despise them, shall I idle away this precious moment
designed for the benefit of mine immortal Soul? My gracious God, cause me to
increase in Grace, and in the Divine knowledge of my Redemption, enlighten mine
Understanding with a clear apprehension of the Heavenly Truths, Sanctify the
outward preaching of thy word, that it may be effectual, and able to work upon
my will. Give me an attentive ear, and an obedient heart, willing to submit to,
and practice whatsoever thou shall command. Deliver me from the ill
consequences of Errors, Partiality and Prejudice, and make me truly thankful to
thee for this great Blessing. Remove not thy Gospel from us, but save us from
the pernicious Plots of the Antichristian Heresy. Unite all of us in our
Worship and Church, that we may study to preserve the Unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace. And being all together united now in the Church Militant, we
may be all the more ready and prepared to enter in due time into the Church
Triumphant, into that Glorious Kingdom of Love and Peace, where our
Sanctification shall be completed, our Knowledge perfected, and our Employment
for ever shall be to Celebrate and Sing forth thy Praises with the Chorus of
Heavenly Spirits. Amen.

A Prayer for Soldiers before a Fight.
O Lord of Hosts, Creator and Preserver of the World, look upon us in mercy at
this time that we are going to hazard our Lives for the Honor an Interest of
our King and Kingdom, and for the Glory of thy Name, and the Preservation of
thy true Religion amongst us. We are confident in the Justice and Equity of our
Cause against these disturbers of the peace and happiness of Mankind. Good God
assist us with Victory and Success, strengthen our Courages, give us Undaunted
Spirits, stand by thine own Cause, and such as Fight for the Preservation of
thy Church and Kingdom. We trust not upon our selves, nor upon our numbers and
resolutions, but upon thy Providence and Celestial Virtue, which we beseech
thee to send unto us in the midst of danger, suffering us not to betray the
trust repose in us, by any weakness or fear; we know that thine Almighty hand,
and all-seeing eye disposes of all things, and that no violence can hurt us
without thy Commission. O Merciful God, let our Lives be precious in thy sight,
preserve our Persons from the violence of the shot, and sharpness of the
Enemies Weapons, that we may yet live to praise thee, and serve thee in our
Generations, in that station of Life unto which we are called. We trust it is
not unpleasing to thee, who vouchsafest to be named the God of Armies, and
seeing the necessity of the Kingdom, unto which we belong, requires it, Bless
us therefore we pray thee, O merciful Savior in these our undertakings, assist
our General and Officers with Wisdom and Skill, and all of us with an undaunted
Spirit, and entire dependence upon thy will and disposal: Whatever happens to
these Bodies of Clay, which we are willing to Sacrifice for thy Glory; look in
mercy upon our precious Souls, pardon and forgive the former weaknesses of our
lives, accept of the blood of our Surety and Redeemer for us, and for his sake
receive our immortal Beings into thy favor and Celestial Kingdom, when ever it
shall please thee to call them out of these Tabernacles of misery and
affliction. Good God we resign our selves into thy hands, dispose of us as it
shall seem good in thy Divine Wisdom. O Blessed Jesus, unto whom all Power is
committed in Heaven and in Earth, receive us into thy Protection and Mercy, we
pray thee, and intercede for us to thy Heavenly Father. Amen.

A Prayer for a Ship's Company, before an Engagement at Sea.
O Merciful and Great God, whose Power, Wisdom, and Providence is so visibly
seen upon this unconstant Element, we humble our selves before thee at this
time of danger, to implore thine Assistance, Protection and Blessings to our
necessary Endeavors, for the Preservation of the Rights of the Nation unto
which we belong. We acknowledge our selves to be miserable Sinners, and guilty
of many provocations against thy Divine Laws; but it belongs to thee, O
Heavenly Father, to have mercy upon thy poor Creatures and Servants: Lay not to
our charge our heinous Offenses, but pardon we beseech thee all our former
Sins, and give us true Repentance; that if thou shall yet spare our Lives, we
may amend. Let not our Guilt and Crimes hinder the Blessings of Victory and
Success, which we beseech thee to grant to our present Fleet and Arms. For that
purpose, command the Seas and the Winds to yield unto us all needful
assistance, and let thy Holy Angels protect our Persons, and our Ships from the
fury of the Enemies shot, and all Casualties. Good God we depend not upon our
selves, our Skill or Provisions, or humane strength, but upon thy Power, upon
thy Mercy, O Holy Savior, upon thy protection and favor; grant unto us we
beseech thee Safety and Victory, that we may live to admire thy goodness in our
deliverance, and learn by these instances of mercy to honor and praise thy
Holy Name, when we shall be escaped out of so great dangers. Save us we entreat
thee, O merciful God, save us, our Bodies and our Souls, that they may be
employed again in thy Service; but let our immortal Souls be dear in thy sight,
whenever, or however thou shall be pleased to call them out of these Earthly
Vessels; receive them, we pray thee, into thine Heavenly Sanctuary. This we
beg, and all other things which thou know needful for us, through the
mediation of our Divine Savior, who sits at thy Right hand, and whose
intercession we humbly implore, in the words that he has taught us, saying,
Our Father, etc.

Seasonable Ejaculations, and short Prayers in the midst of a Fight, either by
Sea or Land.
LOrd have Mercy upon us, Save and Deliver us.

Good God, abate the Pride and Fury of our Enemies.

Merciful Savior Protect us by thine Almighty Power.

Lord Jesus Strengthen and Defend us.

O Blessed Savior, receive our Bodies and Souls into thy Favor and Mercy.

Good God Deliver us.

O Holy Jesus, our Dependence is upon thee.

O Lord of Hosts, we trust upon thy goodness, and Protection, and not upon our
selves.

Save us, Good Lord, Save us, that we may live to praise thee in our Generation.

Have mercy upon our Souls.

We recommend our present and future Beings into thy Hands, O Merciful Creator.

Give us Victory we pray thee, for Christ his sake, that we may Glorify thee
and thy Mercy. Amen.

A Prayer for Mariners in a furious Tempest at Sea.
O Almighty and Eternal God, at whose disposal are all the parts of this great
World, and these violent Waves upon which we are tossed. Look down in mercy
upon us, and give a check to the fury of these Seas. We see before us nothing
but Death, the Deep is open to swallow us up, our only help is in thy
Providence and Protection; Save and Preserve us, we humbly beseech thee, lay
not to our charge our former Sins; let not this heavy load and burden sink us
now into Eternal destruction, but deliver us for thy mercies sake; still the
rage of the Sea, stop these boisterous Winds, and calm this mighty Tempest. As
thou have manifested thy great Power to us in this occasion; let us be likewise
sensible of thine extraordinary mercy in our Deliverance. Thou have promised
that not a hair of our heads shall fall without thy Heavenly permission. O
suffer us not to perish, but rescue us we pray thee in this our great
necessity, and let us live yet longer to glorify thy Holy Name. Send us such
favorable Gales as may bring us to our desired Havens: and give us all grace
to learn by this, and other instances of thy Power and Providence, that our
whole dependence is upon thee our God, and that thou can quickly deprive us
of Life and Being, if we offer to forget our selves, and thy former Mercies, if
we extravagantly abuse either in word or deed thy dreadful Name, and holy
Profession. Spare us, good Lord, spare us at this time, and we vow unto thee
all submission and obedience, and a sincere reformation of our Lives for the
time to come. To this purpose, assist our good resolutions with thy heavenly
Grace, that all these accidents and dangers may turn to our Eternal benefit, to
the safety and security of our immortal Souls: And all this we beg for Jesus
Christ his sake, our only Mediator, whose intercession we humbly implore; and
conclude these our imperfect Prayers with his most perfect Form, Our Father,
etc.

A Thanksgiving after a Victory by Sea or Land.
NOT unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy holy Name be ascribed, O blessed
God, the honor of this Victory and Success! We Praise thee for having spared
our Lives, and suffered us yet to enjoy the light of the Living. We acknowledge
thy Power and Providence in this great preservation of our Persons from the
fury of our Enemies, whom we see lying before our eyes breathless and
senceless; whereas thou have been gracious to us, our good God, and sheltred us
in the midst of those dangers that have swallowed up so many of our fellow
Creatures. O let us never forget this great deliverance, but let these Bodies
which thou have made and preserved at this time, be employed for the time to
come in thy service, and for thine honor. Let these Members which have been
secured by thy Providence from wounds and maiming, be consecrated to Holiness
and Piety, and to advance thy Gospel and Religion. O Let us all make a right
improvement of this great Mercy and Salvation! Let it not become an aggravation
of our Crimes and ungratitude. Give us, with all thy Mercies, thankful hearts,
humble and dutiful Souls, that in the midst of all this Worldly Prosperity and
Successes, we may behave our selves as becomes true Christians. Sanctify
therefore this great Blessing to us all; let us not demean our selves too
insolently over our fellow Creatures, but treat them with compassion, as thy
Subjects and Servants as well as we. O Let this Deliverance and Safety be so
recorded in our hearts and minds, that we may ever glorify thee our God for
it, and oblige thee to a continuance of thy favors, to grant to us and our
Endeavors, such Success and Prosperity, that we may be a Safeguard and
Security to our King and Kingdom, to preserve them from the violent attempts of
all their Enemies and ours, 'till it shall please thee out of thine infinite
goodness, to put a stop to this raging War, and grant us a lasting and
honorable Peace. These, and all other Mercies which thou know needful for
us, our King, and Kingdom, we humbly beg, through the Mediation of the Lord
Jesus Christ our only Savior, to whom with the Father and Holy Spirit, Three
Persons and One God, be ascribed from this time forth, and for evermore, all
Honor, Glory, Dominion, and Praise. Amen.

A Prayer for the Preservation of the King's Person.
O Gracious God, King of Kings, and Supreme Monarch of this inferior World, we
humbly beseech thee to take into thy merciful Protection the Sacred Person of
our King. Save him from the Power and Designs of all his Enemies, frustrate all
their Plots and Conspiracies, Preserve Him in the midst of the greatest
Dangers, that He may always prove an happy Instrument to promote thy Glory, and
true Religion amongst us. For that purpose, assist His Fleets and Armies, bless
us that Fight for Him, and the Public Interest: Crown all His Endeavors with
Victory and Success here, and with everlasting felicity hereafter; and all we
beg for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer for the Church Militant.
GOod God, look down from Heaven upon all thy Servants, dispersed all over the
Dominions of Antichrist, and elsewhere; deliver them from their grievous
Oppression, give a check to the unmerciful Enemy, preserve them from Sin and
Apostasy, assist them with the Directions of thy Holy Spirit, Sanctify all
their Afflictions and Crosses to them, and in thy due time rescue them out of
the Cruelties and Barbarous usage of their implacable Enemies. For that intent,
bless all those Worthies that design to do them good, and open the eyes of all
men to understand, and give them Grace to profess thy true Religion; call the
Jews, Turks, and Infidels into thy Sacred Fold, complete the number of thine
Elect, and bring us all to that Eternal Kingdom, which thou have provided and
promised to thy chosen People. Amen.

A Short Prayer for such as are desperately Wounded.
HAve Pity and Compassion upon me, O Merciful God! I submit to thy Will; if my
Body be destroyed, save mine immortal Soul. Pardon all my Sins for Christ his
sake: Receive me into thy favor, support my Spirit under all my torments. Give
me an assurance in thy love, by a reliance upon thy gracious Promises; and
deliver me out of this World of Sorrow and Suffering, and admit my Soul into
thy Kingdom of Peace. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Amen.

FINIS.

