HEAVEN upon EARTH, In the serene Tranquillity, and calm Composure; in the
sweet Peace and solid Joy, of a good CONSCIENCE; sprinkled with the Blood of
Jesus* and exercised always to be void of offense toward GOD and toward MEN.

Brought down, and holden forth in XXII. very searching Sermons, on several
Texts of Scripture, to that purpose. Wherein many weighty and momentuous Cases
of CONSCIENCE, greatly influencing a tender Christian walk, are Soberly,
Solidly, Succinctly and Satisfyingly Discussed; Several of which are not
readily to be met with in the Wri^ngs of other Divines on this Subject.

By that Learned, and eminently Conscienscious Minister of the Gospel, Mr.
JAMES DURHAM* Some-time Preacher thereof at GLASGOW.

1. Pet. 3. v. 16. Having a good conscience: that (...) they speak evil of you,
as evil doers, they may be ashamed, that falsely accuse your good conversation
in Christ. EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew (...) Printer to the Most
Sacred MAJESTY, ANNO DOM 168^*

ERRATA.
Courteous Reader,
PLease ere thou read to correct these few escapes of the Press, as page 12.
line 36. read grossest for greatest. p. 22. l. 36. r. inclination. p. 26. l.
20. r. dictateth, p. 30. l. 22. r. as for its. p. 33. l. 29* delet no more* p.
57. l. ^. r. of ^ascination. l. 2. d. conceat, l. 20. r. on for one. p. 61. l.
22. r. first for 2d. p. 74. l. 4. r. thought, p. 75. l. 29* r* this for all. p.
87. l. 21. r. ordinary. p. 99. l. 10. r. thus for think. p. 104. l* 37. r. only
for any. p. 119. l. 28. r. not left. p. 136 l. 2. r. ere for if. p. 142 l. 26.
r. persons for people, p. 15^ l. 34. r. consideration. p. 151. l. 4. r. censor,
p. 156. l. 29 d. divine, p. 182. l. 15 put a point after testimony. p. 195 l.
34. r. b^ings. p. 204 l. 30. r. as for is l. last, r. is for s, p. 234. l. 20.
r. rational creature, p. 235* l. 4. r. concerning them by self-examination. p.
256. l. 4. r. some way for some. nay l. 25. r. had for hand, p. 270. l. 5. r.
(as if he said) p. 303. l. 3. r. our selves, l. 10 r. repentance p. 308, l. 4.
r. allowed, p. 309. l. 7. d. full, p. 311. l. 11. d. so p. 325. put, after
sacrifice, p. 338. l. 12. r. observe more especialy. p. 342. l. last, r.
persons. p. 343. l. 1. r. their for his p. 344. l. last, r. them for it, p.
348. l. 20. r. a mistaken law. p. 353. l. 8 r. he, l. 18. d. is. p. 358. l. 29.
r. creature. p. 361. l. 6. r. for making. p. 364. l. 8. r. fain.

Any other lesser literal escapes, mis-pointings, or misplacings of some very
few parentheses, as thou will pardon, so thou will easily correct.

GEneroso vir^, and amico suo multis nominibus plurimum Colendo Domino
Alexandro Durhamo, Domino de Largo, Clarissimi Authoris Filio Germano, and ex
multis quos illi Deus gratiose dederat liberis nunc tantum superstiti; qui
defunctum patrem (virum illum non tantum apud Nostrates, sed etiam apud Exteros
Celebrem and vere magni nominis) quamvis non passibus aequis, pro suo tamen
modulo, in vijs Domini serio sequitur; egregias has de Conscienscia Conciones
Conscionatoris consciensciam tenerrimam and plane divinitus illuminatam
suaviter spirantes; in sinceri amoris tesseram and perpetuae observantiae
testimonium, D. D

Johannes Carstares.

TO THE READERS, And more particularly to the Inhabitants of the City of
GLASGOW.
THE Micro-cosme, or little World* Man, a notably curious Compend, and
^abridgement* (as it were) of the larger one, and the great Master piece of all
the visible works of GOD; w^ when he came from under the hand of the Omnipotent
Creator in the first Edition, a little Model, and Representation of the Divine
Perfections; having impressed on him that blessed and beautiful, that amiable
and admirable conformity to the Image and likeness of GOD, wherein consisted*
the preheminency of His Nature, above that of all other Creatures in the
Visible ^r Sublunary World; being one of the great excellencies that a created
nature is capable of, and a clearer ray of Divine Majesty, then his dominion
over the other Creatures; and which only made him capable of the enjoyment of
God, as being that which assi^ilated to him, and brought him to the nearest
approaches to Glory: All the faculties and powers of his Soul carried this
glorious Character v^vely engraven on them; His Body also had somewhat* of the
same Image stamped on it, tho not in respect of its figure, and shape or
natural u^e, but as an esse^l part of his nature, it was interested therein by
a participa^ on of original righteousness; For it was man's person that was
made holy, tho his Soul was the first proper Subject of that con-created habit,
and principle of holiness, yet his body (as I said) as an essential part of
his nature, did participat thereof, by a peculiar communication of that
holiness to (...)* as far as it was to be influential on moral operations; and
hereby were the Parts and Members of his Body, in that state of innocence and
integrity, made Instruments and Servants unto righteousness and holiness: His
Understanding was a lamp of clear and pure light, without any the least measure
or mixture of culpable darkness or ignorance, it was able clearly and
distinctly to represent all objects, competent for him to know, with wonderful
readiness and facility: His Will was (to say so) straight as a rush, without
any the least sinful crook, o^ sinister bias* inclining only and perfectly to
that which was good* and altogether averse from every thing that was evil;
there being a through agreement betwixt his will, and the will of God, so that
he willed wh^ he willed, and ^illed what he ^illed: All his Affections moved
only and constantly toward right and commanded objects, and that with
perfection of regularity in all their motions* His Memory was of strong
retention, neither knew he, while he remained such, what it was ^o forget any
thing that was suitable, and incumbent for him to remember: His Conscience was
in excellent case ^o reflect, and there being no ground for any challenge,
reproof, or (...), it did only commend and applaud* in a word, it did most
faithfully and exactly act the part of God's Deputy, following his orders
punctually and precisely, and so was kept in an indisturbed calm, and
perfectly serene tranquilli^ie: The Members of his body were servants only to
righteousness, and with holy ^lacrity, sub^erued the soul in all its
operations; But, ah! the entering in of cursed sin, made a sad, sorrowful and
stupendous Ca^astrophe, setting o^ fire as it were the whole come of nature,
and putting its very foundations some way out of course, and deplorably
de^acing the curious stately, magnificent, beautiful and glorious Fabric of
this little (...) Man; quite vitia^ing and corrupting all the faculties, powers
and parts of his soul and body, which by the exact and exquisit symetrie and
harmony thereof, through the image of God concreated with him, made him, while
it remained in its integrity, incapable of all such motions, or actions, which
should be subservient unto, or complyant with any thing contrary unto, or
different from it: His Understanding, the leading faculty, and the eye (as it
were) of the soul, became an abyss and dungeon of darkness, covered all over
with fogs, mists and clouds of ignorance, errors and mistakes, so that becoming
of a spiritual and holy man, a carnal and corrupt man, He did not receive,
neither could he know savingly the things of God, he became quite blind, having
losed his vi^ive faculty, as to all spiritual discerning: His Will the ruling
and governing faculty, utterly losed its rectitude, and became crooked,
froward, perverse, rebellious and obstinat, strongly inclined and bent to evil,
to all evil, only to evil, always and constantly to evil, and altogether
averse from every thing truly good; willing that which God nilled, and nilling
that which he willed: His Affections turned all mutinous, disorderly, disturbed
and confused, furiously rushing on prohibited objects, as the horse rusheth
into the battle; and what movings of them were toward any commanded object,
these were altogether irregular, not so much as one of them moved toward any
such object, purely or primarly, because it was a thing commanded: His Memory,
quite losed its re^entive faculty, as to the remembering of any thing
spiritually good, in the way it should have been remembered, it became in that
respect as a leck vessel, all such things slipping and running through and out
of it: His Conscience being de^ed and made guilty, became clamorous, unquiet,
challenging and accusing, boisterous and stormy, filling him with horror; and
(when not stupefied and benumbed with spiritually Lethargick Security, or
Cauterized) p^ing him upon the rack, and making a kind of hell in his bosom,
so that he was Magur ^issabib, terror round about* even his own Burrio and
tormente^: All the members of his body were yielded to be the weapons of
unrighteousness to sin; So that all the faculties and powers of his ^oul, and
members of his body, were on the sudden up in arms in hostility and rebellion
against God, proclaiming and waging war with him, and on the matter
blasphemously bidding him a defyance: O! ^ad and sorrowful revolution, in and
on the Little world Man. Heu quantum mutatus abillo! God made him upright, but
he sought out to himself many inventions; woe to us for we have sinned, and the
crown has fallen from our head: And by the loss of our original righteousness,
and the corruption of our whole nature, with the innumerable actual sins and
transgressions that flow from thence, we bear, alas! a great deal more of the
Image of the Devil, and of the Brute, then we do of the Image of God. The
re-introduction, restoration, and renovation of the pristine beautiful
conformity to the glorious Image of God (with their reconciliation and
justification through his satisfaction to divine justice) in some of the
universally lapsed and losed posterity of Adam, even all the elect and gifted
ones to the Mediator to be redeemed, sanctified and saved by him, in order to
the capacl^ating of them to enjoy fellowship with God, (forefaulted by the
fall) and that by a new Creation (the very splendour and glory of the whole
Creation) was the great ear^nd and bussiness, for which Christ Jesus came* into
the world; who being the head and foundation-stone of this new Creation, has
gracious^ undertaken to prepare, sanctify and glorify his mystical body, or
all the elect given to him by Iehovab: which he accordingly effects, and
brings to pass, by regenerating them, by sanctifying them, and by carrying
on this work of sanctification in the growth and gradual advances thereof, till
it be perfected and consummated in glory: whereby the Image of God in men is
again renewed, and restored both in their souls and bodies respectively, in a
good measure now in this life, and shall be perfectly in the life to come;
where, as they shall all see him as he is, intuitively face to face, and enjoy
him fully and immediately, without any the least moments interruption through
all eternity, so they shall be like him, perfectly like him, according to
Creature capacity; resembling him to the very ^fe: All the faculties and
powers of their souls partake of this renewed work; The Understanding being
savingly enlightened; the will rectified; the Affections reduced unto order; the
Memory strengthened, and the Conscience much cleansed and calmed, and put into a
capacity as to accuse and condemn, so to excuse, allow and absolve, as there
is just ground for either; and they put to make it their great bussiness about
which they allow themselves to be exercised, always to have it void of offense
toward God and toward men? which Conscience with the concerns thereof being the
great T^eam and Subject of these choice, searching and savoury Sermons (wherein
if there be any thing that does not so fully answer expectation, let it be
imputed to the writer from his own mou^h, whose copple was so very incorrect,
that the fitting it for the view of the world has caused no small labor to me)
I need say the less of it, only in general, I would humbly offer these few
things.

First, we would above all things look well that once we have a good
Conscience, not only Morally (that is when Conscience judges it self bound to
own Gods ^evealed will for its rule, and when it impelleth or pusheth the man
to act according to that rule, and withal the more ordinary disposition of his
will is (...) comply with these impulses of his Conscience, which may be where
there is no special or saving grace,) but Graciously so; which necessarily
pre-supposeth a state of regeneration, and the hearts applying it self by faith
(the gift of God) to the blood of sprinkling, which both purges and ^acifieth,
cleanses and calmeth the Conscience, which speaks better things then the
b^ood of A^el, yea has a cry* abl^ to outcry the loudest cries of the most
cl^morous and guilty Conscience, and is that wherein all disquieting challenger
and ^ccusations for sin^ are only ^afely sunk and and put to silence, so as
they shall never again swime above, and ra^k to the final sorrow and shame of
such as are led through gra^e to take this course with them; as the now-sunk
and any other way silenced challenges of most men and women, will once most
certainly rise on them, and speak at a high rate against them, never any more
to hold their peace from grievously galling and gnawing accusations; For to the
unclean and unbelieving nothing is pure, but even the mind and conscience is
defiled.

Secondly, The Conscience being thus made good, we would endeavor by all
suitable means to keep it so, that we may be in case on warrantable and good
grounds to say with the Apostle, We trust we have a good conscience in all
things, willing to live honestly: Heb. 13. v. 18. And if at any time the
Conscience of the Christian be defiled, and wounded by new contracted pollution
and guilt; and challenges begin thence to arise, and to disturb the peace and
sweet repose of the Soul; there would be on all such occasions, fresh believing
applications made to the blood of sprinkling, that thereby the heart may be
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and the Conscience purged from dead works to
serve the living God; and endeavors would be renewed in the strength of grace
to walk more tenderly, without offense toward God, and toward men: toward which
these Sermons abound with variety of choice and excellent directions and helps.

Thirdly, and more particularly we would study to have our Conscience well and
thoroughly informed, by intimat acquaintance with the mind and will of God
revealed in the Scriptures of truth, as to all things that we are called to
believe and do, so that it may be in case to discharge its office and duty
aright, whether in Dictating or in Testifying, or in Judging: an ill informed
Conscience, especially where there is any zeal, or forwardness, strongly
pusheth and suriously drives men to many dangerous, distracted and destructive
practices; has not this driven men to kill the servants of Christ (as himself
foretold) and in doing so to think that they did God service? did not this
hurry on Paul, before his conversion, to persecute Callers on the name of the
Lord Jesus* and to make havoc of the Church, by drawing, and dragging the
disciples both men and women bound to Prison, and by cruel persecuting of them
even to strange cities, compelling them to blaspheme? so exceedingly mad was he
(as himself confesses) against them; O! what terrible and tragical things
has* this set men on to do, and what m^d work has it made in some places of
the world, beside many lesser impertinencies, extravagancies and disturbances
in particular Christian Societies.

Fourthly, We would endeavor to have the Conscience deeply impressed with due
and dee^ v^neration, aw and dread of the Majesty of God, the supreme Lord of,
and great Lawgiver to the Conscience; whose Laws and Commands are only
properly, directly, immediately, and of themselves obligatory thereof; because
the Consciences and Souls of men are properly subject only to God; and because
the Law of God written in the hearts of men, and in the Scriptures, is the only
rule of Conscience; and moreover because men cannot immediately judge the
Conscience, nor know they the secret motions thereof; and finally because he
can only inflict spiritual punishment on the sinning Conscience: all the Laws
and Commands of men in what ever capacity are only obligatory of the
Conscience mediatly, indirectly, and consequentially; viz. in so far as they
are consistent, complyant and agreeable with the Laws and Commands of the
absolutely supreme Lawgiver, or not repugnant thereunto: for certainly he has
not given a dispensation to any power on earth, Civil or Ecclesiastic, to
countermand his commands, or to enjoin obedience ^o commands contrary to, or
inconsistent with his own; whose commands are immediately and inviolably
binding of the Consciences of Superiors and Magistrates, though the greatest
Monarchs on earth, as well as of Inferiors and Subjects, all without exception
being Inferiors, and Subjects to him: Yet such Laws of men as do either press
or declare the Commands and Law of God, and make for the conservation, and
observation thereof, oblidge in Conscience; because such Laws as they are such,
participat of the nature and force of the Divine Law: and because the Law of
God does directly and immediately command subjection to the Superior Powers:
therefore even in reference to the^ ^njust Laws, and such as are repugnant to,
or (...) with the divine Laws, Subjects are oblidged in (...) not to re^use
obedience to them out of any contempt of lawful authority (let ^e to disca^m
an^ renounce the same, as some poor seduced and deluded persons do, in these
days, ^ther ou^ of ignorance, or humor, or misguide^ zeal, to the great
reproach of Religion) not to admit (...) any thing that m^ have in it the (...)
appearance of offense, and scandal that way; because the contempt o^ lawful
authority, and the ^andal of others, are in themselves sins against the Law of
God: yet still as no ^eer humane laws do directly, immediately and of
themselves (as I said) bind the conscience; so neither has God given a power
to any of the Super^our Powers on earth to enjo^ obedience to commands that are
cross to his own ^njunctions, which all are oblidged indispensably to obey.

And therefore it is not only s^range, but even stupendous for any Christians,
especially such as pretend to be Protestants, confidently to assert, and bol^
^o publish to the world, as Mr. Hobbs does in his Leviathan, (a book designed
by him, as I have been informed, to complement Cromwell, against the writ^rs own
Conscience, such as it was) p. 168. That no private man is judge of good and
evil actions in a Common wealth, under civil Laws; and that the mea^ure of good
and evil actions is the Civil Law (of actions civilv good why not? but of
actions simply good and evil (as his assertion carries) wh^? what reason, or
sh^dow of reason? God never having given, no^ assigned such a rule; we may thus
throw away ou^ Bibles, as the rule of good and ev^l a^ions, and all betake our
selves to the Civil Law as the only Rule) and the Legis l^tor the alone Judge,
since he may as well divest a man of humane nature and un-man him, as deprive
him of a private Judgment of discretion, or of a private discre^ive Judgment
in reference to his own actions; the so^er exercise whereof is no assuming to
himself in ^he least, the capaci^e of a public Judge; and it at any time in
any thing rela^ing to ^is (...) acts, this Judgment of private discreti^n fall
to thwart the Law, or public Judgment, he adven^es on that cum peric^lo, or
on his pe^l; but it cannot in reason utte^ly rob him of it* since (as is said)
he can as soon cease to be a man, or a rational creature, as to have that quite
denied him, or taken from him; and to what end or purpose should he be
privileged with this above brutes, i^ the exercise of ^t shall be for ever
suspended in the Members of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, as almo^ all men in
the world are? what sound and Orthodox Divine, or sound Christian Lawyer ever
taught such Doctrine? The learned doctor Ames tell^ us in the 4. Co olary, and
very last words of his first book of Cases of Conscience, that Interpretatio
Scripturae, vel judicium ^scernere voluntatem Dei, pertinet ad quemlibet. in
foro consc^tiae pro (...). And page 169. of the forecited book, the same Hobbs
says, That he who is subject to no civil Law sins in ^ll that ^e does
against his conscience; yet ^t is not so with him who lives in a common
wealth, because the Law is the public conscience: which ^eems to be
inconsistent with, if no^ point blank contradictory unto what the Apostle
exhorts to Romans 14. v. 5 Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind, or
conscience, to wit, of the warrantablenesse of what he does; and to what he
asserts, v. 23. whatsoever is not done in faith, (or from this full persuasion
of its warrantableness) is sin: He does not surely write this to Christians ^n
Outopia, or in the ^ancied new world in the Moon, ^ut to those who were realy
present memoers of the Roman Commonwealth, or Subjects of that Impire; neither
can it with any show of reason be supposed (especially by him who in the strain
of his Book, as to this matt^r, makes very little, or rather no difference at
all betwixt a Heathen and Christian Magistrate, for whether the Magistrate be
Pagan, Mohammedan, Jewish* Christian, Popish or P^otestant, Heretical, or
Orthodox. Seems to ^e all on^ to him, and his followers in this debate) that if
the Roman Emperor had been Christian he would have written otherwise, or that
his becoming such, would enervat, yea quite evacuat the strength and obligation
of what he writs; for ^e delivers it as an eternal and un-alterable verity,
Rule who will, and be the Civil Laws what they may be: and while in the 13.
chapter of that same epistle, he tells Christians, v. 5. That they must needs
be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake; he seems very
clearly to distinguish betwixt the Law and Command of the Civil Power (which
Mr. Hobbs calls the public conscience.) and the conscience of private
Christian Subjects, and to pres^e upon them subjection to the higher powers,
for their own conscience sake; and so to leave to them some exercise and
judgment of that their Conscience concerning the matter of their obedience and
subjection; otherwise the obedience and subjection could not well be said to
be for Conscience sake, or out of Conscience; for he raight shortly have said,
obey the dictats of the public conscience, a^ the laws of the superior
powers, there being no place for the exercise of the conscience of private
subjects in the matter. There is one divine (such as he is) who in his
Eccle^iastick polity more lately, delivers the same doctrine; wherein he not
only plainly Hobbizeth, but also palpably plays the plagi^y, borrowing (not
to say stealing) much of what he says to this purpose through his Book, from
Mr Hobbs, tho in some few things he oppo^eth him, and delivers his sentiments
in a finer dress of language; it may be, that none may think that he is
beholden to the other, for that which he would surprise the world with as his
own new, and profoundly witty invention, vainly as it were crying (...); let
them for me, share betwixt them this glorying in their own shame, that shall
not be rolled away: He says that in matters of Religion, and divine worship,
subjects are to be ruled by authority and the public conscience; and that in
these matters, private men have not power over their own actions, nor are to be
directed by their own judgments, but by the commands and determinations of the
public conscience, only with these sorry restrictions; If the things commanded
do not either countenance vice or dis^race the Deity; or if the things be not
absolutely and essentially evil, whose nature no case can alter, no
circumstance can extenuat, and no end can sanctify: Mr. Hobbs has only this
limitation, if the things be not against the law of nature; in effect both come
near to the same, if not to the very same amount, and by both an obligation is
pleaded to ly on the Consciences of all private Christian subjects, to give up
themselves to the conduct and regulation of the public conscience, or of the
Laws of the Commonwealth, as to many at least, of the positive commands of
God; doing contrary to which, will not fall within the compass of these very
narrow limitations: which either supposes without any warrant or proof, that
the public conscience is always infallible as to these (and it is worthy
noticeing what the learned Monseur Claude has to this purpose in his de^ence
of the Reformation, where he says, In effect an absolute obedience and entire
resigning of ones self to the conduct of another in these matters that regard
the faith and the conscience, is a duty that we can lawfully tender to none but
to God, who is the first truth, the first principle of all justice, to which
none can pretend without usur^ing the just right of God: As is also, what says
Amesius, page 6. of his Cases, That the conscience is immediately subject to
God, and to his will, and cannot subject it self to any creature without
Idolatry) Or it is the short cut, and compendious way to debauch men's
consciences, and to drive all conscience out of the world; being obviously
liable to these following (beside others) great and gross absurdities 1. That
private Christian Subjects are not at all to trouble themselves, or to be at the
pains to search the Scriptures, in order to the information of their
consciences, and bringing themselves to be fully persuaded in their mind or
conscience (which they are expressly commanded to do, John 5. 39. and Romans 14.
5.) Of the warrantableness of what they do, or are enjoined to do in Religion,
and in the worship of God; If it be not against the law of nature, which may be
easily discerned; for says Mr. Hobbs, it is born with every man, and engraven
on every man's heart; He is in all such things to acquiesce without debate or
demure, in the determination of the public conscience; and if he shall
endeavor to have his conscience informed* the more he does to, he but puts his
own conscience the more upon the rack, and to the torture, if he must,
notwithstanding the clearest information and best grounded persuasion of his
own judgment and conscience, stand to, and acquiesce in the resolve of the
public conscience; as he must do according to this doctrine; if he sin not,
(as has not hitherto been doubted by any man of conscience) in counteracting
his own light, and well-informed conscience* at lea^, he cannot but be more
disquerted, that he was, according to the command of God, at so much pains in
the ^utit of seeking to have his conscience so well informed; which God never
made a just ground of disquiet to the minds of his people: and his acquiescence
in the determination of the public conscience or of the law of the land, must
be as to many, or most, if not all divine positives in Religion, and the
worship of God; for says Mr. Hobbs page 249. They to whom God has not spoken
immediately, are to receive commands from the Sovereign; and consequently in
every Commonwealth, they who have no supernatural revelation to the contrary,
ought to obey the Laws of their own Sovereign in the external acts, and
profession of Religion; which draws dreadfully deep, as will ^ther appear from
some of his instances; If (says he page 271.) it be asked, what if we be
commanded by our lawful prince to say with our tongue, we believe not in Christ
(he may as well add, we believe not that there is such a person as Christ) must
we obey such a command? Profession with the tongue (says he) is no more then
any other gesture whereby we signify our obedience, and wherein a Christian
holding firmly in his heart the faith of Christ, has the same liberty that
Elisha allowed to Naaman the Syrian; a great and gross mistake, the Prophet
allowed no such thing, but without giving any particular answer to his demand,
since by what Mr. Hobbs confesses he could not but know that what he desired
(if indeed he desired it some learned men asserting that the words, contain a
reflection upon a past unlawful* practice, and a begging forgiveness of it,
and not a desire of a permission of any such practice for the future) was a sin
and unlawful to be done; only bids him go in peace, wishing him well, and Gods
blessing to him, though not as to that particular; ^ere, says he* Naaman
believed in his heart, but by bowing before the Idol Rimmon, he denied the true
God in effect, as if he had done* it with his lips: (how dare he then be so
bold, as to affirm that the Prophet allowed, and approved of his practice?)
What then shall we say to that of our Savior, whoever denies me before men,
him will I deny before my Father which is in heaven* To this (says he) We may
say, that whatsoever a Subject, as Naaman was, is compelled to, in obedience to
his Sovereign, and does it not according to his own mind, but in Order to the
Laws of his Country, that Action is not his, but his Sovereigns, nor is it be
that in this case denies Christ, but his Governor and the Law of his Country:
O! what a wide door is opened here for grof^est distimulation, and jugllng in
the matters of God, and for the most palpable inconsistancy betwixt the heart
of (...), and his actions? The one manifestly contradicting, and ^elying the
other; which ought, especially in such cases, f^thfully to correspond, and
exactly to agree* What security, I pray, could men have upon earth one from
another, in their Oaths, Covenants, ^cts and Co^acts, in their mutual
B^rgainings and dealings, if such a cursed latitude were allowed them, to say,
promise and sweat one thing, and resolve another in their hearts? and sha^ that
be allowed in matters wherein the honor of God is so much, and so nearly
concerned, which is so abominable in the concerns of Men, all which
comparatively are but trifles* Might not all Christian Martyrs of old, and
Protestant ones of late, by such obedience to their respective lawful
Sovereigns, in the several parts of the Christian World, have escaped and
delivered themselves from being burnt alive* and from other bloody, violent and
cruel deaths, and exquisite torments* and shall they not according to this
detestable Doctrine be looked at, as a company of silly fools who needlessely
threw away their lives, which they might thus have very easiely preserved? ^or
none of them, we know of, were ever by their Popish lawful Sovereigns enjoined,
to say with their tongue, that they believed not in Christ, which yet, says
he, they might and should, have done, (keeping their mind to themselves, and to
God) and much more those things which they were commanded: Further, page 239,
240, 241. He refers to the decision of the Sovereign, all sorts of Doctrine in
effect, and more particularly and expressly, whether the Subjects shall profess,
That life eternal and happiness shall be on the earth only? Whether the Soul of
man is a living Creature independent on the Body, or does subsist separatly
from the Body? Whether any mere man is Immortal, otherwise then by the
Resurrection of the last day? whether wicked men shall be tormented eternally,
so as not to be destroyed, to die and be annihitated* at length? (to all which
himself seems to be (...) as his own opinions* O! wicked and wretched* O!
atheistical, detestable and damnable opinions!) whether I say the Subject shall
profess these things or not, he refers to the decision of the Sovereign* by
which we may very easily judge in how many, and in how very momentuous things
in Christian Religion, he (...) subjects, as to their outward profession and
carriage* to ^stand to and acquies^e in the decision and determination of the
lawful Sovereign, in a Kingdom, or Commonwealth, or of the public Conscience,
or Law of (...) (...), which whether it be not to deny all Conscience (...)
Subjects and private persons, in such matters as so nearly concern the eternal
Salvation of their Immortal Souls, is obvious at first (...). It puts me in
mind of what is reported of a great man (smelling strong of this
Conscience-destroying-doctrine) who expostulating with some Country men,
living under him, for their nor doing somewhat required of them by him; for
which nonp^rformance when they pleaded Conscience, he in a great ^uffe, not
without some execration, replied, -- What have the like of you to do with a
Conscience? Which was plainly on the matter to say with Hobbs, that they, and
such as they should have no Conscience, but what is ductile and governable by
the Conscience of lawful Rulers, and Superiors, and that their commands and
prohibitions make things just and adjust; which is (^ayeth Mr. Li^h in his Body
of Divinity, page 378) to make Subjects beasts, and the Magistrate God. 2ly All
pri^at persons living in a Kingdom, or Commonwealth must hence forth,
according to these Doctors, allown, and not in the feast regard in many things,
and those not of little moment in Religion, and the worship of God, their own
Consciences as his Deputies, and have recourse to the public Conscience, or
the Law of the Land, as the uni^ersal Depute set over all the Consciences of
private persons, living therein, nay to it as taking Gods own room to make Laws
directly, immediately, and of themselves obligatory of all their Consciences,
and to enjoin obedience to them, as so oblidging them; and must, contrary to
the Scripture, no more notice the accusings or excusings of their own
Consciences, but those only of the public Conscience. 3ly. The indispensibly
requisite qualification of the obedience of Children to their Parents, Ephesians.
6. v. 1. viz. In the Lord, (whereby the Apostle does undenyably lay it on the
Children, to consider and judge by their judgment of private discretion,
whether the commands and injunctions of their Parents be agreeable to the mind
of the Lord, and such in obedience, whereto they may expect the Lords
approbation) must be casheered and abandoned; for certainly there lies no
greater obligation on Subjects to obey the commands of the Sovereign power of
the Kingdom, or Commonwealth, then lies on Children to obey their Parents, who
were Sovereigns in Families, before ever there were any Kingdoms, or
Common*wealths erected, as himself every where asserts. 4ly. That if the
Apostles of our Lord should have been forbidden by the lawful Sovereigns of the
Kingdoms, and Commonwealths of the World to preach the Gospel, and Baptize,
they should in obedience to them have forborne; which Mr. Hobbs plainly without
a blush insinuates, when he says, page 311. Our Savior gave his Apostles
power to preach and baptize in all parts of the world, supposing that they were
not forbidden by their own lawful Sovereigns: Had they not their Commission
from their Master in most ample form, without any the least either direct or
indirect intimation of such an exceptation or ^mitation? Math. 28. 19. 20. Go
ye therefore (says he to them) and teach all nations* baptizing them in the
name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I command you; That is, of whatsoever nature they be,
whether they be clear by the Law of Nature, or be divine positives, whoever
forbid or command you ^o the contrary; and Mark 16* v. 15. Go ye (says he to
them) into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every Creature, which
accordingy they did, v. 20. And they went forth and preached every where, not
only where they were not forbidden; did they not preach the Gospel at
Jerusalem, notwithstanding they were severaly, not without threatenings,
forbidden by their own Sovereigns the Council? and tell them plainly, that they
ought to obey God, rather then men, wherein they could not obey both;
alleging that they could not, but speak the things that they had heard and
seen, without any such regard (as might imped them in their work) to the strait
threatenings and prohibition, to speak at all, or to preach in the name of
Jesus: and least any should say, or think, that this was more then they had
warrant for; we are told, after the inhibition to preach, and after their
imprisonment for contrav^ning, from which they were miraculously set free; that
the Angel of the Lord, who had opened their Prison Doors, charged them thus, Go
and stand and speak in the Temple to the people (what^oever, the Rulers think
o^ it, and notwithstanding they have in^bited and imprisoned you) all the words
of this life; of all which the divine Historian gives us an account in the 4.
and 5. Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles: And why I pray does he not as well
make the supposition of their not being forbidden by any lawful Sovereign, as
by their own? since he will not, neither does deny, that lawful Sovereign
Powers, may prohibit strangers within their own Dominions, to preach or
practice against the Law, o^ public Conscience, and chas^ise them for
controvention, and disobedience (excepting always the persons of Ambassadors
and ^eraulds sent from other Civil. Sovereigns, which use to be accounted in a
manner Sacred and Inviolabe) as well as their own native Subjects: and if so,
had the Apostles been forbidden to preach and baptize, by the Sovereign power
of every Kingdom, and Commonwealth, whether they came (as they could not
readily, nor reasonably expect but they would, all the Kingdoms and
Commonwealths of the world being then Pagan, excepting that of the Jews)
where would they, or could they have preached and baptized? and what would have
become of the Gospel, and of a Gospel Church? Did not Paul and Silas after the
Magistrates of the City of Philippi, had (it seems with their own hands,
debasing themselves in their ^ury, below the dignity of their Office) rent off
their clothes, laid many stripes on them, and casten them into prison, for
their preaching, and teaching customs (as was alleged by their accusers)
Which were not lawful to be received or observed by them being Romans; did they
not I say, go in and exhort, or preach to the brethren in the house of Lydia,
and that after they were by the Magistrates desired to depart out of the City?
as we may see, Acts 16. 5ly. That private persons living in Kingdoms or
Commonwealths do not sin, and shall be kept harmless in obeying the Laws
and Commands of their lawful Sovereigns, though cross the dictats of their own
Conscience, and it may be cross to the positive Commands of God; The first of
these new Teachers, Mr. Hobbs tells us (as we show before in the first
absurdity) in the ca^e of denying Christ before men, most dreadfully threatened
by him with denying them before his Father, that whatever a Subject as Naaman
was, is compelled eo in obedience to his Sovereign, and does it not in order to
his own mind, but in order to the Laws of his own country; that action is not
his but his Sovereigns, nor is it he that in this case denies Christ, but his
Sovereign and the Law of his Country: and page 309. The Civil Sovereign, may
make Laws ^uitable to his Doctrine (for he will have him to be the only
Sovereign teacher of the people that are under him Iure divino; which quite
^ulls the divine right of all the Ministers of the Gospel) Which may oblid^e
men to such actions, as they would not otherwise do and which he ought not to
command, and when they are commanded they are Laws and the external actions
that are done in obedience to them without the inward approbation, are the
actions of the Sovereign, and not of the Subject, who, in that (...) but the
Instrument* without any motion of his own at all, because God has commanded to
obey them; Alas! the poor Subject is here by him not only robbed of his
judgment of private discret on and Conscience, as to his own acts, which is
hard enough; but in a manner, of a humane rational Soul, if not also of a
sensitive one, and so degraded and detruded below the very beasts that perish;
For he makes him a mere instrument without any motion at all only he somewhat
recovers him from his brut^, yea infra-brutal state, by making him capable to
obey Commands, though against his Conscience: The other Hobbist Doctor, who
will not be outstriped by his Master, according to his manner dictateth very
Magisterialy* That if there be any sin in the command of the Sovereign Power;
he that imposed it shall answer it, and not I. whose whole duty is to obey; the
Command of Authority will warrant ^y obedience, my obedience will hallow, at
least excuse my action, and so secure me from sin, if not from error: very
easy, so^t, and smooth Doctrine indeed, for private Persons and Subjects. If
its teachers could assure us of its certain and in^allible truth, and of its
consonancie and agreeableness with the Scriptures of truth; But Subjects must
not cast their Souls at h^p-hazard, on the bare and unproved asserts of these
Gentlemen, who give us no great proof of either their truth or tenderness in
other great concerns of Religion; Especially since the divinely inspired
Apostle reaches us quite other Doctrine, while he tells us, more generally. 2.
Cor. 5. v. 10. That we must all appear (or ^e made manifest) before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body (whether commanded by Superiors or not) according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad; And more particularly, Romans 14. v. 12. So then every
one of us shall give an account of himself, (not another for him) to God; and
Gal. 6. v. 4, and 5. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he
have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another; For every man shall bear
his own burden; And 1 Cor. 3. v. 8. And every man shall receive his own reward,
according to his own Labor: And indeed these Teachers by their flattering the
Sovereign Powers, put them to make a very heavy reckoning and by their
pretending to gratify them, lay on them a great and insupportable burden;
Which, when well considered, will be found very much to embitter all the sweet
of that exhorbitant, and incompetent power granted to them. I would have none
to think, that by any thing said, I design in the least to derogat from lawful
Authority and the civil Magistrate any thing that is due thereunto, God forbid I
should; I heartily acknowledge Magistracy to be the ordinance of God; Romans 13.
v. 1, 4. And Magistrates to be by Office Ministers of God to us for good; to
whom, for begetting and maintaining a just aw, dread and veneration of them, he
has imparted and communicated some of his own names, or styles, calling them
Gods, even such as are Exodus 22. 28. Ps. 82. v. 1. 6. John 10. 34, 35.
his Le^vetennants, Vicegerents and* Representers on earth; and would beseech,
and obtest that all of us may render, as unto God the things that are Gods, so
to Caesar the things that are Cesars. Math. 22. v. 21.
As to fear God so to honourthe King; that every soul be subject to the higher
1 Pet. 2. v. 17. Romans 13. v. 1. 5.
powers, subject not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. That we all
submit our selves to every ordinance of man for the 1 Pet. 2. v. 13. 14. 15.
Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sin: by him for the punishment of evil doors, and the praise of
them that do well; For so is the will of God, that with well doing we may put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men. That we be subject, to principalities
and powers, and obey Magistrates. And that first Tit. 3. v. 1. ^ Tit. ^. v 1, 2
of all supplications and prayers, and intercessions and giving of thanks be
made for all men for Kings and * all that are in authority, that We may lead a
quiet and peacable life in all godliness and honesty: Cheerfully allowing to
them all that the Scriptures of the old and new Testaments, and the Consessions
of Faith of the Reformed Churches of Christ allow unto them: and whoever have
taught, or held, or do teach, and hold the contrary, whatever be their
pretentions and professions, are not only, not true Presbyterians, but in so
far, not true Protestants, yea not true Christians, but the disgrace, shame and
reproach of Presbytery, Protestanis^e* and Christianity, so far as in them
lies; for their way has a manifest tendency to fasten such unworthy
imputations on these interesis, though they can cause no inherent blemishes in
them, no more then fogs and mists can do in the Sun, a^beit they may eclipse
and obscure its glory: Let us make the supposition that the Apostles of our
Lord had taught such Doctrine, as some very few, one or two have of late
taught, and do still teach (which yet we cannot with any shadow of truth make;
For these divinly and infallibly inspited persons could teach no such Doctrine)
What ground of jealousy and prejudice would it have given to all the Secular
Powers of the World against the Gospel of Christ? As if the design of it had
been to ru^ne all Civil Authority, and to instigat its disciples to root out
all Civil Magistrates and Rulers; how would it have set them on, and not without
some reason, with implacable fury to have by all means stiffled the
Gospel-Christian Church, in the very Infancy and Cradle thereof? whereas the
Doctrine of Christ, and His Apostles teaching no such thing, but most clearly,
convincingly and fully, the contrary; it made the Civil powers their
persecuting its P^reossors utterly in excusable, and their sufferings by them
to be truly ^ous* and it is worthy observation, that the time wherein our Lord
Christ, and his Apostles* Paul and Peter gave these fore mentioned Commands,
and Instructions to Christians, relating to their duty, to the Superior Civil
Powers, was, when Tiberius, Cal^gula, Claudi us* and Nero were Roman Emperors;
none o^ whom were the best nor near the best* even of Pagan Emperors, and some
of them were very Monsters of men. Only it would be carefully looked to, that
foundations be not shaken, and put out of course, and that ancient boundaries
and landmarks be not removed; which no Christian Civil Sovereigns, in Kingdoms
or Common wealths, keeping them, selves in the Line of due and just
Subordination to the Majesty of God, the great and absolute Superior, and
Sovereign, the King of Kings, by and under whom all Kings reign, will allow of,
or give way unto, whatever un-hallowed Hobbists, profanely and impiously
suggest to the contrary: Whose principles (whatever they pretend to grant to
the Civil Sovereigns of Kingdoms, and Commonwealths) are a manifest tendencle
to the unhinging, and utter dissolving of all government* For let us in short,
but suppose these four things, which Hobbs very Magisterially, tanquam ex
tripode, dictats, and takes fore granted, in his forcited book. 1. That all
Religion is bottomed on human Authority, and precariously borrowed from the
will and pleasure of men, and has no divine authority of its own; whereby (as
ingenious and acute Sir Charles Wo^sly, in his unreason ablness of athiesm,
says*) an inrode is made upon its best desence; for indeed (says he) it will
never be kept up with any other interest in the Consciences of men; and where
it is not supported by conscience* it is ever tottering, and yields to the
blasts of every humane pleasure; if once (says the same learned Gentleman it
be taken foregranted, that the Scripturs have no authority but what the Civil
Power gives them; they will soon come upon a divine account to have none at
all. adly. That the Apostles could not make their writings obligatory Canons
without the help of the Sov^aign (...) Powers, and that therefore the Scripture
of the new Testament, is the only law there; where the Civil Power makes it so;
as if forsooth the Divine Authority stamped thereon by the absolute Sovereign,
by the great and infallible Legis lator carried with it no immediate obligati on
the Consciences of Men to whom it comes, to receive and obey it as his Law;
Whosoever besteveth (says Sir Charles Woolsl^) That it is in the power of
every state, whether the Gospel shall be authentic, or not, he must needs
throw off all divine respect to it, and be in a very fair way to trouble
himself little with any devotion arising from it. 3ly. That there is no
distinction of good and evil Actions but by the Civil Law, which is unto him
the measure thereof; though this distinction of good and evil be deeply and
indelebly engraven on the hearts of all men, as a native and necessary result
of the faith of the being of God, as the supreme rectitude. 4ly. That there are
no ultra-mundan, or eternal rewards or punishments, nor any beyond or beside
these that are bestowed or inflicted by the Civil Power in this present life;
though from the beginning of the world, throughout all ages, experience has
given in full demonstrative* and undeniable evidence, that men have been
mightily impelled and encouraged to do good by the hope of future eternal
rewards, and proportionably restrained, pulled back, and deterred from doing
evil, by the fear of future and eternal punishments; If (I say) we once suppose
these things, we quite ruin and r^ze the great foundations* not only of
revealed and supernatural, but also of natural Religion; without which it is
impossible, that government amongst men, can have any sure or firm basis to
rest on; but must needs, according to the prevalency of their selfinterests,
cromble into pieces, and end in Anarchy and Confusion. It is not altogether
unworthy of remark here, that Hobbs runs quite cross to the dictats of famed
Matchiavel, that prodigy of profound policy, though but a very coarse Divine,
who labors much in his Prince to persuade Sovereign Civil Powers of the
necessity and advantage, for the supportance of government, of dissembling and
pretending at least, a great regard and veneration to Religion; in comparison
of whom, the other is but an impolitick Puny, and a far worse divine, even (if
it involved not a repugnancy) a diabolick one.

Fifthly, We would take heed that we do not supinely, and carelessly neglect and
slight the checks, challenges, rebukes and accusations of our Consciences, in
lesser things, or in matters of comparatively smaller moment (wherein yet
Conscience has a concern, as it has in all our Moral Actions; neither are
many, even of our Natural Actions, as circumstantiated quite excluded from its
concern) for that insensibly weakens the voice, checks and rebukes of
Conscience in more momentuous matters, and may pre-dispose and prepare to
trifle with it in these too, and may provoke God, whose deputy Conscience is,
to enj^n it silence, and to suffer the man to go on securely in sin without
check or challenge* while yet in the mean time, he secretly commands it to
write up, and keep a record of all these Items against him, and in due time to
set them all in order, to marshal, as it were, and draw them up in rank and
file before him in a terrible manner, and to give him at once a most fu^ious
charge: challenges and accusations of Conscience, that have been smoothered for
the time, and slighted after lying long silent, have in some notable strait and
difficulty arisen and got up upon men many years thereafter; as these of
Joseph's Brethren did on them, full twenty years at least, after their
pitielesse, cruel, un-natural, inhumane and barbarous usage of their poor
innocent younger Brother: A secure, silent and none-challenging ill Conscience
is amongst the worst of ill Consciences, and in some respect worse then a
turbulent, stormy and roaring ill Conscience, (if it come not to the hight of
despair*) because disposing the man athiestically to think, that because God by
himself and his deputy the Conscience, keeps silence, he is therefore like unto
the man himself, and that neither he nor his deputy will ever speak again, nor
reprove for those things, but that he has quite forgotten them all, and will
not any more call to a reckoning for them, O! that such as forget God, and
s^ight his challenges and reproofs by their own Conscience, would consider
this, least he tear them in pieces, when there will be none to deliver: It may
also provoke him to speak that very angry and terrible word, Hos. 4. v. 17.
more terrible some way then if he should say, famine, fire, sword, pestilence,
and wild beasts fail on the man, he is joined to his Idols (and so straightly
joined that he will listen to no challenges of his Conscience checking him for
maintaining the conjunction; nor to any suggestion of it, persuading him to
divorce from them, or to un^le any of the knots of that cursed conjunction) let
him alone, let him sin on, and by sinning treasure up to himself wrath against
the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Beside that
such a silent, sleeping and stupefied Conscience through often trading
challenges under foot, will at last waken and flee in the ungodly man's face,
and as a fierce mastive Dog, or ravening Wolf take him by the Throat, and
become his Burrio and Tormenter and perhaps, for eviting the trouble and terror
of it, put him (though a poor and pitiful, desperate and distracted shift) to be
his own murderer and executioner; or if it should keep silence to death, and
even then not disqulet him, yet it will in Hell, as a never dying worm gnaw the
heart of him, and as a ravenous vulture tear out, as it were his very bowels;
and by its yelling and roaring, by its biting and renting the very c^ul of his
heart, make him a hell to himself in hell, and so make a double hell to him:
Alas! even the godly themselves may by somewhat of this guilt, raise great
storms of trouble and disquiet in their own Consciences.

Sixthly. We would by all means guard against counteracting and running cross
to the plain and downright dictats of our Consciences, especially when clearly
informed by the Word; for this is a high daring, malepert, affronting,
desplsing and disowning of Gods Deputy, and as it were a violent putting him
off the Bench; the language whereof is, that if God himself the Lord of the
Conscience, were or could possibly be, as much in the man's reverence, as he
supposes his Conscience to be, he would deal with him at the same rate, and
serve him with the same measure: this brings on dedolency, stupidity and
caurerizing of Conscience, makes stout against God, hold and impudent in
sinning, it makes the man's heart harder then an Adamant, it makes him to be of
a brazen brow, and to put on a whores forehead, so that he* will not at all
think shame, nay not so much as blush, but confidently wipe his mouth, and say,
What have I done? and very readily it brings on all the dreadful effects
mentioned in the foregoing Caution; and fills the world of the visible Church
with prodigles of profanitie and monsters of mischief, and even in a manner
bringsup hell upon earth, when it becomes habitual, and when God judicially
gives men up to their own hearts lufts, and to walk in their own counsels,
without all regard to what he says to them by his word without them, and by
their own Consciences within them.

Seventhly, We would carefully advert that we adventure not to do any thing
with an unclear, he sitant and doubting Conscience; since it is impossible in
this case to do without sin and hazard of damnation, the Holy Ghost having
positively and plainly told us, that whatsoever is not done in faith is sin;
Rom 14 v. last. That is* not only whatsoever is not done by a person in a state
of faith (without which it is impossible to please God) is sin; but also and
most agreeablie to the scope, whatsoever is not done in the faith and
persuasion of the warrantablenesse theros is so, and that he who thus
doubtingly, and without such faith and persuasion eats, o^ does, is damned,
or judged. Ibid. It will not as^oil the doer doubtingly, or the doubting doer
from sin and judgment, to tell him that his Conscience is in an error, and
that he is not to regard what his erroniou* Conscience dictats to him, but to
act contrary to it; I ^s ^ue indeed, that an erring Conscience does not
oblidge a man to act according to its blind and erroneous dictats, for a man
never is, neither can be obliged to sin, he is rather bound to endeavor in
Gods way to have his Conscience, when in an error, un deceived and well
informed, and so to lay aside his error, but yet while his Conscience still
continues in its error, and comes not to be informed aright, the man is
bound up so, that he cannot without sin counteract the dictats of his erring
Conscience, which is not for the time apprehended by him to be in an error:
neither will it relieve the m^n whose Conscience doubts of the lawfulness of
doing such and such a thing, to tell him that more knowing and conscientious,
more prudent and pious men then he* are free and clear for the thing whereof he
doubts; for other men's Conscience can be no rule to his, unless he were
persuaded of their infallibility, and that their Conscience could not be taken
with any error or mistake: God has put a Conscience in every man, as his
Deputy, to whose dictats he is carefully to take heed, and has not made the
Conscience of any one man, or Society of men, his Depute over all the
Consciences of other men: I shall easily grant, that when the Consciences of
more knowing, more tender and more conscientious men then my self, dictat to
them the warrantablenesse of such and such a practice* I am called to be holily
jealous over, and suspicious of my sel^, impartially to examine the reasons of
their clearness, and on that occasion to search very scrutinously, narrowly,
and exactly into the grounds of my own unclearnesse, hesitation and doubting,
and to be much and earnest in prayer to God, with unbyassed singleness and
sincerity* For sending forth his light and truth to guide and lead me: But if
no withstanding all this, my doubt still remains; and it may be also, that
there are several other godly and judicious persons that are doubtful and
unclear with me; I cannot in that case warrantably give up my self to be
implicitly determined by the Conscience of others, whatever their
qualifications be, or whatever my veneration may be for them, nor am I bound to
act my self with a doubting Conscience; since I am expressly fold by the
infallible Scriptures of Truth, that I cannot act in that case without sin, and
without incurring the hazard of damnation; and that no man can keep me harmless
in doing so, Since every man must give an account of himself to God: And if I
shall do one thing with a doubting Conscience, because (...) may be mistaken,
and in an error; or because such and such godly and knowing persons are free
for it, what a wide door would this open? why may I not do another thing of
greater moment doubtingly, and another after that, and third after that* where
shall I stay or stop, and when shall there be an end of such Conscience
doubting actions? especially in times wherein troubles and tentations snares
and offenses do abound ^ wherein, as there has been, so there will readily
still be different sentiments and apprehensions as to some lesser and lower
truths further removed from the fundamentals of Religion (where about all are
agreed) and so proportionably as to (...) practices among^ even truly godly
men; it not being to be supposed that while Saints so journ, and are militant
here on earth, the intellectuals of all of them will be of the same size, or
cast into the same mould, that their light will be of the same clearness, and
that they will be all of equal mortification, self-denyednesse, tenderness,
un^hy affedness, fingleness, holy zeal, resolution, courrage and boldness;
which as it says, that there will be more clearness* and more darkness and
doubting amongst them, at least as to some remote things: So it speaks the
necessity of mutual Christian for bea^ance* compassion* and Sympathy* And it
has been a very generally received maxim in matters of Conscience, that in
dubiis tu^ius is it abstinere, in things that are doubtful (at least as to their
very substance (to say so) and not only as to somewhat extrinsick to them) i^s
safest* to abstain.

Eighthly. We would in the case of indifferent things, wherein we are clear our
selves, and fully persuaded of our own Christian liberty, be very tender of the
Consciences of others, who may in that respect he more weak, and not so fully
clear and persuaded* about them; least we offend and wound their Conscience;
and so indirectly consequently and by the rebound, offend and wound ou^ ow.
Conscience* here the Apostles directions, assertions, precepts and practice,
Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8. 9 and 10. Chapters are singularly useful, admirably apposit
and excellent; O! that the Apostolic primitive Christian amiable tenderness
in the matter of offense, in the use of things indifferent, were brought back
to and revived in this much declined and degenerated generation, wherein
offenses abound, and the love of many waxes cold; and wherein there is a great
propension and readiness, untenderly and uncharitably to give and to take
offense. I do not by this in the least insinuat, that for preventing the
offense (or rather displeasure) of any, we may warrantably do or forbear any
thing that God has commanded or prohibited the doing of; or that we should or
may run cross to the dictats of our own Consciences, or do any thing with an
unclear and doubting Conscience; which is always sin, and therefore never ^o
be adventured on, offend and be displeased who will; though even in that case,
their offense should be a grief to us, as it was to the Apostle (whose exercise
it was to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward men)
who said, Who is offended and I burn not?

Ninthly. We would take heed to, and be aware of pretending Conscience in any
thing, about which we have no real exercise, doubt or scruple of Conscience; as
for instance* in the first place, if professors of Religion should pretend
Conscience, for abstaining from such and such a practice, only from long
custom of doing so, from the example of others, or from loathness to displease
them, or only from dis-inclination to, or aversion from the thing, which they
will not readily abide by, if any considerable suffering, whether of emergent
loss, or cessant gain be met with on account thereof; whereby it comes to pass
that Conscience, and truly Conscientious persons, are expo^ed to contempt and
scorn; Some standers by and lookers-on, taking occasion to think and say, that
such persons have all the while been acted by no real principle of Conscience,
but only by humor, or at best by the example of others, to the great reproach
of Religion, and the holy profession there of; and such as have a natural and
unreasonable prejudice at all serious godliness and tenderness of Conscience,
ly at the wait to fish and catch all advantages so fortifying themselves in
their prejudice, and are ready to draw their conclusions not only, nor so much
against the particular persons, as against the whole generation of
conscientious and godly people, yea against godliness it self, and tenderness
of Conscience* their prejudice prompting them to think and say, We always
thought that sort of men were not truly conscientious and godly, whatsoever
they professed; and now we see and find them to be so, and that we were not
mistaken, but in the right, when we thought them to be such; they are all such,
all of a piece, acted by no true principle of Conscience, but by humor,
peevishness, or some such thing, notwithstanding of all their high floun
pretensions of Conscience; for let them but be put a little to it, and all
their Conscience-pretensions will be quite relinquished and evanish, and they
will be, and do like others; which gives ground to sober and truly
conscientious persons to think, that it were better, and more for the advantage
and credit of Religion, and of the real pleas of Conscience, that it were never
pretended in such things, where it is only pretended* I will not, I dar not
say, but a truly conscienscious person may, by the more closse approaches of
trouble and suffering on the account of some particular debated practice, or
forbearance, be put upon more narrow and exact inquiry into, and examination of
the grounds and reasons of that practice, or forbearance; And may after such
inquiry and examination, come, from more clear light, to have different
apprehensions about the thing, from what he had, before; Though the clearness
win at, which is waited with the eschewing of trouble and suffering, would be
holily jealoused and suspected, and brought to the light of the Word to be
thereby scrutinously, accuratly and impartially tried, least self-love in such
a case bribe (as it were) and bias the persons judgment and light. 2dly. When
Conscience is pretended in minute, small petty and comparatively inconsiderable
things, while in the mean time little, or no Conscience at all is made of, but
vast and unlimited latituds are taken in, the most momentuous, and weighty
things of Religion; as the Pharisees pretended Conscience, in tithing the
smallest herbs, as mint, anise and rue, while in the mean time, they passed
over without making any bones of them. Judgment and the Love of God; which is
straining at gnats and swallowing of camels. 3dly. When Conscience is pretended
for men's tenacious adhering to human traditions, while in the meantime they
make no Conscience of making void the Law of God; as the same Pharisees did,
for which out Lord, with holy severity inveigheth against them. 4ly. When
Conscience is pretended for not shedding the blood of Innocents; and yet
notwithstanding the same things are adventured on, and wickedly per-petrated,
when they come in competition with men's worldly wealth, or preferment, or with
the gratifying of great ones in order to the former; as it was with Pilat in
the matter of condemning Christ, of whose innocence he was thoroughly convinced,
and accordingly did thrice over hear public testimony to it; yet when he was
told, that if he did let him go, and condemned him not to death, he was not
Cesars friend, he forthwith proceeded to the condemnatory Sentence, and
delivered him to the persecuting and murdering Jews to be crucified; and, poor
wretch, he imagined, that the silly shift of washing his hands in water, would
wash and purge his deeply ^ fil^d Conscience, from the guilt and pollution
contracted by shedding of that innocent and most precious Bloo^ bu^ it stuck
faster to, and was more stiffly barkned on his Conscience, then to be so easily
washed off: and with such poor and pitiful shifts, do such men think or fancy
to pacify their Consciences, and to purge them from the defilements of the
greatest, most clamant and horrid crimes: If Pilat had any real demurr in his
Conscience about the thing (as very probably he had) his counteracting it on so
base and unworthy accounts, and then foolishly fancieing, that by such an empty
ceremony, as washing his hands in water, he could be washed from the guilt of
so a^rocious a Crime, were high aggravations of it. 5ly. When men pretend
Conscience as the reason of their not committing the least sin, nay of their
not doing somethings that are very debateable, whether they be sins or not;
while in the mean time they make no Conscience to stretch forth their hand to,
^ay with an high hand to adventure on the commission of sins* that are
incontravertably very great, and gross, as the Pharisees pretended Conscience,
for their not going to the Judgment Hall, least forsooth, they should be
defiled, and so unfitted to eat the Passover, who yet made no scruple
ma^ciously to embrew their wicked hands in the blood of the person, that was
God, and typified by the Passover. 6ly. When Conscience, or a conscientious
regard is pretended for divine institutions and ordinances, merely and mainly
from pickque and prejudice at the most tender and conscientious persons, as if
their warrantable and consistent practices, were the grossest violations and
greatest vi^ifyings of them, and plain inconsistencies with a just regard for
them* How often thus did the Scribes and Pharisees quarrel with our Lord and
his Disciples, as breakers and profaners of the Sabbath? because of somethings
done by him, and them thereon, not in the least in-compatible with the
sanctification thereof; as if they themselves had been more tender of the due
observation of the Sabbath, then either the Disciples, or their Lord and Master
was. 7ly. (to give no more instances) when Conscience is pretended for keeping,
and not breaking of sinful engadgements, vows and oaths wherewith men have
rashly bound themselves; As suppose a man should rashly vow and swear, that he
will be avenged at the highest rate on another, because of either an imagined
or real, a lesser or greater injury done him; and as Herod swear, very
inconsiderarly and rashly, that he would give the dancing daughter of the
incestuous Mother Herodias, whatever she should ask of him, even to the half of
his Kingdom; who asking at her Mothers instigation, the head of John the
Baptist (which was of more worth then the whole, let be the half of his
Kingdom) and he judging himself bound by his oath, to grant her desire,
accordingly gave order (its said, for his oaths sake) to the Executioner to
behead him in the Prison without any trial, or so much as a hearing* though it
was indeed against the light of his natural Conscience; he having been
convinced, that he was not only an innocent, but also a just man and holy, and
accordingly observed him, and did many things, enjoined him by John, and heard
him gladly; as if unlawful and sinful oaths rashly come under, could in
conscience bind men to act against the plainest and most palpable dictats of
their own Conscience* whereas they ought rather to repent, and pray for the
pardon of such engadgements, vows and oaths, and forthwith to break them, since
Iuramentum nunquam potest esse vinculum iniquitatis, an oath can never be a
bond of iniquity, or oblidge men in Conscience to commit what is palpably a
sin.

Tenthly. We would be aware, that we do not in-consideratly, rashly and
precipitantly adventure upon any action, or meddle with any bussiness,
especially of moment, before deliberat and serious consulting with our
Conscience; (endeavoring always to have it well informed by the Word) which
either, makes many such actings and meddlings to be afterward reflected on
with a challenging and disquieted Conscience; or tempts us to endeavor the
byassing, and bribing (as it were) of our own Conscience, toward a sort of
justifying us in what we have done* or if neither of these should be, (which
seldom comes to pass) we are greatly in hazard to be very loath, reluctant
and shy to hear, and lay due weight upon the after animadversions, and censures
of our Conscience upon these actings and medlings, being over and by, and not
now reversible: O! how safe and sure might we be in all our actings, movings
and medlings; and with how much peace might we reflect on them, if we did
always call and admit Gods testimonies, and our own Consciences enlightened and
informed by them, to be our advisers and counselors; the neglect whereof
makes many rugged, disorderly, irregular and unpeacable steps in our walk: That
man only walks surely, that walks uprightly, in single and unbyassed compliance
with the dictats of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, and of his own
Conscience conform thereunto; most certainly in the multitude of consultations,
with such counselors there is safety.

Eleventhly, We would carefully take heed that we do not baffle and prostitute
Conscience, either by swearing at all by our Conscience, let be ordinarlly and
customarily, (too much incident to many pro^est Christians, to the great
scandal of Christian Religion) which beside the un-necessariness of it, at
least in most cases, is never in any case warrantable; Conscience, though Gods
Deputy, being but a creature, as Heaven, Earth and our Heads are, Math. 5. v.
34, 35, 36. (by which we ought not at all to swear, being expressly forbidden by
the Lord to do so) and so never to be sworn by; Swearing being a piece, and a
very solemn piece of Gods Worship, and often put for the whole Worship of God,
in the Scriptures, where we are called to swear by him only: Deuteronomy. 6. v. 13.
and 20. v. 10. or where swearing by it is much, or altogether abstained from
and it may be somewhat abhorred, yet we would not dar to debase, vilify and
(as I said) to prostitute Conscience ordinarily, and on every light and trivial
occasion, by saying in conscience, or on my conscience; which in common
discourse, without any the least necessity, is sure more then Yea and Nay, and
so according to the Lords own determination (precisly to be stood too) comes
of evil; neither will they really be found to be amongst the tenderest or most
truly religious and conscientious persons; whatever be their professions of, or
pretensions to Religion or Conscience, to whom this is most familiar; for by
this customary and habitual solemn asserting every light, minute, and trifling
matter (when withal it is offensive to tender ears) men may be tempted in
other things to make too bold with their Conscience, which they thus debase, if
not, even upon such petty occasions now and then to swear by it: Conscience is
a very tender thing, and would be very tenderly dealt with, and in nothing in
the least bourded or dalli^d with; and we are expressly commanded to abstain
from all appearance of evil. 1 These. 5. v. 22.

Twelfthly. and finally, We would by all means take heed and beware that we do
not mock, deride or flout at Conscience, and conscientious Persons (which no
man that has any Conscience will dare to do, no^ to deny the power of it* nay
the Atheist himself (as Sir Charles Woolsly says well) cannot with all his
skill disband his own fears, nor run away from his Conscience, no more then he
can run away from himself; he finds seasons wherein he smarts under the lashes
of it.) No^ take up, entertain and harbor any prejudice and pique at them, as
if such, by the tenderness, doubts and scruples of their Consciences, disturbed
the repose, peace, tranquillity, and free acting of all the Countries,
Corporations and Societies, greater and smaller wherein they live* and made a
very unpleasant, unchearful and disquieted life to the persons themselves: or
to think that it were a great advantage to the World, that all such persons
were out of it, or clustered together by themselves only, in some remote corner
of it; for whose nice and strait laced (as they call it) Conscience and its
inquiries, scruples, and doubts, they cannot get leave to live quiet, and to
act with that freedom they would be at: Alas! if such had their desire, and all
doubts, checks and restraints of Conscience were removed from men; what
confusion disorder, and distraction would the World run into? How instantly
would it be turned into a very shambles? How would men, the greatest part of
men turn like roaring Lions, and ravening Wolves, as cruel Tigers, or savage
wild Boars, one to another? How would it be filled with violence* rapine and
blood? How would the greatest and most abominable villainies walk up and down in
it, in the very streets and concurses of the People, un controlled, barefaced,
not in masquerad, or under any disguise? How would reasonable men be as so many
incarnat devils, or bruit beasts? such would take heed that this be not found
to be the interpretative language of these thoughts; O! that there were not
such a thing as Conscience Gods Deputy in men, in the World; And, O! that there
were not a God to appoint, commissiona^, and establish such Deputies under him:
I shall not deny (having plainly asserted it before) That an ill informed
Conscience waited especially with any forwardness, may make very sad work
amongst men, and prove a very troublesome and cumbersome neighbor; But alas!
why should the blame be laid on Conscience* as Conscience, what evil has
innocent Conscience done? The general great advantages that come to the World
with the many mischiefs that are keept of it by Conscience, are infinitely
greater, and more valuable, then any little prejudices and disadvantages that
now and then, here and there come by the ill*informed turbulent Consciences of
some particular persons: neither will I altogether deny, but the tenderest
Consciences of truly godly men may sometimes dispose them to jealous, and
suspect themselves, where they are not indeed guilty, as it did the eleven
honest Disciples, when the Lord told them that one of the twelve should betray
him, and through some weakness, may now and then disquiet and give them the
alarm, when there is little or no ground for it: But I must say, that this
may be very easily dispensed, and born with, since that little damnage (if it
may be called so) will be easily and quickly compensed by its giving the
alarm, and causing suitable disquiet, when there is just ground for it; Here
a tender Conscience may be resembled to a vigilant and strict sentinal set to
watch a house, lying in midst of Thieves and Robbers; who will sometimes on a
mistake awake and alarm, and it may be at midnight raise all the family, and
put them into some fright* as if Thieves and Robbers were breaking in upon
them; but they think the less of this, and bea^ the better with it, a^ being
sure that when the Thief or Robber comes in very deed, he will give them the
alarm; and there are very few, or none, that will not far rather chu^e to
have one or two, yea ^everal false allarmes, though somewhat disquieting, then
to want a true one, when there is just ground for it; And when, by means
thereof they may prevent the cutting of their Throats, or spoiling of their
Goods.

Let then the Conscience be well informed by the Word; let its dictats
according thereunto, be tenderly complied with, and none of them counteracted;
and let its checks, challenges, accusations; with its answers, testimonies and
excuses, according to their respective grounds and reasons, be carefully
listened to and admitted; in a word, let all study once to have a good
Con^cience, and to be always exercised to keep it void of offense toward God
and toward men: And then great honor and glory would redound to God, the Lord
and Sovereign of the Conscience; suitable and due deference would be given to
his Word, as that whereby the Conscience is rightly informed; the peace of men's
own Consciences would flow as a river; the offending and st^mbling of others
would be much prevented; the profession of the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ
would be much adorned and beautified; and men of all Ranks, Stations,
Capacities, and Relations; As Magistrates and Subjects, Pastors and Flocks,
Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Teachers and
Scholars, Buyers and Sellers, etc. would be blessings from God one to another,
which would make a little Heaven upon Earth: To all which these few excellent
Se^mons are singularly contributive; That they may therefore come with a
special blessing to all the Readers of them, and more particularly to the
Inhabitants of the City of GLASS GOW, (where they were Preached many years ago)
is the desire of

November. 1. 1684. Your Servant in the Gospel I. C.

In the epistle, page 5. l. 4: r. renewing. p. 20. l. 29. r. R^epresentces p.
20. l. 6. 1. 1 Timothy l. last r. professors. p. 22. l. 6. r. upon the Con^ciences.

HEAVEN upon EARTH in a Serene and Smiling good Conscience.
SERMON I.
ACTS 24. Verse. 16. And herein do I exercise my self to have always a
Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men.
A Good Conscience is a singularly good Companion, the worth and benefit
whereof is not readily so well known till men be brought into some strait; then
indeed the passing great and singular worth and usefulness of it clearly
discovers it self: as we may see in Paul's case here, who being arraigned before
the tribunal of an heathen Judge, and having many enemies, and these too of his
own nation having delivered him up; Among other grounds of Consolation and
defense that he has to sustain himself by, this is one and not the least, that
(...) (...) did bear him witness, that it was his endeavor and work to live so
before God and men that he might not have a challenge from it; and this makes
him speak boldly against all his Accusers, and is better to him and more
valueable then all the Arguments and Rhetorical Discourses that a Tertullus,
yea a Tully, or the most eloquent Orator in the World could have used for him.

These words hold out a Compend and Sum of a Christian walk, and an excellent
partern for Believers, Herein do I exercise my self, etc. where we have these
three things considerable;

First, The Apostle's great design and aim. viz. To have a conscience void of
offense, that he might so walk as never to offend his Conscience, nor to give
it an ill report to make of him.

Secondly, The extent of this design and aim, and that ^n a twofold respect. 1.
In respect of the Object toward God and toward men, i. ^. he would do duty to
both, and be found without offense to either. 2. In respect of all Actions,
Companies, Places and Times; he was so exercised always, not after a Sermon or
Communion only, not under some heavy Cross, or after some notable outgate and
delivery only, but he aimed, designed, and endeavored to be so constantly and
equally.

Thirldy, The manner of his going about this, Herein (says he) do I exercise
my self, i. e. it was a business that took him up and held him seriously at
work; he was as a man who fighting for his life in a Barras, or at a single
Combat carefully handles his Arms, even so did he carry and behave himself in
all things as if his life had stood on every action or word.

I shall at once and together propose several Doctrines clearly deducible from
the Text, the prosecution whereof will help to clear both the words and the
matter contained in them.

The first whereof is, There are many sorts of offenses both toward God and
toward men that we are subject an^ liable to.

The second is, There is within every man a Conscience that takes notice of
every piece of his carriage, and is accordingly affected with it, and affects
the man for it.

The third is, Whatever things are offenses toward God or Men are also
offensive to the Conscience, whatever sin strikes against his Law wounds the
Conscience.

The fourth is, It Is a very good, choice, and excellent thing for a Believer to
walk so, as to keep a Conscience always void of offense toward God and toward
Men; and on the contrary it is a very ill thing at any time to have offense
toward either of them lying on the Conscience.

The fifth is, It is the duty of all men and more especially of Believers to
walk so, as they may always keep a Conscience void of offense, yea it is not
only a duty, but we may look on it as an excellent mean for advancing of
Holiness.

The sixth is, Where men honestly aim to keep a Conscience always void of
offense, it will be an exercising and uptaking thing.

The seventh is, Where this exercise is neglected and not seriously carried on,
the Conscience is left to stumble at, and to abound with, offenses.

As for the first, That there are many kinds of offenses which People are
subject to, toward God and Men; It is a thing uncontroverted by all, and we
need say little of it; only first, There are sins against the first Table,
which are offenses toward God, being immediately against him* And there are sins
against the second Table, which although they be against God, yet immediately
they touch and reflect on men. 2. There are sins against God that are secret,
which God only is witness to: and there are open sins which scandalize men,
Paul endeavored to eschew all these, for all are ^ins against the Law of God
and wounding of the Conscience.

The second is, That there is a Conscience within every man which takes notice
of every piece of his carriage, and is accordingly affected with it, and
affects him for it: This is the ground of all that follows, and had need to be
more particularly spoken unto: This truth then contains these three things, 1.
That there is a Conscience in every man that takes notice of every piece of his
way and walk, hence it is said to bear witness, 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our
rejoicing, the testimony of our Conscience, etc. and it is also said to accuse
or excuse, Romans 2. 15. it witnesses for men and excuses and comforts them when
they do well, and witnesses against them, accuses and reproves them when
they do evil; and so is to them as a Check, Captor or Censor: The Apostles aim
to have a Conscience void of offense suppons that he and every man has a
Conscience, and that it takes notice of every thing, and will take offense if
it be a thing that thwarts with it: We shall not in this place stand to debate
what Conscience is whether it be a power or a faculty, an habit or an act,
which as it would not be much for your edification, so it would transcend the
reach of many of you; only in the general we may call it a power wherewith God
has endued the soul of man to take notice of all his thoughts, words and
actions. 2. We say ^ts accordingly affected with every thing, when the man does
right it is pleased, and when he does wrong its offended and wounded, as we may
see 1 Cor. 8. 10, 11. so 1 Samuel 24. 5. Its said David's heart smote him, and
Prove. 18. 14. this is called a wounded spirit. 3. As it is affected so it
affects the person, when a man has done well, it excuses and clears him, and
when he has done evil and wronged it, it challenges and accuses him; in which
respect Conscience is called a Judge, pronouncing sentence by absolving or
condemning men; Scripture and the experience of all sorts of people and times
clear and prove this, 1. The Scripture says of Heathens, Romans 2. 15. That their
conscience bears them witness and their thoughts the mean while accuse or
excuse one another; it holds out this to have been in Adam, who immediately
after the fall, Genesis 3. 10. says, I heard thy voice and was afraid, terror
seized on him; it mentions this also to have been in Joseph's brethren, who Genesis
42. 21. say, we are verily guil^y concerning our brother; and in David in that
forecited 1 of Sam. 24. 5. where its said, that his heart smote him; it is
clearly also supposed 1 John 3. 19, 20, 21. where the Apostle says, If our
heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knows all things, if our
heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God; where we would take
notice, that what is here, and sometimes in the Old Testament, called the
Heart, is in the Text and else-were called the Conscience, which supposes this
to be in every man: It is further clear from the daily experience of all in all
times; for sometimes it is pousing to duty, sometimes it is challenging for the
omission of duty, or for commission of the contrary evil; sometimes it is
speaking peace, sometimes it is marring peace and denouncing war as it were;
all which plainly evidence that there is such a thing in men, so Herod when he
heard of Christ's Miracles, his Conscience puts him in mind of John the Baptist
whom he had beheaded, and disquiets him with fears that John might have been
raised from the dead; something of it appears likewise in Achab, when it puts
him to put on Sackcloth; all which (I say) plainly evidence that there is such
a thing in men, and beside full Scripture Proof, there are none but if they
observe, they will find their thoughts the mean while, either accusing, or else
excusing them.

For further clearing of this, we shall speak a little first, To what this
Conscience is, if it be possible satisfyingly to explain it. 2. To the use and
ends of it, and why God has placed this in man; where we shall show the
several sorts of Consciences that are in men, good and evil.

For the first, to wit, What Conscience is, we may for coming at the
understanding of it, consider the name Conscience, which signifies a
co-knowledge, or a knowledge going along with our knowledge: which we may
consider, First, As looking to Gods knowledge going along with ours, and ours
going along with his, and thus it implies as his knowledge of all our
thoughts, words and ways, so our knowledge together with his of these, or our
taking notice of them with respect to his knowledge. 2. We may consider it as
reflex-knowledge joined with a direct knowledge, as for instance when a man
has a direct knowledge of Prayer as his duty, and a reflex knowledge going
along with the practice or exercise of the duty, whereby he sees and discerns
himself, either to behave suitably in it, or to be faulty; in this respect
Conscience is a practical knowledge taking notice by a reflex act of a man's
ways. 3. We may consider it as comprehending a knowledge of Gods Law, and then
it signifies a knowledge of our selves compared with the Law, it has knowledge
of the rule, and so of what is duty and what is sin, and withal it has in it
the knowledge of our selves and of our conformity or disconformity to the rule;
Conscience then in this respect is a man's knowledge of Gods will and of himself
as compared with it. 4. We may consider this co knowledge as it supposes
beside the knowledge of our selves, the knowledge of something taking notice of
us, or of something deputed in us by God to keep a record of all our carriage
and particular actions, and so it is looked on as some way different from us;
hence it is called a Testimony, the testimony of our conscience. Hence also a
man will appeal to his Conscience; and it does when in any measure in exercise,
impartially and incorruptly bear witness, and a man^ Conscience will speak
against him as if it were at all no part of him, neither can he command it
silence; however then we call it, It Is a power deputed in the soul of man by
God, taking orders from Him and from* His revealed will and word, and accusing
or excusing the man as He directs; It Is called Prove. 20. 27. The candle of the
Lord, it is above man in its sentencing and accusing, and will not be commanded
by him.

To clear it yet a little further, there are in Conscience these Three things,
1. There is the laying down of some ground, such as the Law, or the word of
God, by which it puts a man to trial; which is, That we call the major or first
proposition of the Argument: As we may see in Judas when his Conscience
wakened, it lays down this ground (which is done by light) he that is guilty
of innoceat Blood, has broken the Law of God, and may expect horrible Wrath.
2. There is an assuming, which is the minor or second Proposition of the
Argument, or the Assumption, if the man be guilty of such and such sin; As
thus, But I Judas am guilty of Innocent Blood, and have broken the Command of
God, (and this the Conscience by it is Testimony confirms) Then 3. It draws
the Conclusion, and speaks forth the man's Lot, and gives out his Doom, what he
may expect; as in the present instance; thou Judas may expect horrible Wrath
from God, this Conscience applies, and lays home unto him; every Conscience
has these Three in less or more. The way of Conscience its Reasoning and
Concluding, is different from a man's Knowledge and Light; For a man may see Sin
and not be touched with it: It d^ffers likewise from the memory; For a man may
remember that which affects him not. It differs from Self-examination; for
that, if it be mee^ examination, brings a man only to know that he lies under
such and such Sins, so and so circumstantia^ed; though it make use of all these
Three as it is Instruments, yet it go^ beyond them, and has a Pricking,
Stinging, Paining Power; It Accuses, Sentenceth, Smites and sharply
Censureth: Whereas, before Conscience act it is part, a man may look often on
his Sins, and yet but overlook them; And as to things that are right,
Conscience does not only or barely look on them, but it has an approving
Testimony, which proves comfortable; there is such a thing as this in every
one of you, which will let nothing pass, but more or less will take notice of
it, and either accuse or excuse you for it.

As to the 2d. The use of Conscience, or the Ends wherefore God has put this
in Men and Women, which I shall draw to Three heads; that may be as so many
Reasons of the Doctrine.

1. He has done so for this end, that by it he may keep up his Soveraignity,
Power and Terribleness; and keep men under the awe and dread thereof; For this
which is called Conscience, will make the sto^est to tremble, it will Write and
Impress so v^vely and deeply these great Truths, that none shall be able to
blot them out, that there is a God, that there is a Judgment to come, and that
all will be called to Reckoning, which none will get eschewed, It will fix and
fasten such selfconvictions on Sinners, as will make them un-avoidably condemn
themselves: So John 8. 9, 10. When the Scribes and Pharisees bring a women
taken in adultery to Christ, intending thereby to trap and ensnare him, He
says, He that is without sin amongst you, let him cast the first stone at
her; Whereby their Consciences were made to bear such faithful Testimony
against them, and to carry such terror with it, that they were all forced to
steal away one by one; and yet they needed not to have thought shame on account
of any thing we hear men could have challenged them for; But Conscience had
such an awe and force on them, that there was no resisting of it.
Scripture-history does also tell us that such is the power and force of
Conscience, when it is awaked, that it will make the knees to smite one against
another, even of a Belshazzar, and will make a Governor Felix to tremble.

A Second end is, That God may hold Men and Women at their duty, in going about
these things which are commanded and prescribed by him, and in abstaining from
forbidden sins; For, if there were not some awe from Conscience, what
extravagancies would they loosly run into, who have no fear of God and of his
Word? And thus Conscience has a force to put men to duty, in these respects.
1* It discovers Duty, and holds it before them, when the Lord has commanded to
Pray, read the Scriptures, to keep the Church, and wait upon Ordinances
dispensed there; to keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. Conscience puts a man in
mind of these, and when he neglects any one of them, will say to him, thou
should be in another place, or about other work; so when David's heart smote
him, it helped him to see his Duty. 2. There is an obligation to Duty laid on
by Conscience, so that the man cannot shift it, he cannot, he dare not say,
such a thing is not my duty, for Conscience bears it in and lays it on him
convincingly. 3. There is an efficacy in Conscience to pouss to duty, from this
comes that restlesness and disquiet that is often in Men and Women, when duty
is omitted that they can have no peace till it be gone about. 4. Conscience
inviteth to duty, by promising peace upon the performance of it: On the other
hand, Conscience has influence to restrain from Sin. 1. By discovering such
and such a thing to be Sin, and though the Soul would notwithstanding endeavor
to digest it, yet Conscience makes a challenge to go down with it. 2. By
threatening the Sinner when it is warning is neglected, and not taken; telling
him that he shall repent it one day, and that it will make him repent i^. 3. By
taking away the sweetness of Sin, and leaving a sting in place of it; as when
Achab killed Naboth, it said, Have thou killed, and also taken possession? And
from this arise challenges, and fears of the execution of threatened Judgments,
which quite mar the comfort the man expected, in the enjoyment of such and such
a thing; in all which it keeps a majestic and stately divine way becoming Gods
deputy, and bears witness for him against the Sinner.

A 3d. end is, To abbreviat (as it were) Gods process in judging men, to
justify and clear him, and to make way for his Sentence whatever it be; 1. It
conduces (...) it were, to the opening of the Books, to the sisting and
putting of all persons in a posture before him to be Sentenced by him; it does
in a manner all, so that God has little or nothing to do, as it were, for it
discovers to a man what was his Duty, and his Sin. 2. It cites him to compear
and answer for neglecting such and such a duty, and committing such and such a
Sin, and he connot possibly shift compearance. 3. When he does compear, it
gives in a L^bell of Accusations against the Man, and a Catalogue of all his
Sins, in thought word and deed, this and this (will it awefully say) thou did
at such and such a time, in such and such a place, aggravated by such and such
circumstances. 4. It serves to be a witness, yea in place of a thousand
witnesses, and there is no denying or shifting of what ever it bears witness
to; All which we may see in Joseph's brethren, Genesis 42. 21. who say one to
another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother in that we saw the anguish
of his soul, when he besought us and we Would not hear, therefore is this
distress come upon us; The Law discovers that it was a Sin, Conscience
challenges and accuses, they are cited, the accusation is given in and
proven, this and this they did, and did it with all these circumstances; not a
pitiful word that Joseph spoke, nor a tear that he shed in the anguish of his
Soul, beseeching them to desist, but they remember it now; and there is no
shifting of the challenge and accusation, nor covering of it, as they had done
before to their aged Father Jacob; but they must needs now take with all, and
confess we have sinned, and are very guilty concerning our Brother, etc. 5. It
passes Sentence, and in this respect, the heart is said to condemn when the
thing is evil, and to absolve or not condemn, when the thing is good, 1 John 3*
20, 21. 6. When it has Sentenced and Condemned, it leaves not the man so, but
goes on and executes the Sentence, and turns a gnawing worm to bite and
gnaw, and as an Executioner to Buffe^ and Smite, to Damp and Torment the Man;
Thus ye may see how useful Conscience is to help forward Gods Judgment, and to
vindicat him in his Sentence: And as it is thus with a guilty Conscience, so it
is with a Conscience absolving, it will absolve when men condemn as we may see
in Paul here; when men give in a lybel and accuse, it will discharge, as Acts
23. 1. Men and brethren I have lived in all good conscience before God until
this day: and when Conscience has absolved it makes cheerful, as 2 Cor. 1.
12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, etc. And 1 John 3.
20. If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God: So then
we see Conscience has these Three great uses and ends, 1. To keep people in
awe of God, and of his greatness, and to keep them in mind that they must give
an account to him. 2. To hold them at their duty, and they should be very loath
to contradict it. 3. If duty be neglected, to record all their faults, and to
accuse and sentence them therefore, and never to leave pursuing them, for
Conscience will continue as a worm in hell gnawing for ever and ever.

The First Use serves to bear in this truth on you; that there is such a thing
as Conscience, the most ignorant and profane and haughty of you all, whether
young or old, one and other of you have a Conscience, that takes particula^
notice of every thing in your walk, that records all, that accuses or
excuses; and though ye take not head to it now, ye will one day be made to
know it; take it therefore for a certain truth, that ye have such a thing
within you, that ye have a Knowledge with your Knowledge, even a Conscience
that remembers when ye would forget.

The minding of this is useful, 1. To make people cast out with Sin rather then
with their Conscience. 2. To make them wary that they take not liberty in
secret to Sin. 3. To make them take kindly with reproofs for Sin; Remember
therefore that there is a Conscience in every one of you* Ye will possibly
think it needless to press this, and I wish it were so, but we may shortly
point at these evidences, to prove that many on the matter think they have not
a Conscience.

The First is, That they take so little pains to prevent a quarrel from their
Conscience; how many omit, balk and step over Duty, and go on in Sin? Which
they durst not do if they believed that they had a Conscience. 2. The few
challenges that most have under many Sins, and their living in such peace and
security, as if they had not a Conscience to disquiet them, many Men and Women
know, and are as little acquainted with challenges and convictions, and stand
in as little awe of Conscience as if they had none at all; Hence we use to say,
that such a man has not a Conscience, because, though he have it, he regards it
not; and such a m^n has a Conscience, because he makes use of it, and listens
to what it says. 3. That people seek more to approve themselves in outward and
seen Duties, than in inward and secret ones, and look more after men's
Approbation then Gods, and lean more to, and lay more weight on outward
testimonies from men, then to, and on inward ones from their own Conscience. If
Conscience were really believed to be, there would be as great aw of God, and
as great loathness to Sin in secret, as before many witnesses.

But ye will Object and say, seeing every one has a Conscience, what can be the
reason that many care so little for Conscience?

Answer, 1. What is the reason that men care so little for God? If they care
not for the Lord and Master, it is no wonder they care so little for the Deputy
and Servant; shall we therefore think that there is not such a thing at all as
a Conscience in such? No, by no means; it will prove indeed, that they slight
Conscience, but not that they want a Conscience. 2. There is in many men a
contending with and provocking of Conscience, which in Gods righteous Judgment
makes a silent Conscience; when the Lord makes Conscience quick, and sets it
on to reprove and check for Sin, and men do not listen to it is checks and
reproofs, Conscience offends, and will not reprove: Conscience being Gods
Deputy, takes Orders from him, and when God will ^ot vouchsafe a word of
reproof on a man, neither will it; Ephraim is joined to idols let him alone,
saves the Lord, Hos. 4. 17. And from Romans 1. 20, 21. We may see the cause why
God gives up the heathen to a reprobate mind, to do things that are not
convenient, To be their going cross to the light of nature, and their natural
Conscience, and not only doing things sinful, but taking pleasure in them that
did them; therefore they are given up to do greatest things without check or
challenge: Hence it is thus in part at least, with many Professors within the
visible Church, for thwarting with Conscience; and indeed a silent and dumb
Conscience is a great plague, for if it cease to be a reprover, and speak not,
men, nay, even godly men, may and will sleep on, as David, after the going over
the belly of his light, and blunting the edge of his Conscience slept long
enough, till Conscience at last roused him up: Hence also the Apostle speaks
of some Consciences which were seared with an hot iron; which is not so to be
understood, as if Conscience were flesh, or of a fleshly substance, only he
makes the comparison, that as a man's flesh is sensible of, and affected with
the prick of a pin, so is Conscience with Sin, while tender; But as the flesh
of a Man or Beast, when it is seared or burnt, a considerable thurst will not
much, if at all affect it; So is Conscience, when stupefied, and made senseless,
by multiplied Sins against light, it grows so cauterized and seared, that
hardly any Sin, or challenge for Sin is felt. 3. Men want not a Conscience,
though they hear it not always speaking; for Conscience may often be speaking
when they take not head to it; As is abundantly clear in David and Joseph's
brethren, for that which is the Death* evil of a natural man, may sometimes be
the sore and dangerous sickness and distemper of a child of God; And though
Conscience may speak but softly for a time, yet thereafter it will speak
louder, and make it known that it spoke when it was not listened unto: The day
comes when the Books will be opened, and Conscience will speak plainly,
smartly, and home, and it concerns you all to know, that Conscience is not
absent when it is quiet; but that it will speak, and speak to purpose in due
time, and that as a party with whom there is no Trysting till it come before
the great Judge, and then it will give in what it has to say; and it will then
be evidently known that there was a Conscience in the prophanest person, who
most cauterized it, by going over the belly of it is Light and Suggestions.

The 2. Use speaks to you that live at random taking great Liberty and
Latitude to your selves beside the Rule, O! do you believe and remember that
there is a Conscience within you, and that it will call you to a Reckoning?
sure, if ye did in good earnest, ye would be other manner of men: It Is
generally granted, that there is a Conscience in all, and the prophanest will
have Conscience often in their mouth (and indeed their Conscience is little
worth) when they stand in no aw of it, but rather trample on it; Let me tell
you, the greater Light ye have, and the more means and warnings ye are
privileged with, the greater will be the aggravation of your guilt, and the
more dreadful will be your Ditty, and Doom from God, and from your own
Conscience; If Conscience will be an impartial Witness, and severe Judge
against all, even Heathens, who never heard the Gospel. O then! what access
will it have, terribly to reprove, condemn, smite and gnaw you that live under
the Gospel, and hear the word daily? Many of you have some stickling and
stirring of Conscience within you; but alace! ye know not what it means, and
would be quite of it, but from this Word, be exhorted to know who has
appointed it, and for what end it is appointed, and make use of it is warnings;
(...) for others that know it, and go on sleeping securely in your Sin, I must
say this to you, that the more knowledge ye have of it, it will certainly make
you to have the more dreadful wakening* When all the kindreds of the earth
shall houl at the seeing of the son of man* and stand trembling at his
presence. O! what a scrich and cry will Conscience have in that day, louder (I
conceive) in some respect, then the Trumpet it self, setting home the Truth of
Challenges, bearing witness of the fact, and representing the horror, terror
and torment abiding them; therefore think on it, O! think on it, all ye who
continue in Sin and will not be reclaimed, who mock at all Warnings, and break
all Bonds, and will not be subject to Discipline, ye shall not be able to shake
off the Bo^d of Conscience, but it shall bind you as the Colar of your Coat,
and keep you bound till ye be ^isted before the Judgment Seat of God.

Use 3. Seeing ye have a Conscience, let it not be silent, idle and usle^* but
put it to speak, and do you hear what it says, and take you warning from it;
it will not be Bribed, Budded, nor Boasted; It Is a sore matter to have a
Conscience, and never to take notice of it, nor of what it says. I shall now
only, seeing there are some good and some evil Consciences, as they are, or, are
not informed, beseech you to study to have a well informed Conscience,
especially, since, where it is well informed, it cannot easily be budded, nor
soon prevailed with, to suffer things to come under debate and controversy
wherein it is clear: a just regard too, and the right use-making of Conscience
would notably promove Holiness, and nothing readily does more obstruct it then
the not taking heed to Conscience, and not laying due weight on what it says.
Though many of you do now look on it as nothing, or a thing of little moment,
yet ye will find it to be a greatly momentanious thing, O! that God who has
given us Consciences may be graciously pleased to give the right use of them.

SERMON II.
ACTS 24. 16. Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void
of offense toward God, and toward men.
IF we take a view of, and look through Christians and professors of Religion,
that may have the Root of the matter in them, and may in charity be supposed to
be effectually called, there will be found as great a graduall difference
amongst them, as amongst men of any other calling whatsoever; And if we will
compare them generally with the Apostle, as to the constant vigorous driving of
this notable and noble design, there will be found great in-equality, and much
lamentable un-likness; Herein (says he) do I exercise my self to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward men* This was his great Work,
and it is indeed a sweet Work, yea a short sum and compend of a Christians Life.

When we discoursed last from this Text, and had drawn some general Doctrines
from it, for clearing the words, we spoke more particularly to this Doctrine,
viz. That there is in all men and women a conscience that takes notice of
every piece of their carriage, and is accordingly affected with* and affects
men for it; Some thing which affects them as it is affected; if their
carriage be good it speaks good to them; if evil, it speaks evil to them,
Hence its said, Romans 2. 15. Their conscience bearing witness, and their
thoughts the meanwhile accusing or else excusing one another; Something also
was spoken to what Conscience is, and what is its office: We shall now add a
third Doctrine (though it be not the third in the order that we proposed the
Doctrines at first) which is this, That Christians ought so to walk* yea if
they be tender they will aim and endeavor so to walk* as in nothing they may
give their conscience offense. The foregoing Doctrine is common to all, viz. To
have a Conscience, but this to walk friendly with the Conscienc, so as not to
offend or wrong it, is not common to all, but peculiar to him who is a
Christian in earnest; as the Apostle speaks of himself in the preeceeding
Chapter, ver. 1. Men and brethren, I have lived before God in all good
conscience until this day, (supposing him to mean since his conversion) and 2
Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, etc. and
Heb. 13. 18. We trust we have a good conscience in all things willing to live
honestly: and his pitching on this as a great ground of his consolation in
straits, is a clear evidence that it is not a common thing, but peculiar to the
tender Christian: Hence is the confident approaching of the Saints to God, as
we may see in David through the Psalms, in Hezekiah* Isa. 38. 3. Remember I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart;
and in Job chap. 27. verse. 6. So 1 John 3 21. Beloved, if our hearts condemn us
not, then have we confidence toward God.

For further clearing of this point, we shall show First, What it is not to
offend the Conscience. 2. That a Believer ought to walk (and if he be tender,
will walk) so, as he may not offend his Conscience. And 3. Make use of the
Doctrine.

For clearing of the first, we shall show 1. What offends the Conscience. 2.
What it is not to offend Conscience. The first of these may be comprised in
these three generals; 1. That whatever is sin against God offenneth the
Conscience, for Conscience being God Deputy* substitute by him, and sustaining
his place, and vice in a manner in the Soul to give sentence for him, whatever
offends and wrongs God, must also offend and wrong the Conscience; and though
every sin does not always at present sensibly and feelingly affect the
Conscience* yet it makes way for that, and proves to be an offense and wrong
done to it, in that it lays the ground of a Challenge. 2. That is an offense
and wrong to the Conscience which is against light and knowledge* and though
the impulse of Conscience, according to that light, be not always so vigorous,
yet where there is a thwarring with light, there is a daring of Conscience* and
a contradicting of it, and (as it is Rem. 14 22.) a man then conde^neth himself
in that which he allows, and lays the ground of a challenge against himself
in that wherein he has light and clearness. 3. Conscience is offended or
wronged when any thing is adventured on that is contrary to the Impulse of it;
as when Conscience says that such or such a thing ought to be done, and we
notwithstanding leave ^t undone; or when it says such and such a thing ought
^ot to be done, and yet we do it: since Conscience (as we said before) takes
notice of all a man's thoughts, purposes, words and ways, to give in a word for
God, when that which it says for him is slighted, it cannot but be offended and
wronged.

Secondly* Not to offend, but to keep friendship and a good understanding with
the Conscience, supposes and takes in, these things, 1. To have the judgment
clearly informed anent the mind of God; for though Conscience be above us, yet
it is under God, and therefore it ought to be informed from his Word; and we
lay a stumbling block before it, when we endeavor not to have the eye single
(as the Lord speaks) and the understanding clear. 2. To listen and lend the ear
to hear what Conscience says, and after deliberation to be sweyed and
determined according to what it says, in doing or forbearing, for unless we
take heed to the voice of Conscience, we know not when we please or displease
it. 3. To ply and steer a straight course according to the dictate and
direction of Conscience, to take orders (to speak so) from it, so as when
Conscience points at such and such a thing as evil, to stand and sist there,
without daring to meddle with it, or move toward it* and when it holds forth
such or such a thing to be a duty, straight way to give obedience to it; herein
mainly consists a good Conscience (considering it with respect to its
exercise, when once made good) to have our Conscience saying nothing against
us, and without having ground to say any thing against us; when it cannot
challenge us and say that it enjoined us to do such or such a thing, and that
yet we did it not, or that it enjoined us to forbear such or such a thing, and
that yet we went on to the doing of it, so that when we come before God it may
have nothing to reprove or challenge us for, nothing to condemn us in; but as
it holds out our duty to us from the Word, just so to endeavor to behave in
all things.

For the 2d. thing proposed to be spoken to, viz. That a Believer ought, and if
he be tender, will walk so, as he may not offend his Conscience; These three
things will confirm it. 1. The very nature and office of his Conscience; If so
be that Conscience speaks for God and is appointed by him as his Deputy, to
be a remembrancer of Duty, and a restrainer from Sin, then the awe of God and
love to him will make a man that is tender, walk according to the directions of
Conscience; hence it is that Romans 13. 5. the commands that are laid on for Gods
sake, are also laid on for conscience sake, Wherefore (says he) ye must needs
be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake; that is from the
awe of God, that puts us to our duty, and from respect to Conscience his
Deputy; in this respect the voice of Conscience is the voice of God; for as a
man cannot be tender who refuses to hear the Word of God, so neither can he be
tender who refuses to comply with the directions of his Conscience speaking
the mind of God to him. A second reason is drawn from the great advantage that
flows from the testimony of Conscience; it gives much quietness and sweet
peace in all straits and troubles, and much confidence and holy boldness in
approaching to God, If our conscience condemn us not, (says John) then have we
confidence toward God; In a word, whatever condition a man can be in, it
proves his friend, nay his best friend. A third reason is taken from the great
prejudice that comes to a man through his thwarting and coming in tops with
Conscience; he wants that sweet inward peace that passes all understanding
to keep and garrison his heart and mind, whereby he is much exposed and laid
open; God looks terrible-like upon him, and he has no access to him with
boldness and confidence; when the Conscience is disquieted, troubled, and as it
were through other, or confused, and fears arise, and challenges are wakened
therein, these threaten a challenge from God, and portend a storm of wrath to
follow: hence is David's complaint, Psalm. 32. 3. 4. When I kept silence, my
bones waxed old through my roaring* etc. and his lamentation throughout the 51.
Psalm; and to this purpose the Apostle John speaks very weightily, If our heart
condemn us. God is greater then our heart, and knows all things, where he
plainly insinuats, that the Heart or Conscience its condemning, is the
forerunner of Gods condemning, and an evidence of it; and that withal the
latter is, as more absolutely infallible, so more terrible then the former;
where these three go along together, it is impossible where a person is tender
but he will be loath to top or thwart with his Conscience.

As for the Uses which we proposed to speak to in the Third place, they may be
drawn to these fou^, 1. For information and instruction in the matter of Duty.
2. For trial, and to evidence who are sincere Believers. 3. For reproof. 4. For
exhortation; there being need of all these, especially to such Christians who
take but little heed to their Conscience.

The first Use shows what is Believers duty; they should by all means learn
to know and take up what Conscience says from the Word of God, and labor to
have their Conscience well informed; and take notice of what it speaks ere
they do any thing, and what are Conscience thoughts of it, after it is done,
and accordingly to be affected, determined and swayed. It is true, the Law of
God is the supreme rule, and to be hearkened to in the first place; but that
which we are now speaking to, is, concerning taking advice from Conscience,
which 1. Does make the Law speak more sensibly, lively and aloud, then before.
2. It makes it speak more plainly, for when peoples reason will be ready to
shuffle by a word, that sam^ word coming into, and taking hold of the
Conscience, will become more clear and convincing, and it makes the
understanding, being thereby made more single, to take it up better. 3. It
makes the man more impartial, when the Word comes not to his judgment only,
neither will he leave the Word with his light and reason simply- nor to debate
with his inclination and affection; but puts the Word and his Conscience
together and takes the meaning of it some way immediately from his Conscience,
it makes him single and unbyassed (as I said before); and sometimes a^
Conscience will speak when the judgment has little or nothing to say; so it
decideth often betwixt the opposite reasonings of the judgment for both sides.
4. The advice and dictate of Conscience is much more powerful then that of the
simple judgment and reason, and adhereth better and more closely then affection
or inclination; Conscience being more directly Gods Deputy, and in a more
immediate subordination to him i^ sticks more ^enaciously by duty; and it
being as a check to our humors, and as a Compass to steer our course by in all
things, we are to be swayed by its advice; hence some who can almost debate
nothing in reason, yet will not dare for Conscience to do such a thing.

Some necessary Questions relating to practice arise from this Use, which we
shall speak a few words to. As 1. If any other thing beside Conscience may have
an impulse to duty? 2. If other things may have an impulse to duty (whether it
be credit, interest, inclination, will, or affection,) how may the impulse of
these be decerned, and differenced from the impulse of Conscience? 3. Whether
the dictates of Conscience may always be followed, seeing its impulse may be
wrong? 4. What should be done in such a case, and how may we difference what is
right? 5. Whether a man and his Conscience may be friends and agree together in
a wrong cause or practice?

For the first Question, Whether any thing beside Conscience does or may pou^s
to duty? We answer affirmatively, Many things may court us which by their
impulse do often ^hwart with Conscience, hence is the inward combat in the
Christian betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit; the Flesh does pouss to one thing,
and Conscience to the contrary; therefore Gal. 5. 17. it is said, The flesh
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these two are
contrary one to another; and Romans 7. 23. the Apostle speaks of a law in his
members rebelling against the law of his mind, and leading him captive to the
law of sin in his members; more particularly these things (as we hinted before)
may have an impulse toward the doing of duty, As first* Men's credit, has a
strong impulse, where any thing crossing it, is apprehended to occur. 2. Men's
interest has often an impulse, so as to carry on a selfish design, it will
make gain seem to be godliness. 3 Men's natural inclinations, will and
affections, have an impulse also, and the impulse of these will sometimes be
exceeding like to the impulse of Conscience, and here we may consider these
three things which they have influence upon. 1. They may have influence to mar
a man's light and pervert his understanding, as it is said of a gift, It
blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverteth the understanding of the prudent;
so men's credit, interest, and natural inclination, may in a sort bribe the
understanding and blind the judgment insensibly, and the man not know of it
distinctly at least. 2. When they have perverted the judgment they may engage
the affections* and these drive violently. 3. If the man yield not to such a
thing, his credit or interest will vex him like Conscience, and take rest and
quiet from him; as we see in Herod, Matthew. 14. 9. who when the dancing Damsel
suited for the head of John the Baptist, was sorry (or grieved,) nevertheless
for his oaths sake, and for them who sat at table with him, he commanded it to
be given her; Folk would have thought that it was his Conscience that made him
sorry, but indeed it was not Conscience but Credit; therefore it is said, not
only for his oaths sake, but for them that sat at table with him; it is like if
his oath had been been given in private, Conscience would not much have troubled
him; and while it is said he was sorry or grieved, it shows plainly that his
Credit suffered him to get no rest until the ^ll turn was done; under pretext
of keeping his oath; Herod was predominantly swayed by these who sat at Table
with him, and would have it thought that he was to be excused because otherways
he could not forsooth keep his oath, who yet had broken many an oath, and made
no bones of them.

For the second Question, How may the impulse of Conscience be known and
discerned from the impulse of Credit Interest, inclinations, Will and
Affection? Answer, By the Word, To the law and to the testimony, Isa. 8. 20
Conscience is subject to that, and Conscience never readily pouseth against
duty holden out by the Word; Conscience would never bid Heroa take away the
life of an innocent man. 2. If a man be dark and doubtful in a particular,
Conscience as Conscience is always single; but Credit, Interest, and the like,
have always some by-respect, which steals in and drowneth Conscience,
representing to it that such and such loss or prejudice will follow on such a
thing: Interest and Reputation will make a man say, I would no^ do such a thing
if I could do otherways; but shall I hazard all my estate, and possibly my life
also? this I may not do; and when interest and particularity prevail, they make
him to step over Conscience, and to think that he does no fault; when it is
some particular hazard that swayeth him* interest is satisfied from a supposed
necessity, but Conscience acknowledges not that rule; in outward things when
the man can do no other ways it will put him to choose suffering. 3. When
Credit, Interest, and the like pouss, their impulse is partial and violent, but
the impulse of Conscience is impartial and sober; Conscience swaying the man,
pouseth him from the awe of God, and from love to him, and to all that is known
to be duty, impartially, as to pray, read, meditate, confer, etc. but when
interest, credit, or inclination swey him, they will drive him to one thing and
not to another, and more especially to that which may satisfy his humor* and
that violently; but for the more exercising duties of Religion, as to humble
himself before God, to repent of sin, to meditate, etc. it does not pouss or
but very coldly and slowly: as some men will have an impulse to provide for
their families, and they will ride and run for that, but if any object of
Charity offer, or if there be any hazard of loss for Christ and the Gospels
sake, these will be silent there, or if Conscience mutter, it will not be much
regarded in what it says. Now if Conscience sweyed the man here, there would be
an impartial respect had to one duty as well as to another. 4. Where Interest,
Credit, Inclination, or Affection pou^s, they drive not only violently and
partially, but irrationally, and cannot stay nor endure to reason and debate
things, or to be disswa^ed from the thing toward which there is an inclination
and will, neither will give a hearing to what may be said to the contrary: But
Conscience in its impulse, is rational and sober, goes to the Word, and would
have matters calmly seasoned and debated, and is the better satisfied the
better the business be debated and cleared, because it like^h and loves
rational service: Romans 12. 1. and therefore lays every thing to the rule, and
readily conte^teth with corruption, with which inclination sideth. 5. When
Credit, Interest, and inclination in their impulses are thwarted, they storm,
they vex and torture the man; but when the impulse of Conscience is thwarted,
it has a kindly pricking and stounding, the impulse of interest or inclination
being thwarted, con^useth and puts through other (to spe^k so,) and being but
a carnal fit of passion, makes ^rothy, light, and distemperedly passiona^e;
but it the impulse of Conscience be thwarted, it weighteth and stingeth deeply.
6. The impulse of Conscience affects constantly, and choppeth evenly, though
sometimes in its chopping it will be more quick then at another time, yet where
it swayeth, it leaves not off, but continues chopping this year and the next,
and accounts a thing evil or good in another as well as in a man's self, and
in himself as well as in another, and at all times; but when a man is poussed
by credit, interest, inclination or affection, he is like a distempered man in
a Fever whose pulse beats not evenly, he is not constant and equal, but up or
down as the particular that affects him, (...) his humor, or comes near
him: as for instance, a man swayed by his interest will dispute for the
government of such a person this year, and for the government of another the
next; for such an interest this year, and for a contrary one the next; for one
sort of government in Church or State as best this year, and for another as
best the next; because his own particular interest comes in to side with it;
and so he changes his Principles according to his Interest, and disputes for
one thing to day, and for the contrary the next, thus his interest forgeth and
frames principles to maintain it; which is an evidence that such men's great
principle is their interest, and that they are (...) swayed from a native
principle of Conscience, else they would be more evenly and constant: therefore
beware to take every impulse for the impulse of Conscience, many men woefully
abuse Conscience by their pretentions to it, as if some weighty, nay some
extraordinary bond were on their Conscience, when as indeed inclination or
affection or some other such thing pousseth them on.

The Third Question is, May not even Conscience sometimes err and go wrong? May
it not pouse to that which is evil and sinful? and should it then be followed?
Ans. Conscience may err, or go wrong two ways, 1. In respect of Light, by
thinking that which is wrong to be right, 2. In respect of Practice in
application of the Rule: And therefore it is needful to speak a word for
clearing of both; And First, In the general, when we say that men should walk
according to their Conscience, we understand it of a Conscience well informed,
and in the exercise of Duty, as knowing its Masters will and doing it; for a
wicked man may have a good Conscience in respect of Light to tell him what he
shall do, and to challenge him when he does wrong, though yet he will not obey
it; Therefore we say for a man to have a good Conscience, is, to have a well
informed Conscience, and doing duty accordingly.

For further clearing of this, There are Ten sorts of Consciences that men
ought not to be guided by; Whereof Five fail in the Major or First proposition,
in respect of Light; and other Five fa^l in the Minor, or Second Proposition,
in respect of Practice or Application: The Five sorts that fail in the Major
Proposition or in respect of Light, are these. 1. An Erring Conscience, when
the Judgment is misinformed, and accounts Duty to to be Sin, and Sin to be
Duty, as it was with these of whom the Lord speaks, John 16. 2. The time
comes when whosoever kills you will think that he does God service; Though
an erring Conscience be not so properly to be called Conscience, for it rather
gives offense then edifies, yet this Conscience, such as it is, puts a man
into a strait, that he can neither do nor forbear; that is, it necessarly,
while it remains, involveth him in sin whether he do or forbear; Hence it is
said of such a Conscience. ligat sed non obligat it binds up the man, but
does not oblidge: For the man that has th^s erring Conscience, making him
think that such or such a thing is a necessary duty, when in the mean time it
is a Sin; in following the impulse of his Conscience, sins against the Law
of God; as suppo^e it be in persecuting, or killing; the Servants of God, which
he thinks good service; neither will the error of his Conscience excuse him
here, because he should have endeavored to have it better in^. For These that
sin in the law shall be judged by the law: And if he forbear to do such a thing
he sins against his Conscience, for he supposing it to be Gods mind which it
directs, and his Conscience being to him in place of God, he is guilty, as if
what he does were done directly and immediately against God; for to him it was
so, and he thought so, and thus, through his own cuipable ^ccession, it lays
a necessity of sinning on him, whether he do or forbear; yet it never oblidgeth
nor can oblidge him to go contrary to the Law of God* as suppose he thinks
that such a Minister, who is an honest and faithful man, should be Deposed or
Excommunicated, it does not oblidge him to persecute an innocent and honest
man, and yet if he endeavor it no^, he sins against his Conscience, in
countenancing of that Person, which he in his mis-apprehension judges to be
Sin: This may seem to be somewhat strange and paradoxal; but it is the woeful
effect, and bitter fruit of the want of Light, and of a well-informed
Conscience, and it flows not from the nature of the Word of God, nor from the
nature of Conscience, but from our own Corruption, making^ no use, or an ill
use of the Word of God, the Superior of the Conscience: So that there is hardly
a worse thing then ane Erring Conscience; Because, whether the man that has it
forbear, or do, to him it is Sin; only, if the thing be indifferent, it
oblidgeth to do, or forbear; for when the Word determines not, Conscience
(though misinformed) casts the balance to the side which it judges to be
necessary; As for instance, it a man think it a sin to hear the Word with the
head un-covered, he is oblidged to cover his head, and contrarily; for
Conscience there casts the balance: but when the thing is unlawful on the
matter, it may bind him up, while it remains in an Error, so as he cannot
without sin counteract it is dictat; but it never oblidgeth him to sin.

2. An Opinionative Conscience, is not a good guide, That is, when a man has
some sort of Light, or apprehension of a thing to be Duty; yet fear^th that it
may not be Duty, and has some (...) or (...) about the matter; For 1. This is
not Faith, but Opinion and in matters of Faith, Opinion cannot be a ground to
rest upon; Therefore, Romans 14. 5. Every man ^ughe to be fully persuaded in his
own mind. 2. In matters of Practice, the impulse of an opinionating Conscience,
will not warrant us; For when a man hesitats, he cannot do in Faith; therefore
to do; it is sin to him, because he has not persuasion; and in this respect,
as to practice, he is like the man that has the Erring Conscience, he can
neither do nor forbear, but he sins. 3. If it be in a truth, not
fundamental, Opinion may have weight with him, and swey him to that which is
most probable, and has most conveniences with it (though in matters of
Practice it be otherwise) and it gives Conscience peace in this respect, when
that which has most probability in it (as I have just now said) is inclined to

3. A Doubting Conscience (of some affinity with the former) which leaves a
man in an hover, or suspense, that he knows not whether such a thing be Duty,
or if such a thing be Sin, or not, certainly here a man is bound not to do
doubtingly: For he that doubts is damned; if he do; Romans 14. 23. And yet
there is hazard in forbearing, if the thing be duty; yea in this case there is
a necessity of sinning (bu^ still of the man's own contracting) when there is
not a mids, but either the man must do or forbear, yet in this case its best
for a man to betake himself to the safest side, and to hazard on suffering
rather then on sin; As for example, a man must either do such a thing of the
lawfulness whereof he doubts, or be^n hazard of losing much, or all that he
has in the World; He knows that suffering simply considered is no sin, and
he is some way matter (to say so) of his own suffering, but not of his doing;
since he doubts, and his doubting lays this obligation on him, rather to
abstain then to do, and to take his hazard of suffering, for in dubiis tutius
est abstine^e; and in this case no man's authority can oblidge and bind the
Conscience to a thing as duty, neither can it be loosed by mere Authority, or
respect to men when it doubts* Because no man's mere authority can quiet and
satisfy the Conscience; nor keep the man skaithless before God, when on such
an account he does any thing doubtingly.

A 4. Sort is a Scrupling Conscience, which differs from the former in this,
That it is clear in the main of duty, but scrupleth and is unclear in some
accidental thing, that goes along with it; As for instance, when one would
pray, and apprehends that in praying he will take Gods name in vain, because
it may be some blasphemous thought is injected into his mind; or when a man is
about some necessary duty of his lawful calling, and has some thing like an
impulse of Conscience to pray, which haunteth, and some way vexes him; This is
a scruple, but upon a light ground, and has little or no reason for it; yet it
is born in with violence, and therefore in this case, a man is oblidged rather
to go over the scruple and follow his duty; for, although he should endeavor
to satisfy his Conscience, by reason in this case, as in the former; yet when
the duty is clear, he should trample upon what would hinder him, and go on with
the duty, and in so doing, he trampleth not upon his Conscience, but upon that
which comes in to mar him in his duty, and follows, or (to speak so) doggeth
his Conscience.

A 5, Sort is a Weak and Infirm Conscience, which especially in indifferent
things hinders a man to use his liberty, as Romans 14. 2. One believes that he
may eat all things, another that is weak eats herbs; he will not take the
liberty that God allows him, as it was with many in the primo* primitive
times, who, thought not all mea^s to be a like lawful as to their use: Though
this sort of Conscience should be informed, in order to its being brought up to
the use of its lawful liberty; yet while it is infirm, and has not clearness
in the thing, it ought to lay on Bands for abstention; as the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 8. and last, If meat make my brother to offend, I will not eat flesh while
the world stand^th least I make my brother to offend; because by the example of
his eating (as he says before) his weak brother is emboldned to eat also, and
so his conscience being weak is wounded, all which says that we ought to study
to be well acquainted with the Word of God, that Conscience may be rightly
informed thereby.

Secondly, There are other five sorts of Consciences that fail in Practice or
Application of the Rule, which ought no more to be laid weight upon in practice
then the former. The 1. is a too narrow Conscience, that challenges too soon
(with which many in these days are not much troubled, but rather run on the
contrary extremity,) as when a man's light is not clear in a thing that is
indifferent, as the weak Conscience was wounded for eating a little flesh; thus
ane infirm Conscience will readily challenge, and highten a si^ without ground;
which is especially to be found among new beginners, who use to have a number
of challenges for this and that, which yet cannot well abide the trial; several
particulars might be instanced in, as they will be sometimes challenged, and
disquieted for coming into such a company; which yet (...) might have done
warrantably; for not speaking when possi^ly it was their duty to hold their
tongue; ^or speaking when yet it was their duty to speak; for taking so much
meat and drink, which yet is but sufficient for the sustentation of nature;
though they question not such (...) and drink to be lawful for the kind, yet
they are challenged and troubled without ground; as to the measur^ and quantity.

2. A too large and gross Conscience, which we fear is the ^orest and r^fest
sickness among Consciences, a Conscience that can easily digest many things,
which being laid to the Rule, would be found sinful, a gross Conscience is
opposite to tenderness, and can hear of sin threatened, without fear, which it is
lying under, it stands not on the offense of others; As in Corinth, There
were some that went on in the use of their Liberty withour regard of their weak
Brethren, not caring whether they offended them or not; it regards not other
folks Conscience in indifferent things; it will not only confidently come near
to ill, but hazard on ill whereas all appearance of evil should be abstained
from: it is a narrow Conscience ab^deth over far a back, so a gross Conscience
comes over near; it will put persons to eat to drink, and to be clothed too
libe^ally, prodigally and vainly, because these things are la^ful.

The following 3d, 4th, 5th, Sort of Conscience are degrees of one and the same
kind, some whereof are incident to Believers, some not.

The 3d, Is a sleepy Conscience, such as was in David, in a great measure, when
he ^ell in Adultery, Murder, and in the Sin of vain numbering the people;
opposite to this, is a wakened Conscience, that cries loud, and knocks hard,
the more sleepy and drousie that Conscience has been, it rappeth the louder
and harder when it is wakened; therefore men had need to be so much the more
awar of the f^rmer gross Conscience, that it draw not on a sleepy Conscience;
and when Conscience speaks not, but is silent now, know that for the time
there is ground to fear its being fallen a sleep.

A 4th Sort is a hardened Conscience, which is* when, not only the Conscience is
sleeping, but the life is much put out of it by habitual sinning; And when men
thus put out the light and life of their Conscience by sinning, God is provoked
to put it out by judicial hardening (as we see in Pharaoh) that no challenge
bits on them: There are lesser measures and lower degrees of this that are
incident even to the godly, and not only to several reprobats which come not to
Pharaoh his hight.

A 5th Sort it a Cauterized Conscience, that is said in the Scripture to be
sea^ed as with a hot iron; this hardneth in a very high degree, when a man
runs over the belly of his Conscience trampling on it, and doing all in a
manner that he can to make it senseless and benumn^d, so that he is no more
sensible of a prick from it, then dead flesh is of the thurst of a pin, or of a
knif; habitual sinning, and the Judgment of God joined together bring on
this, which is called, Romans 1. 28* giving up to a reprobate mind, so that as it
is, 32. Though they know the judgment of God, that they who commit such things
are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that
do them.

It is not of these Consciences that we mean, when we say that ye should so
walk as ye give not offense to your Conscience in any thing; the Conscience of
many speaks, but alace they stop the mouth of it; therefore take every sort
of Conscience to the Word, and suspect that Conscience that is silent when the
Word speaks.

A 4th Question is, Whether a man that has an erring Conscience may not have
peace and quietness? If so, how may that peace and quietness be discerned from
true peace of Conscience? (where also the 5th Question is somewhat at least
indirectly touched on.) Answer, A Conscience, may be pleased while it is erring
and in a wrong course, but it cannot have true peace; even as we may please our
Brother when we flatter him in his sin, and please him not to his edification;
so a man may have not only quietness, but a sort of delight and sainness in an
erring Conscience, but no true peace, because it wants the Word of God for
its ground; even as an hardened Conscience may have quierness and yet want true
solid peace; as when Conscience is mistaken or in an error, and agrees well
with the mistake or error, it will be well pleased; so when it is humoured and
applauded, it is well pleased, and will make the man think that he does God
good service, while in the mean time he is doing nothing less; yea it will have
a sort of delight and fainness flowing from the delusion of its light, and will
make the poor man to be well pleased and satisfied when he gets that which he
is seeking, to succeed and go with him.

But how shall it be discerned? Answer 1. It is suspiciouslike when the
Conscience is overwell pleased, and when Conscience and men's humors are both
pleased together, and when corruption does not side and take part against it,
this (I say) is a shrewd evidence that Conscience is erring; for when a man is
going aright about his duty, corruption, will be against him; but when all is
silent it is no good token; when Paul is a delighting himself in the law of
God, there is a law in his Members rebelling against the law of his Mind, and
leading him captive to the law of Sin in his Members. 2. It may be known by
this, when Conscience has more contentment and peace, and greater delight and
fainness in such or such a particular supposed duty, then in all other duties;
as for instance when a man thinks nothing of but undervalueth Infant Baptism,
and must needs be baptized over again; and when he is rebaptized, he has more
satisfaction and (as he thinks) more comfort in that Duty and Ordinance, then
in all other duties he goes about, (though his rebaptizing be indeed no duty
called for from him), that is an evidence of an erring Conscience; for if it
were the peace, comfort and satisfaction of a well informed Conscience, he
would have comfort, if not alike comfort in all Duties and Ordinances; so when
some men have more delight in making others to become Antinomians, or
Separatists, or Quakers (they being of such a Judgment, Porswasion and Sect
themselves) then in gaining men fre^ Popery to be Protestants, or it may be
from being merely natural men to be in good earnest exercised to Godliness; and
like the Pharisees will compass Sea and Land for that end, not to make them
children of God, but to proselyte them It would be adverted here, at what time
the Author preached these Sermons; least several of his instances should not
seem so pertinent; It was when temptations to these things were strong.
to their own Sect; That is a shrewd token that it is men's particular Interest
and Humor that swayeth them more then Conscience does, or if Conscience have
influence here, it is an erroneous and mistaken one. 3. It may be known by a
man's more common and ordinary frame and way, it is hard to say that Conscience
puts a man to such or such a thing, and to change his way in such or such a
particular indeed to the better, when yet it does not set him on endeavors in
the strength of Grace to change his way and life in the general tract of it;
for as true Grace is uniform, so a well informed and truly good Conscience,
makes a man endeavor an universal and uniform change in his way; and without
all doubt it is as clear a duty to pray, to search his Conscience, to walk
without giving offense, to hear the Word, to meditate thereon, to injure no
man, etc. and yet he will be strick in such a particular, but prays no more,
waits no more upon Ordinances no better then he had wont to do, etc. this
looks very like an erring Conscience, for (as I said just now) Conscience
makes not a man to change in one thing only, but it puts him to endeavor also
a change in all: Therefore beware of such deceit^, for Conscience is much
abused in this time; it is indeed an excellent thing to keep a good Conscience
and void of offense; but it is a desperate thing to make a Shoe-horn or
Stalking-horss of Conscience, to make it subserve our own humor, and the
carrying on of our own particular Interest; or to leave the Word and to pretend
Conscience, and to be swayed by Interest, under pretext of Conscience: There is
great need then to look well to the Word, and to have the Word and Conscience
going hand in hand together; to keep near God, and to walk in holy fear that
Conscience have not any thing wherewith it may charge us justly.

SERMON III.
ACTS 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self to have always a Conscience void
of offense toward God, and toward men.
THere are many sad mistakes about a Christian life, and the serious and
zealous following of Holiness; for men either diminish from Holiness as to the
extent of it, or dispense with and take a liberty and latitude to themselves in
the following of it.

In this Text we have a short and sweet sum of Paul's life, (an excellent copy
and pattern of a Christian walk and conversation,) wherein he gives us a view
of these two. 1. Of his aim and design, to walk so as he may have a Conscience
void of offense toward God and toward men; and that in an universal extent
always, or at all times and in all things. 2. Of his manner of prosecuting it,
Herein (says he) do I exercise my self: he is seriously taken up with it, it
is his great business, his one thing as he calls it, Phil. 3. 13.

We spoke of these two generals. 1. That there is in all Men and Women a
Conscience that takes notice of their actions, and is ready to be offended
with their miscarriages. 2. That Men and Women, and more especially Believers,
ought so to live, and if tender, will aim so to live, as they may be friends
with their Conscience, and that there may be good terms and a good
understanding betwixt them and their Conscience; that their Conscience may have
no challenge against them in any thing of their walk either toward God or
toward Men: This is clearly and convincingly holden out in Paul's practice here,
whose great aim, design, and endeavor was to walk so, as his Conscience might
have nothing to say against him in duties relating either to God or to Men, in
secret, in private, or in public; This we prosecuted a little, and showed you,
that there is a tie and obligation lying on men so to walk and to follow (not
an erring and deluded Conscience, but) Conscience rightly informed, pousing,
accusing, or excusing according to the Word, for it is Conscience so qualified
that is the rule subordinate to the infallibly regulating rule of the Word.

The Uses of the Doctrine (as we show) are four, the 1. For Instruction. The 2.
For Trial. The 3. For Conviction or Reproof. The 4. For Exhortation. We spoke a
little to the Use of Instruction the last day, to which now we add; that if men
should so walk as their Conscience may have nothing to charge them with, nor*
to cast up to them wherein they have thwarted with it; then every man's design
in his Christian walk ought to be as extensive as his Conscience is in its
office, either in directing, or in accusing or excusing; otherways he cannot
have peace in his way, if he disperise with himself in any thing which his
Conscience does not dispense with him in; and it will be impossible to have
solid peace if he do otherways; so then the walk of a Christian ought to be
equally and exactly extended (no less then is the Conscience) according to the
rule of the Word.

Beside what we said on this before, anent having clearness from the Word in
the Judgment, and hearkening to the voice of Conscience rightly informed; We
shall instance the (...) (...) of a Christian walk according to Conscience
(...) these seven particulars.

1. A man that would walk according to Conscience, must have a respect to all
sorts of D^ties, in Words, Thoughts and Actions, for Conscience will challenge
for an idle word, and for a ^inful thought, to Simon Acts 8. 22. says the
Apostle, Pray God if perhaps the thought of thy hear^ may be forgiven thee:
which says, that sin^ul thoughts may have influence to (...) the Conscience,
and that a man who wou^d keep peace in his Conscience should dispense with
himself in none of these. 2. A man that would walk according t^ Conscience,
must extend Duty to all particulars o^ ever^ kind, to every Thought, every
Word, and every action; ^or according as Conscience, when in case, is pleased
or displeased in every one of these, in public, in private, in secret* in
(...) or smaller Duties or ^ins, so it will accuse or ^xcuse; so then as
Conscience regards al^ Duties and kinds of them, so it regards every
particular of every kind. 3. A man that would walk according to Conscience*
must aim in his Christian walk at the highest degree in every one of these;
though he come short, yet he must not dispense with himself in his short-coming
in any of them; for instance, as he must love God, so he must endeavor to love
him with all his strength, soul and mind; and as he must be holy, so he must
aim to perfect Holiness, and to purify himself even as he is pure; in this
respect the least defect will give Conscience ground of a challenge, and if he
in the least but indirectl^ dispense with himself in it, it will breed a
quarrel. 4. Walking according to Conscience, tyeth a man to be in this aim and
design always; so as it allows of no in^ermission; as for instance, to study
Holiness in this or that condition of life and not in another, or under the
cross* and not in prosperity; but as the word is here in the T^xt, he is always
to exercise himself in this study; and though a man should live many years with
a Consc^ence void of offense; if he begin at last, though i^ be but now and
then to take undue liberty, Conscience will take notice of it and challenge for
it, because the Word, the superior of Conscience takes notice of it. 5. To
walk according to Conscience, extends it self to all circumstances and
qualifications of Duty; it looks not only to the matter of duty that it be
good, but that it be spiritually pr^secute in all the circumstances of it; it
will look to the man's aim that it be single, and if it be not so, it will find
fault; it will look to his manner of doing, whether he be spiritual, lively,
tender, zealous etc. in what he does; and it will look from what principle he
acts, from the strength of Grace or from a gift* from his own Strength or
from Christ's; and it will look to what is his end, or aim (as I just now said)
whether he be bringing forth fruit to himself or to God, whether his end be to
please men and to have their approbation and applause, or to glorify God and
to approve to him; whether it be to stop the mouth of his Conscience or to
honor God; Conscience takes notice of these for founding its accusing or
excusing; and in this it differs from all Courts among men, it will accuse
and condemn where they will absolve, and contra* 6. Conscience will put a man
to take notice of all the means, opportunities and helps whereby Holiness may
be furthered; and if a man come short in the use of any mean, it will put him
to run the back trade as it were, and to take with the guilt, it will say, Man
whether might thou not have had more knowledge, having had so many
opportunities to hear and learn, having had such and such Ministers and
Christian friends to advise with and to be instructed by? as the Apostle has
it* Heb. 5. 12. Ye might have been teachers of others by reason of time and
means, and yet ye have need to be taught the first principles, etc. To have a
Conscience void of offense, it is necessary to use every mean to further us in
the knowledge of Gods will, and to attain to the practice of it. 7. Conscience
will look especially to what use we make of our Holiness, and to what we lay
before Conscience to answer its challenges, whether we bring our good Mind, our
Prayers, External Performances, and our following of Ordinances, to stop the
mouth of it, and to ^ilence the challenges, and quench the fire (to say so) of
Conscience, or whether we bring the blood of Jesus Christ that blood of
sprinkling: if we compare Heb. 10. verse. 2. with verse. 22. and Heb. 9. verse. 9.
with verse. 14. we will find this latter way and ^ot the former to be the only
safe way: These sacrifices that are offered year by year continually can never
make the the comers thereunto perfect: but having a high priest over the house
of God, we may draw near with a true heart and full assurance of faith having
our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water. These gifts and sacrifices could not make them that did the service
perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, but the blood of Christ* who through
the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purges the conscience
from dead works to serve the living God: and though the Conscience will
challenge a Believer where there are defects in the fo^mer rules, yet it is
quieted and satisfied where there is serious and suitable application made to,
and of the sufferings and satisfaction of the Redeemer, i^ so be he dispense
not with himself as to his short-coming in them, and if the use that he makes
of his Holiness in the largest extent and highest degree of it, be not to found
his righteousness thereon, but to honor God thereby in gratitude to him, to
edify others, and to evidence to himself the soundness and reality of his
believing and gracious state. This shows the vast extent of Holiness, and
what it is that men are called to; and thereby we may also see that many sadly
mistake Religion, and what that perfect walk is that a Christian ought to have
before God; and we may say on the whole, if this be to walk according to
Conscience, then cer^ainly not many but very few walk according to ^t, which is
a lamentation and should be for a lamentation.

The 2d. Use is ^or trial, If a Believer when he is in case, and right, will
have it for his exercise, to walk so as he may have a Conscience void of
offense toward God and toward men, then this will be a differencing mark,
betwixt a Believer and an un-believer, the one singly aims, and seriously
endeavors to have a good Conscience, and to walk so, as in nothing he may
offend his Conscience; The other ha^h no such design nor endeavor: If then
this Doctrine hold true, and if this be the Believers exercise, to walk so as
to please his Conscience in all things, and in nothing to of^end it, sure such
a Conscience is proper and peculiar to the Believ^r; and so may be an evidence
of one that has an interest in Christ: This will be more clear, if we look, 1.
To the use that the Saints recorded in Scripture make of a good Conscience, and
that the Scripture wills and allows them to make of it, in their trials,
and troubles, in their straits, and difficulties, as 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our
rejoicing* the testimony of our conscience etc. And in this place Paul ^lyeth
to it, as his refuge, and comforts himself by it, in and against his present
strait; now if it were not a Character and mark of a Christian indeed, it would
not be, nor be allowed to be made such a ground of peace and quietness to
Believers in their straits. 2. It is clear from the nature of Conscience, its
testifying, which is not its own or from and for it self only, but also, and
principally from and for God; Therefore 1 John 3. 19* 20, 21, 22. it is said,
Hereby we know we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before God, for
if our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all
things, but if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God;
And 1 Pet. 3. 21. It Is called the answer of a good conscience; That is such an
answer as gives quietness and a good Testimony to Believers, when all speak
against them, or speak evil of them: Now this answer of a good Conscience is
not a man's bare apprehension that his Conscence is good, but it takes in these
Three* 1. Not only the Conscience its saying nothing against the person, but
positively speaking for him, 2. It is such a Conscience as has its testimony
grounded on the Word of God, 3. It Is the Testimony of a Conscience soberly
reflecting on it self, and trying it self, in the major proposition, to wit i^
such a thing be true; and in the minor propor^ion, (...) such a thing be true
i^ reference to it self in particular, and finding both propositions to hold
true, then ^t confidently draws the Conclusion.

But here some will be* like Object* and say, If a good Conscience be an
evidence of a persons saving interest in Christ, Alace! I fear I never had that
evidence and mark, neither am I like to have it: Which Objection ministers
ground for these two Questions, 1. If a Believer may ever, or at any time have
a good Conscience? And 2. What are the Characters and Properties of such a
Conscience.

For Answer to the First, We would distinguish a good Conscience, which may be
understood, either 1 Legally, and so it is a Conscience giving Testimony to the
fulfilling of the Law perfectly; taking it so, excepting Je^ (...) there was
never a man since Adams fall, that had a good Conscience or a Conscience
altogether void of offense toward God and toward men. Or 2. A good Conscience
may be understood Evangelically, or in a Gospel sense, or, as i^ draws it'^
Conclusion, not from the Law, but from the Gospel; and in this sense Believers
may have, and often actually have a good Conscience; thus, and in this sense,
David, Hezekiah, Paul, and others have drawn comfort from the T^stimony of
their good Conscience, not drawing its Testimony from, nor founding it upon the
Law* and the perfect puri^ that it requires, but f^m, and upon the Gospel, and
the purity that it graciously (...) in Christ Jesus our Lord.

For the 2d, viz. What are the Properties of this Conscience? (which will clear
the former, and also clear, how it comes, that when Conscience challenges for
sin, yet it may be said that the Believer has a good Conscience and may take
it as a mark of his saving interest in Christ) I shall give the 4. or 5.
Properties of a good Conscience, (...) when there may be sin. The 1. whereof,
is, When Conscience is universal, and impartial in its putting (...) duty, thus
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have
respect to all thy commandments; When the Conscience dispenses not with it
self, in the least duty or sin, but its design, aim, and endeavor is to be in
the obedience of all commanded duties, and in the degree that is called for; It
is on these two that David goes Psalm. 18. verse. 20, 21, 22. The Lord rewarded
me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands has
^e recompensed me; for I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my God; as i^ he had said, I halv^d not the Bible, nor the
Commands, nor did I mis-interpret them; neither did I depart wickedly, I never
resolvedly allowed my self in any sin, so as to oppose one sin, and to indulge,
and connive at another; For all his judgments were before me, and I did not
put away his statutes from me, I ende^voured to set them always as a compass
before me by which I allowed my self to steer my whole course; I was also
upright before him, and kept my self from mine iniquity; The sin that I was
most given unto, that had most power over me, and to which I had the manyest
and strongest assaults of temptations, I kept my self most watchfully from
that. A 2d. Property of a good Conscience, in a Gospel sense, is, That it is a
Conscience very single, having a just regard for all these things required in a
Christian walk, whereof we spoke before; it*s very observant of the performance
of all duties, looking not only to the matter, but to the Spiritual manner of
g^ing about them; it is single in its motives and ends, laying due weight on
that which Christ says, If thine eye (...) single, thy whole body shall he
full of light; That is a mark of a good Conscience indeed, when a man in his
actings is sweyed with respect to the honor of God, and does not what he does
to be seen of men, nor to have somewhat to (...) of before God, but he seeks
to have Christ increasing, though he should decrease, and is con^nt to be (...)
upon, if it may contribute to the exaiting of him; and would fain be up at the
due manner of performing all called for du^es; even to be in case with the
Apostle, Heb. 13. 18. to say, W^ trust we have a good conscience in all things
willing to live honestly; This is our aim and design, and if it be otherwise
with us in any thing, we approve not our selves in it. A Third Property is,
That such a Conscience is delighted, and made glad, or grieved and made sad,
according as it is enabled to manage this great design, and to prosecute and
attain this noble end, or not; In this respect, a Believer may have a good
Conscience, even when he fails, and comes short in his duty, which would
quite mar a legal Testimony of Conscience, or the Testimony of a legal good
Conscience; Thus Paul has a good Conscience, Romans 7. 22. Even when he is
wrestling against Sin, and crying out in the fight, O! miserable man that ^ am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? For he finds himself
delighting in the Law of God after the inward man, and that his design is, to
be honest and single for God: It is not so much the challenge of Conscience, as
that there should be ground for it, that affe^eth and troubles him; when he
thinks with himself, what may I, and must I be before God, when Conscience
takes notice of so many things to be amiss in me? It is from this ground (I
say) that Paul comfort himself, that he allows not himself in that which
he did, and reckons his Evangelically good Conscience, and his sincerity to
be his renewed part, and as such sideth and takes part with it, and condemns
the un*renewed part. A 4th Property, or Character, is taken from a Believers
walking, in reference to his challenges; This is not the mark that he wants
challenges, but its drawn from the influence that challenges have on him; Which
comprehends three different Characters, 1. A Gospel good Conscience takes
quickly, and easily with a challenge, and is soon troubled and melted. 2. It is
made quickly to loath and con^emn it self for sin* and so Conscience and the
man agree well together, when Conscience says to him* thou art a Sinner, thou
ar^ lost, Justice must be satisfied, and thou can not do it, he says so
likewise. 3. When challenges put yet further at him, and pursue him yet harder
and closser, the good Conscience makes him ^ee to the Blood of Christ, and sets
him a seeking of pardon from God, in the Court of Grace, when the man is some
way condemned in the Court of his own Conscience, and then he obtains peace,
even in the Court of Conscience; For when God speaks peace in and through Jesus
Christ, the Conscience also speaks peace; and thus though the man has not a
good Conscience in a Law*sense (as I said before) yet in a Gospel-sense he
has; and he minds to keep friendship with God, and with his Conscience,
though he cannot quiet, pacify and satisfy it in a Legal way, yet in a
Gospel way he may: And this is even it, that the Saints have in their appealing
to their Conscience, for the great ground of their peace, viz. The sincerity of
their Practice, and their fleeing to Christ's Blood, to the Blood of sprinkling,
for quieting their Conscience in the crowd of challenges for their short
comings and failings in practice, and that very warrantably from the Word of
God; whoever sincerely take this way, though they have challenges of
Conscience, they have yet notwithstanding a good Conscience: Such a Conscience
challenges by the Law, yet absolveth by the Gospel; challenges on account of
the Rebellion of the Law in the Members, and yet absolveth in respect of the
Law in the mind; it condemns the man as loathsome in himself, and in his own
duties and righteousness, and yet absolveth him as founding his peace on
Christ, and sinking and putting to silence all challenges, and accusations in
that Blood of Sprinkling, that speaking Blood that has a cry to outcry the
loudest cries of the most clamorous and guilty Conscience: And what can be
justly said against this, since Christ's Righteousness is perfect, and Gods
promise faithful, and Christ's Blood of force and efficacy to quiet and give the
answer of a good Conscience.

But it may be asked h^re, May not a natural un-renewed person, or a hypocrite
have the Testimony of a good Conscience? or how far may his Conscience be good,
and wherein lies the difference betwixt his good Conscience, and the Believers
good Conscience? I know this is a piece of the Spiritual pride and vanity of
many of you to boast of a good Conscience, and really it would make a tender
Conscience some way to loath to hear you speak so confidently of it; I shall
therefore in the First place Answer to the Question how far the Conscience of a
natural man, or an hypocri^e may be good? and then show you how, and wherein it
is defective, and what are the differences betwixt it and the Believers good
Conscience.

For the First* I would say this in general in the First place, that we are
not now speaking of sl^epie, erring, dead and hardened Consciences; the
Testimony of these is little worth; neither is every thing Conscience that many
men think to be so, Conscience must act according to the word, else it
withdraws it self, from that due subordination it stands in to God, and to
his Law; Conscience is oblidged to abide and stand by Gods Testimony, but God
is not oblidged to stand by its Testimony; we would therefore beware of
mistakin^ Conscience, more particularly in the 2d. place, a natural man may
have something like a good Conscience* and may come the length of these four
Steps according to his light, ^. He may have a negative good Conscience, that
is, a Conscience which does not actually challenge him, yea, a Conscience that
has no gross thing to challenge him for; he is, it may be, no Murderer, no
Adulterer, he defigneth no Oppression, nor deceit in his Dealing, etc. and on
this ground he possibly thinks that he has a good Conscience, though he has
no positive Testimony of a good Conscience all this while. 2. He may someway
have a good Conscience, in respect of such or such a particular act, in respect
of being free of a challenge on account of a wrong design, of doing such or
such a thing, or in respect of moral sincerity and ingenuity; such as was in
these men that followed Absalom in the simplicity of their heart; and in
Abimelech, who, in taking Abraham's wife, meaned no evil* no^ any thing, but
what was lawful, and therefore he says, That in the integrity of his heart ^e
did it, that is, he had a moral honest design, and was free from grounds of
challenge about what others might have been ready to charge him with, as to
that action. 3 He may come a great length, as to the duties of the second Table
of the Law, so as he may not wrong his neighbor in word nor deed; he may
design no man's hurt, he may wish evil to no man; thus very probably it was with
that Pharisee, who came to Christ and said, All these have I keept from my
youth, the poor man speaks as he thought, not knowing the Spiritual meaning,
and extent of the Law; Therefore, when he is bidden sell all and g^ve to the
poor, he went away grieved, he had no gross sinister design; it is also said,
that Christ loved him, or pitied him as a civil man: And Its indeed on this
ground* that merely civil men so much magnify and cry up their Conscience, and
place all their Religion in that, being much darkened, and insensibly
prejudicat as to their Light; when they come up the length, or near the length
of that light, Conscience speaks, and gives its Testimony accordingly, and
they have thence a sort of peace* but it is not the peace of a truly good
Conscience. 4. A natural man, or a hypocrite may come a great length in respect
of the external duties of Religion, and may have a kind of a good Conscience in
that respect; as he may pray, and have some moral sincerity in it* and ^o as he
would ^ain have a hearing, and would some way have his heart praying, ^ay he
may have a kind of delight in approaching to God, as its said of those
hypocrites, Isa. 58. 2. He would ^ain know what is Duty, and what is Sin, and he
does not deliberatly thwart with his light; in this respect, Paul says of
himself before his Conversion, that as touching the righteousness of the Law he
was blameless; and Romans 10. 1. He bea^eth the Jews record, That they had a zeal
of God, but not according to knowledge; and what I pray was this, but
Conscience un-informed in, and ignorant of the righteousness of God? from which
ignorance of Christ's righteousness, and of the way of coming to him, it came to
pass that they went about to establish their own righteousness: So then the
natural man, or hypocrite, when he has come the length of some honest meaning,
is disposed to think that he has done very well and that he has a good
Conscience; yet though he may have a good Conscience in some respect, or in
these respects mentioned, and the like, yet to have it simply, and positively
from solid and good grounds, giving him a good Testimony, is impossible; and
the reason is, because he has not the Word going along with his Conscience, in
reference to his whole carriage, and in referrence to the principles, motives,
ends and designs of his actions testifying for him, and therefore I say, he
has not the Testimony of a truly good Conscience.

For the next Question, Wherein is this Conscience defective? and what is the
difference betwixt it and a believers good Conscience? Or, how may it be known
as differing from an honest Gospel Conscience? Answer 1. In respect of its
rise, there is a defect in the Judgment, for if the eye be blind, if the
understanding be dark, the Conscience must be so too; They have (says the
Apostle of the Jews) a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, and being
ignorant of the righteousness of God, they go about to establish their own
righteousness; However zealous they were of God, or others, such may be, yet
they are ignorant in three things, 1. In the extent and spiritual meaning of
the Law; supposing (for instance) that a man keeps the Sixth Command, when he
is not guilty of any gross act of Murder* and the Seventh, when he does not
actually commit Adultery, or Fornication, not knowing or considering that a
look arising from the flame of lust within, is a breach of that Command; and so
proportionably in other Commands: Even as the Pharisees conformed the Law in
the meaning thereof to their own practice, and not their practice to the
meaning of the Law. 2. They are ignorant of the way of Gods righteousness, and
of that which, gives the Conscience solid ground to speak peace; many if they
have an honest meaning in their praying, reading of the Scripture, waiting on
public Ordinances, if they put their bodies to some sort of penance, or be
ready to give if it were the half of their estates to have their souls safe,
and if they have a sort of seriousness in all this, think that all is well with
them, and that they have a very good Conscience; if this piece of ignorance
were well discerned, never one soul out of Christ would have peace, because
none out of Christ have solid grounds of peace, for none have their hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience but these that are in him. 3. They are
ignorant of their particular case, they know not what sins they are guilty of,
nor what Conscience says of them, they think it speaks better things to
them then indeed it does; some guess at it, some mis-interpret it, and some
repe^l it: whereas if they were soberly reflecting on, and impartially looking
to their manner of proceeding in every thing, they would see that they mistake
their Conscience exceedingly. This then is the first defect, viz. a defect in
the Judgment. The 2d. Is a defect as to singleness and sincerity in the natural
man's best condition, such are never single when at their very best, even when
they are most serious in Prayer, they are but going about to establish their
own righteousness; when they fast, and give alms, and the like, it is that they
may have some ground for a good opinion of themselves, or that others may have
a good opinion of them, being always acted from selfy motives and for self ends.

A 3d. defect, Is the want of unbyassed Affections, these being partial and
biased will put the man to reason and dispute for the silencing of his
Conscience; and this eye not being single the whole body is full of darkness;
Affections being inclined or sweyed to this or that side, they will seek to
^way Conscience to that side they incline to: This is it that makes some to
follow after and to haunt the company of those who are erroneous in their
judgment, notwithstanding that they have good reason to the contrary laid
before them from the Word of God, which they reject, and that without
challenge, being quite byas^ed and prejudged in their affections; thus many
natural men lay this for a conclusion, that so much only, is Holiness, and that
no more is needful, and what is more is but superfluous niceness, and so they
prejudge their Conscience by that.

4. It is defective in this, that it maintains not its peace* nor answers
its challenges from Christ's blood* it is not sprinkled with clean, but with
foul Water (to say so); it may be* it puts the man to take on some
resolution, or to come under some vow, as to somewhat that it may be is no
commanded duty of Religion, not has any valuable influence upon it; or he will
as it were sprinkle his Conscience with his tears; thus many will grant that
they have sinned, but withal, they think and will be ready to say, that they
have a good heart, or a good meaning, or that such and such a man well esteemed
of, has such a sin, and is as guilty as they are; or that many have had such
si^s who yet have gone to Heaven; on such and others the like pitiful grounds
they found their peace, and by such silly shifts they seek to quiet their
Conscience; yea sometimes from the consideration of the possibility of pardon,
many conclude confidently that they are actually pardoned; We shall forbear to
say any thing further at this time, God bless what ye have heard, through Jesus
Christ.

SERMON IV.
ACTS 24. 16. Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void
of offense toward God, and toward men.
A Good Conscience is an excellent and very sovereign Cordial to be carried
about and along with us in all conditions, and more especially in afflicted
ones; but as excellent things are usually come at with the greatest difficulty,
so is it in this matter, there being so many so various and so great
difficulties in the way of taking up the nature of it aright, and in the
attaining and maintaing of it; and there being so very many who claim to it
most unwarrantably and unjustly, though poor de^uded Souls they are disposed to
think that they do so on good and warrantable grounds; all which make this
Doctrine concerning the exercise and practice of a good Conscience to be
exceeding difficult and tickle.

Ye may remember the point we spoke a little to last day, was, That Believers
ought, and when they are right, will have it for their exercise and study to
have a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward Men; whence we drew
this Use, That it is an evidence of a sound Believer when right and in a good
frame, even to be thus exercised; a tender, lively, and good frame of soul ^ay
be known by this, that the person aims s^ngly and endeavors seriously to
have a Conscience void of offense.

In clearing of this Use, there are some Doubts that arise on the one side when
Conscience speaks good to a person without a warrant, in which case it is
very dangerous to take direction from it; and some Doubts arise also on the
other side, when Conscience does challenge and condemn, when there is no ground
for it; something therefore must be spoken for clearing and solving both the
one and the other.

The last thing we left at was, That seeing some natural men, civil moral men
and hypocrites may think they have a good Conscience, that they are right and
have the testimony of it, how shall that testimony be discerned? or wherein
does it differ from the testimony of a truly good Conscience, that gives a
Believer ground to draw this conclusion from it, that he is real and sincere in
the work of Grace?

For clearing of this matter relating to these Consciences, that speak good
when there is no ground for it; There are two sorts of persons that fall here,
and are thereby culpably accessory to this delusion of and from their own
Consciences, 1. Some fail in mistaking Duty and the rule of Duty, supposing
that to be an acceptable duty which is but the shadow and appearance of duty;
and this makes all self righteous-men and legal-hypocrites who thwart not the
dark or dim light of their Conscience, but rather follow and comply with it, to
think that they have a good Conscience: as it was with Paul before his
conversion. A 2d. sort are these who take with sin, but think that they have a
good Conscience, and on this ground their Conscience speaks peace to them
though it has no warrant to do so, supposing themselves to be Believers, on
that ground Conscience speaks peace to them when it has no warrant nor are
they Believers indeed: And thus alace! many that are reputed by themselves and
others to be Believers, fail; these are presumptuous hypocrites, as the others
are legal hypocrites; and this kind of Conscience may be called a presumptuous
Conscience, that speaks peace and applies mercy when it has no ground for
either. In answer then to the Question, we shall give some differencing
Characters or characteristick differences betwixt the Believers good
Conscience, and these other sorts of Conscience, some whereof agree more to the
one sort, and some more to the other, and some to both, but take them together.

The Characters are these, 1. A really good Conscience is not easily attained
nor maintained, it puts a man to considerable exercise ^re he come at it,
and to no less how to keep it. Herein do I exercise my self, etc. says the
Apostle; security and negligence are no good tokens; there are these two things
that a man of a good Conscience is exercised in. 1. To prevent the ground of a
challenge from his Conscience, by endeavoring to give it no offense; against
which the presumptuous hypocrite sins, who fancieth that he has peace and
it may be, thinks much of it, and yet is not troubled nor taken up how to
prevent the giving of offense to his Conscience, nor his meeting with a
challenge from it; the legal hypocrite also sins here, in bounding and
limiting his Holiness to such or such a small measure of it, without so much as
aiming any further. 2. He is exercised to satisfy his Conscience when it is
offended; hence is the application to the blood of sprinkling, the exercise of
repentance, the self-loathing, and sharpness of challenges, that Conscience
has with it until it recover, even such exercise as will in a manner break the
bones and turn the moisture into the drought of summer, as it is Psalm. 51. and
Psalm. 32. this good Conscience cannot look on sin and not be troubled; and
therefore they who ordinarily and habitually can look on sin without trouble or
sorrow, and judge it a very easy business to quiet and stop the mouth of their
Conscience, who speak peace to themselves when lying still under guilt
unrepented of and unremoved, carry about with them a shrewd token of no good
Conscience.

The 2d. Character whereby it may be known, is, the mean and way that a man
takes to quiet his Conscience when it is wakened; A good Conscience as it
yields a man peaceand testifyeth well concerning his state; so that peace
rises not so much from this that he has no sin, as from his flying to Jesus
Christ for the pardon of sin; he may have peace as to his sincere and universal
aim at Holiness, and as to his honest and serious endeavor to abstain from
every known sin, as it was with David, Psalm. 18. 20, 21, 22. but as to the
satisfying of Divine Justice he has has no peace, but in resting on Christ's
satisfaction alone; for though his way may be and is good in respect of his
single following of duty, for he reads, prays, meditateth, etc. yet
corruption in a great measure polluting all these works and duties of his, as
to the acceptance of them on their own account and for themselves; he finds
that they are in some respect but dead, as wanting much of the soul and life of
them, neither can he have peace till he betake himself to Christ's blood: though
he were communicating every day, praying every hour, etc. yet he has no peace
in these till Christ's blood speak peace; as we may see in David, who though he
had peace intimated by Nathan, yet is not thoroughly quiet for all that, and
therefore he prays Psalm. 51. Cause me to hear the voice of joy and gladness;
there is no healing of his wound till a word from God himself do it: It is on
the contrary an ill token, when a Conscience sees sin, and can speak peace to
it self on this ground, that there is mercy in God; and yet never applies the
blood of sprinkling, to purge it from dead works; nor seeks to have the Word
spoken as it were from Gods own mouth: and on the other side the legal
Conscience will make amends to God, will give him Sacrifices enough, and
perform many duties to him, looking for his acceptance only on account of
these, and that is as ill a token; but a good Conscience rests not on any of
these; but though it has the sacrifice of a broken and contrite spirit to
offer to God, yet it does not rest on that nor on any duty, but is put beyond
these, to rest on Christ and on his Sacrifice, Purge me with hyssop. etc. says
David, Psalm. 51. And this is a clear and certain differencing mark, even to
consider well whereon Conscience rests for peace after a challenge, and to
make sure that it rests thus on Christ.

A 3d. Character is, That a good Conscience will both challenge and speak peace
at one time; it can stand up and defend it self against a challenge; thus when
the Law on the one hand comes and charges it with many defects in duty, and
denounces wrath against it because of these, it will humbly take with them;
and yet on the other hand, in the very time it can betake it self to Christ and
produce a word of peace that it has ready at hand from him; this we may see in
Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13. I was (says he) before, a blasphemer, a persecuter, and
injurious: but I obtained mercy. It is an evil token when men either have only
challenges and no peace, or only peace and no challenges at all; as it is also
an evil token to offer to maintain peace by shifting challenges; or to give
over pressing after and maintaining of peace by giving way to challenges: But
it is a good token when Conscience can take kindly with and be humbled under
challenges, and yet debate against them so as to keep and maintain peace, and
can give a warrant for its doing so, which is indeed a great practick in
Religion; we may see a clear instance of this in Io^, who says chap. 7. 20. I
have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? where he
acknowledges that he has sinned, and cannot make amends; and yet chap. 27. 4*
5. he says with holy boldness and peremptoryness, My lips shall not speak
wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit. God forbid that I should justify you;
till I die, I will not remove my integrity from me. When God speaks or
seems to speak wrath, his angry countenance drives him not away from him,
though (says he chap. 13. 15.) he should kill me, yet I will trust in him, but
I will maintain mine own ways before him; and verse. 16. an hypocrite shall not
come before him; The Hypocrite or legal man gives it over, when he is thus put
hard to it; ^ though it be easy for him to presume while the Law and Wrath
break not in, yet when the Law comes, Sin reviveth and he dies; as it is Romans
79. it is easy to have peace so long as God speaks not downright against
it; but when he comes to set all a man's sins in order before him, he will with
Judas run and hang himself, rather then abide that tormenting Conscience of
his, terribly denouncing war and wrath from God against him.

A 4th. Character is, That a good Conscience will love to entertain and welcome
a challenge, but an ill Conscience cannot abide nor endure a challenge, and if
it could, it would have Conscience always silent and quiet, when yet it should
not be quiet, neither has it any ground to be so: He who has a good
Conscience is glad to have sin discovered and Conscience kept waking; he
thinks a sanctified conviction of sin a valueable mercy; and the reason is,
because he aims not so much at this to have peace in himself, as to have a
good and solid ground of peace betwixt God and him, and to remove what may mar
it; whereas the Hypocrites great design is to have peace on any terms and by
any means, and therefore when a challenge comes closs and home to him, it is
quite marred; It is on this ground that a tender soul will designedly aggrege
sin, and even foster a challenge, as David does, Psalm. ^1. Against thee, thee
only have I sinned, whereas a Saul will defend his own sinful practice and seek
to shift the challenge, as we may see 1 Samuel 15. 10. yea I have kept the
commandment of the Lord, says that proud Hypocrite.

A 5th. Character or Difference is, That a good Conscience maintains its
peace both from the Law and from the Gospel, and will needs have peace in some
measure in respect of both, else it will not be satisfied; The evil Conscience
again takes its peace from the one and not from the other, and so takes a
wrong rule or ground for founding and trying of its peace; An honest man that
has a good Conscience, has respect to the Law and will not thwart it; yea,
the challenging and condemning part of it is welcomed, and the threatenings of
it have influence on him to make him fear; and as he respects the Law, so he
respects the Gospel, and looks well to Believing, Repentance,
Self-searching, Examination, Meditation, and to his manner of performing these
and of all his other duties, that none of them come in the place of Christ, or
get any thing of that which is his due; and though he seem to himself to have
faith in Christ, if he endeavor not to have Holiness going along with it, he
dare not speak peace to himself: But on the contrary, the legal man or
law-conscience, if it be in good terms as he supposes with the Law, it looks
not to the duties of the Gospel, whether the man be indeed fled to Christ, or
be in good terms with God through him; and on the other hand, the presumptuous
Conscience when it hears the Law and the threatenings thereof, it ^ome way
tusheth at these, and under pretext of betaking it self to Christ, it teareth
(as it were) away the Law; and this mistaking, halving and dividing of the
rule, makes many men think that their Conscience speaks good to them, when
it does not so, but has rather ground to speak evil and woe. And in the by, ye
who think ye have good Consciences, try them by this mark, if ye walk humbly
under Conscience-convictions, taking with them, and if they be welcome to you
as well as a word of peace.

A 6th. Character or Difference, is, That a good Conscience is holily jealous
and suspicious, while an evil Conscience is presumptuously confident and bold;
we say a good Conscience is suspicious, and therefore is often putting it self
to proof and trial, taking the sentence of Conscience to the rule and trying it
thereby, and taking the answer on deliberation, and not off-hand or by guess;
because it knows Conscience is but a servant, and therefore will try if it
speaks its masters, even Gods language; to this purpose says the Apostle 1
Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified; it will
either have Consciences sentence and Gods sentence going together, or else it
will reject and cast it; whereas the most part of men satisfy themselves with
the sentence of Conscience, and look not after Gods sentence, and mis-interpret
Conscience and take its first word (as it were) and put it not to the trial:
Ah! is not this true of many of your Consciences? ye think ye have peace and
that all matters are clear and well betwixt God and you, notwithstanding ye be
secure, ignorant or profane, but when do you put your Conscience to the trial?
ask your Conscience if in all the Word of God peace be spoken to the Wicked, or
to any that is not sincerely aiming and endeavoring to be holy? consider that
word Psalm. 85. verse. 8. The Lord will speak peace to his people and to his
saints; there is not one word of peace for the profane and unholy: How then can
your Conscience possibly speak peace? if it presume to do, it will most
certainly beguile you; and therefore as ye would not be deceived, sollow not,
neither lay weight upon every word that Conscience speaks as to your state,
especially at first, but try it by the Word; or take its sentence to God and to
the Word, and see how he approves of it, and how his Word does warrant it;
for (as Solomon says, Prove. 30. 12.) There is a generation that are pure in
their own eyes, that are not cleansed from their filthiness.

There is yet on this side a 2d. Question, viz. If Conscience may not only
think it self to be right, but think so in a high degree, so as even to be
persuaded of it, when yet it is wrong? Answer, Without all question it may; And
here we may speak somewhat of a deluded Conscience, which is a Conscience that
not only is wrong, and erreth, and speaks good when there is no ground for
it; but a Conscience that has these two things beside in it, 1. It has a
persuasion that it is right. 2. It has the affections somewhat stirred by it,
and a sort of joy in the thing, whereof it is persuaded; It Is (I say) a
Conscience that not only speaks good without ground, but has a persuasion
that it is right, and a kind of joy in it is way: That there may be, and is such
a Conscience among the generality of Professors cannot be denied, and is clear
from what the Apostle says, Gal. 5. 3. This persuasion comes not of him that
calls you; There is a persuasion, and yet not of God; and for the other, to
wit, That there may be a joy in the thing, see Gal. 3. 1. O foolish galatians
who has bewitched you? They had a sort of conceit and fainness even to a kind
fascination and Bewitching conceit, of their being right, neither was there any
dealing with them to draw them off that way: There are Four sorts of these
Consciences among Professors, according to Four several rises that they have,
none of which will warrant them to think themselves to be right. The 1. Rise,
is, from laying too much weight on supposed reason; There is a kind of delusion
that arises from this ground; which was it wherewith the Galatians were
carried away, having heard first from the Gospel, of the righteousness of
Faith; And thereafter, from some false Teachers, of the righteousness of the
Law, as necessary to be added to it, in the point of Justification; They
thought there was good reason for such a Doctrine, and that no loss nor
prejudice could come by it; and therefore they did join both together. The 2d.
Rise, Is, when men lay too much weight on great, though yet but common Gifts,
as on liberty in Prayer, and warmness of the af^ections therein, on Preaching
notably, and one standing it out in sharp Trials with the approbations of
others, it may be even of the best, or when they have been helped to do some
extraordinary things, as in the Primitive times, some Professors were helped as
Gods Instruments to cast out Devils, to speak with tongues, etc. who yet were
not sound at the heart; it is on this ground that Christ goes, when He says,
Luke 13. 27. And Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Many shall come to me in that day, saying*
Lord, we have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and
done many wonderful works: All which are (as I just now said) but common
Gifts, though some of them at least, extraordinary; and when men come to have
any measure of these beyond others, they will not be beat from it, but will go
to death with it, that all is right with them: The 3d. Rise, is from some
supposed spiritual sense and comfort, and from some flashes of joy; These
temporary Believers spoke of, Matthew. 13. and Heb. 6. 4, 5. attained to some
tasting of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the World to come; such
as once come this length, do what they will, and live as they will, have it (as
it were) always sounding in their ears, nor suffer they it to go out of their
heads, that such and such a day they met with God, and that he spoke peace to
them, and therefore they are persuaded that matters are right betwixt him and
them; and yet all this while they may be unsound at the heart, The 4th. Rise
is, From folks habituating themselves to speak good to themselves, and from
maintaining their presumption, and dulling and deadning their own Conscience;
whereupon, in Gods righteous Judgment, Conscience becomes a plague to them,
so that they will dispute and debate with and against any Minister, Neighbor,
or Friend, that would convince them of the evil and danger of their State and
Condition; and the heart being by them, thus deceived, speaks and pleads
for them, and deceives them back again, they are honest ^olks, and were never
heard with their Neighbors, none have any thing amiss to say of them, and
their own Conscience justifies them, and what should more? Thus having put out
their Light, and blinded their own eyes, they have constrained, and some way
necessitated their Conscience to cheat, deceive and beguile them: Such as these
are spoken of, Isa. 44: 20. He feeds on ashes, a deceived heart has turned
him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say is there not a lie in my
right hand? The heart is ordinarily taken (as was hinted before) for the
Conscience in the Old Testament, accordingly Job said, His heart should not
smite him while he lived; And it is said, David's heart smote him: Now such a
man as is here spoken of, his deceived heart, or deluded Conscience turns him
aside, so that he cannot deliver his soul, that is, he cannot wind and
extricat himself out of that thicket of self deceit, so far as to bespeak
himself thus, is it not a lie that I am lipning and trusting to? And yet this
is it that many of you have for a good Conscience, even a deceived heart, or a
deluded Conscience; speak to you who will, or what we can, it is in some
respect impossible to put you off that ^ancie, and to awake you out of that
dream, that you have a good Conscience: And the reason of this delusion is,
that men take not the ground of the Sentence of Conscience from God, according
to the rule of his Word, but from their own misled Reason, or from some common
Gift, or from some piece of sense, or some opinion and fancy of their own
heart, that is in some sort deceived by them, and deceives them. Now all these
Delusions may be in these Three respects, 1. In respect of things Doctrinal; A
man may be persuaded that Truth is an Error, and an Error is a Truth: 2. In
respect of matters of Practice; A man may take an evil Turn or Action for a
good one, and have a sort of persuasion that it is so, as the Jews had in
killing the Apostles; who thought they did God good service, as the Lord
foretold, John 16. v. 2. And Thirdly, In respect of a man's estate, who thinks
he is in friendship with God, when indeed he is not, because he draws his
Conclusion from wrong premises, either failing in the major Proposition,
laying down a wrong rule; Or in the minor Proposition, applying the Rule to
himself partially: these things ye should take along with you, in what we are
to say further on this point.

Now for the Marks and Evidences of a deluded Conscience, beside these
forementioned, of a Legal, and of a Presumptuous Conscience, which may be also
Marks of this, it has these Four or Five especially, accompanying it. 1. A
certain frothiness of Spirit, or a light unsettled frame; The light that a
deluded man has in his state or way, is but like a Dream, that has no reality
in it. He feeds on ashes; and such an one will some way make more Conscience
of, and take more pleasure in that wherein he is deluded, then in any other
P^ece or Practice of Religion, as it was with the Jews, in persecuting the
Apostles; and with the Scribes and Pharisees in seeking to gain a Prosylite,
and yet in all that they do, they are but licking froth or s^um, Ephraim
feeds on wind, Hos. 12. 1. What exercise of Conscience they have about
Religion, is without any sanctifying effect, it stricketh not at the body of
Death* nor does it promove Godliness; it is readily some frivolous thing, that
they are so much taken up with, and are so eager in the persuit of, which
proves but wind and ashes, to whom it may be, in some respect, said, as the
Apostle does to the Galatians, chap. 3. 3. Ye began in the spirit, and seek to
be made perfect in the flesh.

A Second mark of this, is; There is always in such a Conscience, an
un-distinctness, as to the ground whence the man's consolation flows, or there
is much more supposed peace, comfort, joy and satisfaction, then he can give
any solid reason for: And they are hugely disproportioned to the foundation
they are built upon, ask an hypocrite, what is the ground of his so firm
persuasion, and of the comfort and joy resulting there from? He will readily
answer, I think it is so, or I hope it is so, or, if he come to be somewhat
more particular, in the account he gives, it will very readily be to this, or
some such purpose, God has been very good and kind to me in such, and such
Providence, he has bestowed on me such and such Gifts and Benefits, which yet
are but things external and common; or he will, it may be, say, I prayed to God
in such and such a strait, and he heard, and delivered me, and I take that for
an earnest that he will hear me also for heaven and eternal Life; as if Achabs
deliverance from a temporary judgment on his humiliation* had been to him
indeed the earnest of heaven: Or, it may be he will further say, God has
kept me from many sins, and bestowed many blessings on me, (which he may do
unto, and often does to mere natural men) and therefore he will be merciful to
me; such conclusions are broader then the Premises, and the Superstructures
then the Foundations; and yet, alace! the persuasion of many is built upon such
sandy Foundations, and is therefore but a delusion, since it has no solid
bottom: Thus some who are carried away with an error, will say they cannot
defend, nor debate for such a thing, but they are persuaded of it, as if a well
grounded persuasion could be without all reason.

A Third Character, is, That a deluded Conscience can never abide, or endure to
be contradicted, or put to a trial, if any man shall say to such a person. that
he or she is deluded, they will be ready to hate him; thus it was with the
deluded Galatians to whom the Apostle is constrained to say, cap. 4. v. 16. Am
I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? They will readily
cast out with their greatest and best friends, and with the men they were wont
to love most, when they gainsay them in their delusions, as Paul says in the
forecited place, I bear you record, that if it had been possible you* would
once have plucked out your own eyes and given them to me, and am I now become
your enemy because I tell you the truth? It Is an evil token, when a man now
hates another whom he loved before, and on no other ground, and for no other
reason, but because he contradicts him, in that particular wherein he is
mistaken.

A 4th Character is, (which is of some affinity to the 2d.) That as a deluded
Conscience is frothy in its comfort, so it turns a man forthie in his
practice, he is much more concerned, and zealous in small and minute things than
in those of far greater moment; as the Apostle insinuates the Galatians were,
where he says to them, chap. 3. v. 3. Are ye so foolish, that having begun in
the spirit, ye are now made perfect by the flesh? He straineth at a guat and
swalloweth a camel; and is not so much taken up with the whole of Religion, as
he is with that particular thing wherein he is deluded. he has more love unto,
and sympathy with these that are of his judgment and opinion in that
particular, then with all the rest of the Lords people that are sound and
right; The Galatians could not deny, but that Paul had more grace then many, or
all of these Teachers that courted and wooed them so much into that error, and
yet they cooled in their affection to him, and were fond on them.

A 5th. Character is, That a deluded Conscience, i^ ordinarily bitter and cruel
in the effects of it; as it is proud and vain, so it will persecute to the
death them it differs from; hence were the Persecutions of the Apostles, and
of Paul especially; and we have seen it in poor deluded souls, who have thought
themselves oblidged to slay all that were against them, or differed from them
in these their delusions; some what of this bitterspirit accompanied the
delusion of the Galatians; Therefore the Apostle says to them, chap. 5. 15.
If ye bite and devour one another, etc. And James speaks to the same purpose
of such persons, chap. 3. 14. If ye have bitter envying and strife in your
hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth, this wisdom descends not
from above. Bitter zeal and strife is an evil token, and a bitter Conscience is
readily no good Conscience; when a man supposing himself to be in the right, is
carried on with a spirit of bitterness (though in other cases, bitterness,
through the power of corruption may kyth, yet it is native to delusion.) It
flows from pride in such persons, exalting themselves above all others;
Therefore as soon as they are deluded, and go wrong, they must have a Church by
themselves, and will join with no other persons, in Christian communion, but
such as are of their mistaken opinion.

But a Third Question arises here on occasion of the former. viz. whether
Believers in Christ need to be afraid of a deluded Conscience? And whether they
may not be persuaded, and that with a sort of delight and satisfaction, that
they are right when yet they are wrong? (the latter branch of the Question
necessarily supposes the former, which needs not therefore to be
particularly spoken to) We Answer with a distinction, that a Believer may be
mistaken and deluded in a particular, but cannot be deluded as to his gracious
state, because, being indeed a Believer, its a most true and certain conclusion
which he draws concerning his being in a gracious state, though possibly as to
some of the grounds whence he deduceth it, he may be mistaken, or he may draw
it from wrong grounds; yet I say in some particulars he may be deluded; as in
taking such or such an error to be a truth; and so the first Three grounds and
rises of a deluded Conscience, which we form erly assigned, may agree to him:
As, he may lay too much weight on carnal reason, and on common Gifts, as some
of the Galaians did and the Apostles themselves were in hazard to do, and
therefore our Lord says to them Luke 10. 20. Rejoice not in this, that the
spirits are subject to you, but that your names are written in heaven; he may
also lay too much weight on sense or comfort; and the reason may be, because
when God graciously condescendeth to give them now and then some proof that he
loves them, they being in so far deserted, draw a conclusion quite cross to
the design and end of that manifestation, as if he approved them in that
particular wherein they are mistaken; for as a Believer when he is right may
think himself to be wrong, because of the want of sense, so by the rule of
contraries he may think himself to be right, because he has much sense, when
yet he may be wrong: I shall for further clearing, instance it in five or six
cases: As 1. When a Believer has been in some tender frame, praying to God
sincerely and has gotten a hearing, and when some smiling providence meets
him, and inviteth him to side with such or such a thing, he is ready to think
that God calls him to that thing: or it may be the Christian after Prayer
meets with a Scripture that holds out that thing which he has been praying
for, whence he rashly draws the conclusion that he will obtain it, and is
ready to think that therein he walks according to reason, if the thing look
rational like to him, and suit the matter of his Prayer; we may see something
of this, or very like it in Samuel, if we compare the 15. and 16. Chapters of
the first Book of Samuel together; in the end of the 15. Chapter he has very
probably been praying, when he mourned, and chap. 16. v. 1. he is sent by God
to Bethlehem to anoint one of Iesses sons to be king; and when ( verse. 6.) he
looks on Eliah, he presently and somewhat rashly, yet very confidently says,
Surely the Lord's anointed is before him; he having been praying, and the thing
looking so rational and purposelike, was persuaded that he was right, but the
Lord reproves him, and says to him, Look not on his countenance, nor on the
height of his stature, because I have refused him; for the Lord sees not ^s
man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on
the heart. How o^t may a tryst of Providence be mistaken? I was in Prayer and
such a word met me, and such a Providence occurred to me, and did cast the
balance. A ^ d. Case is, when a thing represents it self to the Believer,
not only as lawful and honest, but as conducing much to Gods glory and to the
good of his work, and he means well in it, how ready is he hence to conclude,
that he is certainly called to such a thing, and that it is his duty, when yet
it is not so: we may see something of this in David, who 2 Samuel 7. 1; 2, 3, and
4. having a purpose to build a house to God, proposes the matter to Nathan the
Prophet, who without consulting God, off-hand says to him, Go, do all that is
in thine heart, for the Lord is with thee; and yet notwithstanding though God
loved the thing, and approved of it in its self as a duty; yet it was not Gods
mind that David should perform it, nor that Nathan should have so positively
encouraged him to it; hence when a thing considered in it self is pleasing to
God, and may be for his honor, some good people may think it to be their duty,
whom yet God never called to such a thing; as for instance, to aim to be a
Minister of the Gospel is a good thing in it self, and one may have a sort of
impulse to it, who yet may not be called to it. A 3d. Case is, when Believers
inclinations and affections are exceeding much toward such or such a thing,
very readily therefrom they will come to have a sort of persuasion in their
Conscience anent that thing; as for instance, when they love one sort of life
beyond another, which is not simply unlawful, or one Child beyond another; as
we may see in Isaac his strong inclination to bless Esau, Genesis 27. we conceive
the good man went not against the light of his own Conscience in the matter,
but he loved him excessively, which made him take the less heed to what
otherways Gods promise and way of dealing with his sons might have taught him;
even when he is about to die (when men use to be most single,) he is by his
excess of affection carried on that same way, though doubtless not inrending to
cross Gods purpose anent Jacob. And if Imight instance it (without being
mistaken by any) in this particular, which does not seldom come to pass, when
two Parties are making choice each of other for Marriaga, they may not only
think, but some may be persuaded that they are called to marry such an
individual person, because inclination and affection sets them on, when yet
there may be no such call of God; and so it may be in reference to other
things. A 4th. Case is, when Believers think that Gods Interest and their own
interest go jointly together in such and such a thing or practice, though their
own interest swayeth more with them then Gods interest, yet they will be ready
to allege that they care not so much what become of their own interest, but
they cannot endure no^ admit such or such a prejudice should come to Gods
interest; something whereof we may see in Jonah, to whom the Lord says, chap.
4. Do thou well to be angry? I do well (says Jonah) to be angry to death;
and he would do nothing but die, and even in that evil frame of spirit he
adventureth to pray to God that he would take away his life; for all which
passion and precipitation he alleges a regard to the great concern of Gods
glory, as if by that dispensation his truth and faitfulness would be reflected
on, while yet in the mean time, respect to his own reputation that he thought
would run a considerable risk and hazard, had thereby for the time a prevalent
influence on him; and the great impatiency for the withering of his Gourd, says
plainly that his own interest lay there, and his being so very ca^kered and
impatient o^ so small an occasion, and where so inconsiderable an interest of
his own was touched, might have downright told him that he had need to suspect
his impatiency in a greater matter; Thus it was manifestly with godly Baruch,
Ier. 45. where regard to his own interest had too great a stroke on his
fainting and ^ighing, for which he is sharply checked, Seeks thou great things
for thy self? seek them not; though no doubt he wanted not respect to the
public interest that was now going to ruin in all appearance. A* 5th Case is,
when Believers seem to have or indeed have greater manifestations of God then
ordinary, whereby while it may be he is only approving and encouraging them, as
to the main, they are then in hazard to conclude that he is approving them in
some particular thing that was never in his mind. As we may see in Peter, who
Matthew. 17. at the transfiguration being trysted with a glorious manifestation,
draws this conclusion, It is good to be here, let us build three tabernacles:
it might have been thought that he would not have mistaken and gone wrong then,
by any time, and yet even then he does so: There is a very common ground of
mistake amongst Believers, who if they win at liberty in Prayer about such or
such a thing, and get as they think Gods countenance in the duty, they are then
very ready to conclude that God certainly approves of the thing, when yet it
may be otherways; but suppose it be so that thou art indeed countenanced in thy
duty, yea though thou were upon the mount with Christ, it will not prove that
God allows the thing, though he thus manifest his respect to thy self. The
reason is that which is said of Peter, This he spoke not knowing what he said.
A 6th Case is, when Believers impulse of Conscience proceeds from zeal
without light, or when their light is not proportional to their zeal; for as
there may be in Hypocrites light without zeal (which light does not readily
keep them from miscarrying,) so when the judgment of a Believer is
misinformed, and zeal drives him without light, he then very readily
miscarries; as we may see Acts 21. and 20. James says to Paul, Thou* see
brother how many thousands of Jews there are that believe, and they are all
zealous of the law, etc. their zeal was such for the Ceremonial Law of Moses,
that neither Paul nor any of the other Apostles could get them taken off; and
Paul was forced to stoop to them in many things, when it might in reason have
been thought that they should rather have ceded to the Apostle; Thus Believers
when not well informed, but having an honest zeal for God, are like a Ship that
has more sail than ballast, and so cannot well bear up into the wind, nor
steer a straight and steady course; and from this honest zeal of theirs they
may err and go wrong, yea even be displeased with others, that will not go
along with them in their Error: As all these are incident to Believers, so they
would watchfully take heed that in these and other such cases they give not
credit to, nor lay weight upon all that their Conscience says.

A Fourth Question arising from the former is, Whether it may be thus with a
Believer, and yet he be in a good frame? Answer, If we mean ^ good frame
universally, so, he cannot be; but although he be in many, ye^ in most things
in a good frame, as both himself and others may think, and have good ground to
think so; yet he may go wrong in a particular, and in so far he is not in a
good frame, as in the instances given before. 1. He may have an honest mind and
meaning. 2. In other things he may be very observant of and tender in duty very
tractable and obedient to the faith of Christ* keeping the Church, hearing the
Word preached, given to Prayer, and to wait on all Ordinances, as no doubt
these believing Jews were, Act. 21. 3. he may be in some measure in a praying
frame, yea praying in or about the very time he miscarrieth, as we see in that
forecited ^nstance of Samuel, 1 Samuel 15. compared with 16. who had been
presently praying and offering sacrifice, when he drew that conclusion touching
Eliah; Jonah also was praying in that fit of distempered passion, and content
to die, and desirous to be in heaven, which supposes some clearness of his
interest; for it cannot in charity be thought that the godly man was desperate
or durst so go to God, and yet he was no doubt wrong. Yea 4. He may have great
manifestations, (as we see in Peter on the mount) and yet go wrong in a
particular, as he did; This says that Believers, as-well as others, should
walk in humility and fear, and never be over confident* it is not sure, in vain
that they are bidden work out the work of their own salvation with fear and
trembling; And all men should be very warry unless it be on good grounds, to
draw conclusions about the goodness of their estate especially, wherein these
greatly failed, who are spoken of, Ier. 2. v. 35. Because I am innocent, surely
his anger is turned away from me. Only here, take* two or three differences
betwixt the persuasions that are in Believers, and these that are in
Hypocrites, when they go wrong. 1. In a Believer it is in some particular, and
not as to their state, as it is in the Hypocrites persuasion. 2. It Is in some
accidental or accessory thing, and not in fundamental Truths 3ly. It is readily
and more ordinarily in some thing not simply, and in it self evil, but in
something only that they are not called to of God, though good in it self; in
these most readily, and ordinarily, (as I just now said) they may go wrong and
stray; but yet they may do so, even in some other things at fits, or under some
violent tentations. We shall close up all at this time with these Four or Five
Words of Direction.

The 1. whereof is, that which we hinted at before, That Believers would walk
softly, humbly and in fear, and not be too confident of themselves, or of their
own strength; for though they may warrantably be humbly confident that they
shall be carried through without, at least final erring in any fundamental
truth necessary to Salvation; yet they may slide in a particular practice, or
in a point of truth in such things as are (to say so) accessory, and not
absolutely necessary; and therefore they should walk in fear, and be war of a
despising, censuring, and condemning humor that uses to go along with them,
who think themselves to be right, and others to be wrong; As the Apostles
exhortation is* Romans 14. 3. 2 dly. Believers had not need to be rash or hasty,
in any thing, since much of their erring, whether in opinion or practice
flows from their haste, and suddenness in drawing conclusions; Whereas, if
they patiently waited on God, and considered calmely, and at leisure, they
might get another Answer; But we often lay down our Conclusion, and then begin
to Try (which is a very preposterous course) Whereas we should first try, and
then conclude. 3dly. Believers should be exceeding serious, not only in trying
the thing, but in trying their singleness in it; Considering that oftentimes
there is somewhat beside awe of Conscience, that swayeth them in such and such
a particular (if they could discern it) such as interest, affection, or the
like. 4thly. They would also carefully observe, and beware of the bitter fruits
that accompany delusion in others, which (though they come not to that hight,
yet) may come to a considerable hight even in them, such as are severe
censuring and judging of others, bitterness, frothiness, etc. 5thly. And in a
word, They had need to lippen and trust to God, more then to themselves,
according to that notable exhortation, Prove. 3. 5 Trust in the Lord with all
thine heart, and lean not unto thine own understanding; in all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths; That other word which we have,
Prove. 28. v* 26. would also be considered, and seriously pondered, He that
trusts in his own heart is a fool, but who so walks wisely shall be
delivered: Let all learn to be humble, tender, and sober; And God bless what
has been said for this end.

SERMON V.
ACTS 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self to have always a Conscience void
of offense toward God, and toward men.
THere is no truth that will be more readily granted then this, which we
proposed from these Words, namely, That all men, and more especially Believers
ought so to live, and walk as in nothing to give their conscience cause of
offense: And yet if we shall impartially put the matter to trial, there is
ground to fear, that the life of many will be found to be nothing else then a
continued lie, and practical contradiction to the profession of this great
Truth.

Because this is, (as we said) so tender and tickle a subject, and because
there is so great need to be clear in the true meaning of it, we have been
constrained beyond our purpose, to propose, and answer several Questions, and
to move and dissolve several Doubts, concerning it, to make the fairer and
easier access to the Use; It being so very ordinary for people to think that
they have a good Conscience, when indeed they have it not; and so to baffle (to
speak so) and abuse Conscience (that should be the most powerful provoker to a
tender and circumspect walk) as to make it a ground of security and
un-tenderness.

We spoke a little the last occasion to that Question, whether not only
un-regenerat men may think that to be Conscience* which is not? But also
whether it be incident even to Believers themselves to think, and that with
some sort of persuasion (I will not say with such grossness of delusion as may
be in others) that they are right when yet they are wrong? In answer to which
we showed you, they might, and instanced several Cases, wherein.

Now though the last branch of the Question has its own great difficulty to
conceive of it a right; yet since it is ^or our edification; (for if Believers
may mistake, much more may others,) and since it will make way for confirming a
subsequent Doctrine, viz. That it is a most difficult, exercising, and
up-taking thing to keep a good Conscience; and since also it has very great
influence upon, and is very useful to our whole life, it being withal the main
scope of the Text, to press the keeping of a good Conscience, and the sum and
substance of a Christian walk to do so, we shall yet proceed therein a little
further, and it will not, we hope, be found to be an impertinent, or wide
digression, soberly to do so. That then which we spoke a little to, and will
now further prosecute, is, That Believers (though not in reference to their
state, yet) in the matter of duty (for both in thinking that to be truth which
is not truth, and that to be duty which is not duty, Conscience acts as the
Judgment is informed) may err and go wrong.

In prosecuting of this, we shall First confirm it from some instances. 2dly.
We shall touch on some Aggravations, or aggravating Circumstances of the thing,
though not so much in reference to the sinfulness of it, which will make it the
more wonderful. 3dly. We shall give some reasons of it. 4thly. We shall speak a
word or two to the Use of it.

For the 1. That Believers may thus go wrong, we shall confirm it from 4.
Instances; The 1. whereof is, That frequent and famous instance of Bigamy and
Polygamy, or marrying of two or of more wives, in the Old Testament amongst the
Fathers and Saints; we are far from aggredging their failing in this* and from
making it in them so very odious, yea, we think it may be in some respect
justly extenuated, and far removed from that degree of sinfulness that it would
be among us, and might possibly in some cases had a Dispensation in them; Yet
considering 1. The nature of the thing, and the institution of marriage, and
that of Mal. 2. 15. That he made but one man, and one woman for the man, that
he might have a godly* seed, neither can the multiplication of mankind have
sufficient weight to make it simply to be no sin. 2dly. Considering the
frequency of it, or its being in so many, that it became almost ordinary; And
3dly. Considering the effects that followed on it, viz. The many discontents
and heart-burnings amongst the Wives and Children in the Families of Abraham
and Jacob; It cannot absolutely be excused, in all Cases and Circumstances,
else it should make an extraordinary dispensiation (if indeed it was) to be
very ordinary, which we have no warrant for. A 2d. Instance is in Jobs friends,
who were (no question) gracious men, (as the Lords accepting of them, and Job
for them, Job 42. 8. shows) yet that they Erred, and were wrong in a Truth in
their Judgments, is clear from v. 7. of that Chapter, where the Lord tells
them that they had not spoken right as his servant Job had done; And that they
did very un-tenderly handle Job, is also clear. The 3d. Instance is in the
Apostles and Disciples of our Lord, They were Believers no doubt, according to
Christ's own Testimony given them, John 17. 8. And yet we will find them in
several things thinking themselves to be right, and that with some sort of
persuasion, when yet they were wrong; As in that one tenet concerning the
nature of Christ's Kingdom, which they fancied was to be with some earthly
Grandour and Pomp, and wherein they expected some Worldy Credit, and Greatness;
and in that of Peter, Mat. 16. 22. Be it far from th^e, Lord, this shall not be
unto thee; And if all the Apostles had been put to a Consultation, it is like
they would have diswaded him as well as Peter did; As when he said, he was to
go up to Jerusalem, they said, Master, the Jews sought of late to stone thee,
and will thou go up thithe? And yet how hateful this was to Christ, is clear
from the whole strain of the Gospel, and from his checking of Peter, at that
rate of holy severity, saving ^o him, Get thee behind me Satan; And the two
Sons of Zebedee, Mat. 20. 22. Telling them, That they knew not what they asked;
And, Acts 1. 7. He declares to them that it was not for them to know the times
and seasons which the Father had put in his own power. A 4th. Instance is that
which was the very common Tenet, and Opinion of Believers in the Primitive
times, among the Jews* viz That the Ceremonial Law of Moses was not fully
abrog^ted by the coming of Christ, and is clear from Acts 21. and Romans 14. and,
1 Cor. 8. 9. and 10. Chapters, and that there was much un-clearness, in the
matter of Christian Liberty; they being some way rooted in their Opinion, anent
the distinction of Meats and Days, thinking that it was not taken away; And
though the Apostles determined it, yet they could not easily be brought off
from it.

For the 2d. Take some aggredging circumstances, which will make this the more
wonderful. As 1. That Believers may Err* be mistaken, and go wrong, when in a
very tender Christian frame; As is clear in the forecited instances of the
Patriarchs of Job's Friends, and of the Apostles, and Believers in the
Primitive Times, for, will any I pray deny, but they were in a good frame, when
they had so much Liberty in Prayer, and Preaching, and such success waiting on
it? so that the Devils were subject to them, They were also singularly dauted,
and dandled in a manner, by Christ Jesus himself; and had so much access to
God, and so much of his countenance, yet continuing still for a great while in
some of these their Errors, and Mistakes. 2. That this may be, not only among
the more common sort of Believers, but even also amongst the most eminent; for,
are there any more eminent then there we have named* viz. The Patriarchs,
Apostles and Dis^iples of our Lord? And we may add that of Paul and Barnabas,
Acts 15 36, 39. What the particular was about which the contest was, we shall
not offer now to decide; it is sure in the matter, one of them was wrong, and
it is like both in the manner, and yet both though themselves to be right. 3.
There may be mistakes in very concerning and important Truths: Is not that a
concerning Truth, about which Jobs Friends disputed with him, viz. That God
would not temporally plague a godly man? And was not that a concerning Truth
anent the nature of Christ's Kingdom, wherein the Disciples were mistaken and
wrong? And if we speak of matters of Fact, was not that of the Fathers, and
other Saints, in the matter of Bigamy, and Poligamy a concerning thing? yet all
of them thought themselves to be right, neither did they, (for any thing we
know) go against an explicit challenge of their Conscience, in that matter.
4ly. It is not one or two, but many that may be under such mistakes, many of
the Fathers were mistaken, Job's Friends were so, all the Apostles were so,
many thousands, yea, ten thousands of the Jews that believed (as it were almost
all the Believers of that Country) were so, being all zealous of the
cerimoniall Law, when yet it was abrogat. 5ly. They may be exceeding fervent
and forward, and in that wherein they Err, very bent on it; how vehemently and
eagerly did Jobs Friends pursue the Dispute, to beat him from a sound principle
which they held against him? how serious were the Apostles in these things
wherein they erred? How zealous were these sound believing Jews for these
Ceremonies, even after the matter was otherwise determined by the Apostles? And
how hot was the contention betwixt Barnabas and Paul? Even so hot, that they
parted company. 6thly. They may continue in such mistakes, notwithstanding many
evidences that might serve to bring them off, and against many relevant reasons
given them to the contrary, how many un-answerable arguments were adduced by
Job to persuade his Friends of their mistake? And yet had not the Lord himself
immediately interposed, it is like they might have dyed without taking with it;
How often did Christ refute that Opinion touching the nature of his Kingdom, by
preaching of suffering, and of the necessity of his Death, by telling his
Disciples expressly, that his Kingdom was not of this World, and that they
behove^ ^o become as little Children? And yet notwithstanding of all this, they
continued in their Error, not only while Christ was with them before his Death,
but even after his Resurrection, as is clear, Acts 1. And we know what were the
decrees of the Synod held at Jerusalem, Acts 15. Concerning Christian Liberty,
and how it was told the Believers in that time, That an idol was nothing, and
yet they adhered to their mistake about their Liberty, and thought still
something of the Idol, As Paul shows, 1 Cor. 19: 19. 7ly. Their Error, or
mistake may be continued in long, and Believers may not only fall hastily, or
on the sudden, in an Error of Judgment, or into a wrong practice, but they may
live, and ly long in it; It Is like that of Jobs Friends ended not in a day, nor
in a month; and that of the Fathers was for many years together, and that also
of the Apostles was for several; yea, they may continue so long, that they may
die in it, and never come to so much clearness* as once to know that they were
wrong; though I say not, that they may die in such an Error and mistake,
un-pardoned, yet they may die in unclearness, as to the things being an Error,
yet without prejudice to their Salvation, having an interpretative and virtual
repentance of every thing that is wrong and sinful in them, and so of all
among the rest; As the Patriarchs and many Believers in Paul's time went to
heaven, who, yet very probably did die without coming to be clear in that
particular wherein they were mistaken, or differed from others, who were in the
right: shall we think that two godly men, living and dying in some difference
of judgment, about somewhat not necessary ^o Salvation (wherein, yet the one
of them must be wrong) die not well, and in the Lord for all that? God forbid;
neither can there be any reason given, why they may not die in that wherein
they lived so long, though indeed at death they may come to be more impartial
in weighing the grounds of the difference, and mistake. 8ly. This may be for
some generations; as was that mistake of the Patriarchs, and so it may continue
not only in men's own lifetime, but in after generations the mistake may be
propagat; as in the Primitive Times, some of their debates were not soon
altogether hushed and worn out.

3dly. These things being wonderful in themselves, we shall come now to enquire
a little into the reasons of this, and they are of Two sorts. 1. Some speak
sinful infirmity in men, even godly men. 2dly. Others speak Soveraignity in the
holy God

For the First sort that speak infirmity in us, and are culpable causes of the
thing, They may be these, 1. Ignorance, and Unclearness in the Understanding
and Judgment, for the most eminent Believer in his best Condition Knows but
in part; and as his Judgment is mistaken, so readily will his Conscience be,
which accuses or excuses according as the Judgment is informed; Conscience
pre-requireth, and some way pre-supposeth Knowledge; And therefore the man that
wants knowledge, is called weak, so the Conscience of the weak Brother is
spoken of, Romans 14. And 1 Cor. 8. that is, weak through want of Knowledge. 2ly.
The best and most eminent Believers have a remainder of Corruption in them; and
therefore are in hazard, and in a manner ready to side with, and intertain a
mistake, if Believers were free of Corruption, it might be thought impossible
that they should thus Err, but that will not be till the Soul be separated from
the Body; so long as Corruption remains there will be a hazard, and readiness
in so far, and in some things to mistake, and to follow the misguiding of a
misinformed Conscience. 3dly. Believers are sometimes rash and hasty in
drawing a sudden Conclusion, and too negligent in previous trying; taking that
for Gods mind, which is not so indeed; as may be seen in Samuel, who takes
Elia^ for Gods anointed; and in Nathan, who approves of David's resolution to
build the Temple, not only as it was a good work in it self, but as his present
duty; much of their Error flowed from have; As he says in another Case, Psalm.
116. v. 11. I said in my haste, all men are liars. 4ly There may much of this
evil arise from the suffering of a prejudice to sit down or setle, when a
Believer is prejudged, he may hear many things, and not take them well up; so
the Disciples had drunk in a prejudice at the Cross, and therefore, when Christ
spoke of Suffering to them, it is said, they understood him not. 5ly. Believers
are sometimes un-aware ingadged in a Conclusion, that byasseth their light, and
makes their Conscience partial, as in searching and finding out what might
clear them, so in seeking out grounds to maintain their Opinion by; Thus Jobs
Friends did first apprehend, and take up Job to be an hypocrite, and
accordingly thought it their duty to bear in the Conviction of it upon him; and
to maintain that Conclusion, they wrest Gods providence, and dispensation, not
against their present light, nor, it may be from a former Error so much, as
from the prejudice they had drunk in. 6ly. Believers may think themselves to be
right, when they are wrong, because of a general Custom, or Opinion of such a
thing among other Believers; taking such a thing to be the Judgment of others
they ingadge in it, without trial or debate, which is given as the reason of
the Patriarchs their so long continuing in Polygamy, viz. That it was become
customary, and habitual. 7ly. Beside the instances we gave the last day (which
might also be reasons) Believers out of their respect, and love to a good end,
may think that such or such a mids is good and warrantable, without so
particular examination of the nature of the mids, especially, if it be not
grossly, or manifestly sinful; because they think that such an end is
warrantable, as it may indeed be, and yet every mids is not so; though, when
the end is good, the midses are often with too little care, search and
solicitude adventured on* as Nathan thought it a warrantable thing to build a
Temple to God (and so indeed it was,) and so questioneth not but that it was
David's duty, and here he was mistaken.

For the 2d. sort of Reasons, They are such as are drawn from Gods Sovereignty,
who has some sovereign and holy ends and designs in such a Dispensation, viz.
in suffering Believers to be and abide long under their mistakes. As, 1. It may
be so ordered to humble all Flesh, and to make all know their nothingness, and
to learn that lesson which is taught, Isa. 2. ult. Ceass ye from man whose
breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? It would seem
that Believers might be laid weight upon and lipned to, if any might be so, but
all flesh is grass, says the Holy Ghost, which holds true in some respect,
even of Believers, as well as of others: This preaches and proclaims man's
infirmity, when most eminent Believers are not exeemed from falling into
mistakes, and from continuing therein. 2ly. It may ^e so ordered to make all
others walk in fear, and to study watchfulness the more, and withal to lippen
less to themselves and more to God: These things (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 10*
speaking before of the miscarriages of Gods professing people; from every
degree whereof it is hard to say that the godly themselves were absolutely
exempted) were written for our admonition; wherefore let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he ^all: In his secret and deep wisdom he lets
something be discovered, and emerge as well as written, that all, even
Believers as well as others, may take warning, l^st they slip and loss their
feet when they are not taking heed. 3ly. The Lord may have some more particular
designs in this, though they may be much out of our sight; and though men be
under the rule of his Word, and should not walk by these things as rules; yet
he will exercise his spotless adorable sovereignty in prosecuting his own holy
ends and designs by men's slips, errors and fallings, without being reached with
any the least ^incture or touch of pollution by them, or of culpable accession
to them: As in that failing of the Patriarchs, he often holily promoved the
accomplishment of his promise to Abraham concerning the multiplication of his
seed, though that end did not warrant them in their otherways-unwarrantable
practice; for he made the promise of increase and multiplication, when there
were but two; and it is not unworthy the remarking, that even these who had
manyest wives, had fewest children sometimes; as we may see in Solomon; though
yet at some other times God promoved his promise that way; even as sometimes
from other things sinful; as in Iudahs falling in incest with Thamar his
daughter in law, he promoved the performance of the promise concerning the
Messiah his Incarnation. 2ly. For the exercise of his People, and particularly
of his Ministers, he will sometimes suffer differences and mistakes to arise;;
and indeed they prove to be very exercising now and then to his own, as it was
a great part of Jobs exercise, that his friends condemned him for a hypocrite;
and how often complains he, that they vexed his soul, and were a burden to
him? yet if his godly friends had not been suffered thus to mistake and err, he
had wanted that piece of profitable exercise, for no profane men would have had
such access to table, and prosecute a dispute of that nature against him; but
it exceedingly heightened his exercise, that his godly friends should have been
thus at difference and in tops with him: This also furthered the exercise of
the Apostles, and was the occasion and rise of Paul's being apprehended and*
committed to prison* viz. when he condescended to purify himself, with these
men that were under a vow, according to the Ceremonial Law, as the divine
historian gives the account Acts 21. though the Lord had designed to send him
to Rome, and in order to that end, Paul must come to Jerusalem, and be in the
Temple; and to make way for that, so may Jews shall think, that these
Ceremonies of Moses his Law are to be still observed; and the rest of the
Apostles shall with all think it needful that Paul should condescend so far to
please these overzealous Jews, which he did, and it may be condescended but too
far. 3ly. The Lord by the rising of such differences and mistakes, may intend
the further spreading of the Gospel, as he did in that instance of Paul's
sending to Rome; and in the contention that fell in betwixt Paul and Barnabas;
which made them part company; by which the Gospel came to be preached in more
places, when thus parted asunder, then it would probably have been, had they
stayed together; and its not un^ke that they both had their wonted liberty in
praying, and preaching* without any direct and explicit challenge breaking
their peace on account of that their difference and parting. 4ly. It may be, to
make all Flesh depend on himself, when they may not depend absolutely on their
own Conscience, nor on the multitude of B^lievers, nay, nor on Apostles, as to
some practices and opinions wherein they were not infallibly inspired; seeing
God may suffer them and Conscience too sometimes to mistake, that neither they
nor it may be made the last and supreme Judges, but may be kept always
subordinate to himself as such. 5ly. It may be ordered so, to show the
sovereignty and freedom of Grace, and also the necessity of it: the sovereignty
and freedom of Grace, that will save such that may live long, and even perhaps
die in a mistake; it is true we should by all means beware of abusing the
freedom of Grace to sin; yet notwithstanding he will have it seen that these
whom he saves and eminently coun^nanceth are not without sin: and the
necessity of Grace, for keeping them when they cannot keep themselves; yea it
may be also for the praise of Grace; that if at any time the Believer is kept
right and free from errors and mistakes, the praise may not be to himself
whether as to any thing of the truth or of the practice of Religion; because
many more eminent, better gifted, and more tender then he, have fallen;
wherefore it must be God that by his Grace makes the difference, who therefore
should only have all the praise. 6ly. That Believers may learn to glory and
^oast alone in him and not in their agreement with others that are godly, nor
in their own mind and Conscience simply, nor in their good frame, nor in their
many gifts; and that they may not idolize any of all these, for if they were
always in the right, in a good frame, etc. these things would readily be
thought too much of; therefore the Lord sweepeth all these things away, that
none may glory in any thing that is in themselves, or in others; but that they
that glory may glory in the Lord, and be made to profess and proclaim the
absolute necessity of having God, to be all; and eminently sovereign above all
things, and to know, that though Christians were in the Mount with Christ; that
yet it will not be that alone which will keep them right. 7ly. It may be thus
ordered, that God may show the special usefulness of his Word; and that his own
people may know the necessity of studying it, and of cleaving to it; and that
they may know, acknowledge and adore his deep and infinite wisdom, in giving
that for a rule to walk by, when they see that the best, and in their best
frame may err and mistake; and that the providence of God may be
mis-interpreted and mistaken: The Lord will therefore have his people to esteem
highly of his Word and of the preaching thereof; and to hold them closs by
that, because any other way, they may go wrong; and indeed if men were not thus
hedged in, they would very readily think that their own opinion, or the opinion
and practice of others, were a sufficient rule for them, and would not care for
the Word* Yea 8ly. The Lord may possibly have in his secret justice this design
in the mistakes and errors of the godly, even that these who have prejudice and
enmity at godliness in the Saints, may be judicially therein hardened; for if in
another case it be just with God, to give men up to strong delusions, to
believe lies, because they receive not the truth in love, why may it not also
be just with him judicially to harden them in their unjust prejudice, who
without all reason take up and entertain the same against godliness and the
godly, by suffering some of them to slide sometimes into errors and mistakes?
by which they come in his righteous judgment to be so ^ar plagued, as to think
that now they have reason for their prejudic^; and i^ may be to say, we thought
them always to be such and such persons, and now we see and find them to be so;
who (...) more weight on the practice of any then on his Word; and who will be
ready to cry more out against an infirmity in a godly person, then in others;
and more, then they can be prevailed with to fall in love with their grace; how
many a corrupt and wicked man has justified and maintained his own bad
practice from some failing in the Saints? not to excuse their sin, but rather
thereby, to blind himself and to put out his own eyes more.

In the 4th place according to the method proposed, take a word or two of use.
And 1. May not this instruct us that all Flesh is Grass, that when we look to
our selves we should be humble; and that there is need, great need of fear and
trembling in our Christian walk? whoever they be that dare to abuse this
Doctrine anent the Saints infirmities, mistakes and errors, to foster
themselves the more securely in their liberty of sinning, God shall (if
continued in) one day make it turn to the aggravation of their guilt and to the
heightning of their judgment; and however, for the time they heighten their sin
exceedingly in proposing the Saints faults to follow them, and not their grace
and virtues: whereas this is the genuine and kindly use that all should make of
them, to be watchful, to walk in ^ear, and to take heed lest we also fall,
considering that if it has been done ^o in the green tree, what may we fear
who in comparison are but dry trees, if the Lord shall leave us (as justly he
may) to follow our own councils? it would become us to wonder that we go not
wrong and further wrong, and to look well that we be not vain of our own
standing.

The 2d use serves to teach us that we should not take every thing to be right
where of for the time we may have a sor^ of persuasion, neither that which many
good people may think to be right: God has given us another rule, that should
be looked to and walked by, as Sovereign and infallibly regulating, according
to which we should regulate our own, and the Consciences and Practices of
others.

Therefore 3ly. Learn hence, so much the more accuratly and exactly to put
every thing to proof and trial, that we may see whither it be so in very deed
as Conscience dictateth; By all means let Conscience be laid to the rule of the
Word, let us betake our selves and our Conscience, to the law and to the
testimony, and if it speak not according to these, it is because there is no
light in it; at least in so far; and if even Believers may thus err and
mistake, O! how much more and more sadly may others, who sleep on in their
security, without fear of being mistaken and of going wrong in matters of
greatest and most lasting moment, let be in lesser ones? putting nothing
seriously to the trial, and will yet notwithstanding boast of a good Conscience.

The 4th use serves to teach Believers and all of you, that ye have need to
walk near God, and in closs and constant dependence on him, not simply lipning
or trusting to your own council or Conscience, but to him for direction and
guiding.

The 5th. use, Serves to exhort Believers to be very thankful, and to take it
for a great and singular mercy* when their Conscience challenges them for sin;
and stricks in closs with that which is the Spirits work, John 16. 8. I will
(says Christ) send the spirit, and he shall convince the world of sin; O! but
be it a merciful, profitable and comfortable thing, when God helps you
impartially to search out sin, to hear the Conscience it is impartial verdict of
it, and to be kindly and deeply humbled for it, and to flee to the blood of
sprinkling for the pardon of it.

use 6th. See here the necessity of knowing Gods mind better, and of
understanding his Word better, otherwise we may err, and go wrong, and not know
it; Let me say in a word, that it will be impossible to reach, and attain the
scope of this Text, if we study not to know Gods Word, and his mind in his Word
better; The ignorance that is amongst us, may prove a great Rise, Occasion and
Cause of many sad mistakes, and errors, if the Lord in mercy prevent not; Let
God bless this Word, and make it to have it is own use, for our edification and
warning.

SERMON VI.
ACTS 24. 16. Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void
of offense toward God, and toward men.
THe great Scope of these Words is, to point out that holy Precisness,
Accuracy, and Circumspection which was in Paul's. walk, and ought to be in the
walk of all Christians; And that is, to endeavor to have always a Conscience
void of offense toward God and toward Men.

The Doctrine that we insisted on last was this, That Christians ought to
endeavor so to walk, that in nothing their Conscience may have a Challenge
against them; and when we came to speak of the use, we proposed Four. The 1.
whereof was for Information, and Direction, how to carry in a Christian Life,
and it is in a Word, so as in nothing we may thwart our Conscience either in
ommitting any Duty, or in comitting any sin. The 2d. use. was for trial, as the
Words bear out Paul's attainment, and his comforting himself on this ground,
that he always exercised himself to keep a good Conscience; Whence we show
that it is a good Mark of Sincerity, when a man is taken up, how to keep a
Conscience void of offense; and several Doubts and Questions were occasioned,
in prosecuting of this use, which we endeavored to clear, and answer.

But because we see that such Questions are almost endless, and know not if it
would be to your Edification to propose more of them, we have resolved to break
them off abruptly; and shall only speak somewhat in answer to an Objection, or
Question which cannot well be passed by, and it is this.

Can that be a mark of Sincerity, to endeavor to have a Conscience void* of
offense, seeing even Believers may often have ane evil Conscience? How then, I
say, can it be a mark of Sincerity, and of a sound Believer, to have a good
Conscience?

In Answer to this, we shall First show, how Believers may be said to have an
evil Conscience? 2. How it is not in-consistent with the Doctrine, nor with the
use.

For the 1. We would distinguish Three things in Believers, in reference to
their Conscience. 1. Something wherein their Conscience may justly challenge
them. 2* something that their Conscience without ground may challenge them for.
3ly. Something that may be taken for the language of Conscience, which indeed
is not, by which the Conscience may come to be mistaken.

1. We say, That there are some Things* or Cases wherein upon just ground the
Believers Conscience may challenge him, and wherein he may be said to have an
evil Conscience; As beside several others, in these, 1. If we take it to be ane
evil Conscience, that is not only silent and mute, and cease to be a
reprover, for even gross Sins; but also, when wakened, justly challenges,
accuses, and condemns for them; a Believer may fall under it both ways, as
we may see in Joseph's Brethren, and in David, who had ane evil Conscience, the
first way when it was a sleep, and the second way after it was wakened; though
ane evil Conscience considered with respect to the second way, belongs
properly to this head. 2ly. If we look on ane evil Conscience, as its restless,
disquieting, and vexing, called evil in respect of the effect of it. To wit, as
it speaks evil; so the Believer may have ane evil Conscience, in respect of
particular Acts; for which he is justly challenged; for he may thwart his
light, and may contract guilt, and bring himself under the desert of wrath,
because of that guilt; which brings on trouble, at least inward in his mind,
and Conscience, if not outward also; As we may see in David, after his
adultery; in Peter, when he denied Christ, and in many others; certainly, as to
such particular practices, Believers may be said to have ane evil Conscience.
3ly. If we consider a Believers state, and look upon Conscience, as speaking
his being in an evil state; though doubtless it cannot warrantably charge him
with, nor challenge him for that, nor can it have just ground to say to the
Believer, that his state is evil; yet it may very warrantably, and on just
ground be silent, as to giving him a positive Testimony, as to his good state,
when he has in such and such particulars provoked God, and caused him to hide
his Face; as when David fell so ^oully, his Conscience might warrantably
withdraw, and its like did withdraw its comfortable Testimony concerning his
good state before God* and though Conscience here be in its duty, in
withholding its Testimony from the Believer, while he is in such a Case, yet as
it does withhold it, and so deprives him of the comfort resulting therefrom, it
may, in so far, be called an evil Conscience to him; though it be not in it
self, and sinfully so.

2dly. The Conscience may also challenge a Believer, for some things without
ground or unwarrantably; which we may see beside others, in these Three. 1.
Conscience may charge a Believer with being an Hypocrite, even as to his State,
when he is, it may be, much overcome with the power of unbelief, and has the
evidence of his sincerity much darkened, and sees many things very contrary
thereto, that may seem to speak his being out of Christ, when yet indeed ^e is
in him: The many sad plunges and difficulties that Believers have fallen into'
wherein they have been pu^ to think so hardly of themselves (and not against
the p^esent light of their own Conscience neither) prove that Conscience may
speak so and so hardly to them concerning their u^sound and Hypocritical State,
and yet without ground; especially, when it holds not at the Negation, or
Suspension of its comfortable Testimony, concerning their gracious State, but
positively asse^eth the Believers being in black nature still, and ^o in an
evil Sta^e. 2d^y. Conscience may challenge for that which is not Sin, and so
for that which it has no ground to challenge for* as we may see, 1 Cor. 8.
verse. 7. Compared with the penult verse. In the 7. verse. The Apostle says,
There is not in every man a like knowledge* for some with conscience of the
idol eat it, as a thing offered to an idol, and their conscience being weak is
defiled; And verse. 12. He says. That their conscience being weak, is wounded;
Their light being weak, and supposing such a thing to be wrong, when it was not
so, they were challenged by their Co^cience without just ground: Thus it is
very ordinarily for young beginners in Religion to be peirced, and wounded with
challenges for many things, that these who are more strong, and fully grou^,
will not at all be ^roubled for, neither have ground to be troubled for; as
these who could eat every ^ort of meat, asking no question for Conscience sake.
3dly. Conscience may challenge for a sin that has been pardoned, as if it were
not pardoned; yea* it may challenge for a sin, the pardon whereof has been
intimated; as we may see in David and Job, who were pardoned, and yet under
their affliction, the sins of their youth did stare them in the face; and the
Conscience will readily challenge for old iniquities* though pardoned, either
when Believers break out into some new Act of gross Si^* as we see in David's
Case; or when they are under some extraordinary, and very sadly
circumstantiated dispensation of Providence, sorely assaulted by tentation, and
unbelief, crying loud, as it were, all is wrong there, as it was in a measure
with holy Job.

3dly. We said, That some things may be taken for the Language of Conscience,
which are not; or we may mistake Conscience, and think that it speaks so and
so, and does challenge, when it does not speak so, nor challenge; which may be
the reason of men's supposing the Conscience to be good, when it is not, or
contrarly; and this comes to pass, especially, in two Cases. 1. When our
Inc^nation is thwarted, or our humor is (to speak ^o) grieved, in which Case,
Melancholy, or Discontent, or some other Grief, are readily taken to be
Conscience; As we may see in Achab, when he got not the Vineyard of Naboth, he
laid himself down on his Bed, and would eat no Bread, but it was not from any
challenge of his Conscience, but because his Inclination, and Humor was
crossed; some degrees of which may be found with Believers. 2ly. When
Conscience speaks, only as to somewhat in part, or only concerning such or
such a particular, and we draw a Conclusion much broader, then that which
Conscience does speak, will bear; As when it says to the Believer, in this or
this particular thou art not right; and he hence conclud^, that he is right in
nothing; and very ordinarily it is thus with Believers that are not so clear,
distinct, and strong in their Knowledge and Faith; When Conscience says, that
such or such a thing is wrong, they are ready to conclude that all things are
wrong, and nothing right, because one thing is wrong; So when Conscience
points forth such an end, not only to be lawful, but even laudable, we may be
ready to think, that it allowe^h also of all, or most midses, without
discrimination, that lead to the attaining of the end.

Now 2ly. To answer to the Objection more directly, and so to show how this is
not in consistent, neither with the Doctrine, nor with the Use; We say then. 1.
That it is neither of these two last sorts of things we spoke of, that is
meant, when we say that an endeavor to keep a good Conscience in all things,
is a mark of sincerity; for we speak of a Conscience that mistaketh not, and of
a Person that does not mistake his Conscience; And therefore though Conscience
prejudge a man of the comfortable application of this Mark, yet it cease not
for that to be a Mark. 2ly. When we speak of it as a Mark of Sincerity, we mean
not so much of a persons actual attainment, as of his sincere endeavor; when
he dispenses not with himself, in any sin, nor in the ommission of any known
duty, but is aiming honestly in every thing, to approve himself to God, as it
is, Heb. 13. 18. We trust (says the Apostle) we have a good conscience in all
things, willing to live honestly; The Testimony is founded more on the sincere
aim and endeavor, then what is actually attained. 3ly* In the Doctrine, we
said, A Believer in a good frame, will so aim to live as he may have a good
Conscience in all things, and the Objection supposes only, that when he is not
in a good frame, he cannot have a good Conscience; and that we grant; for he
may indeed* by his carnal frame and walk, spoil and rob himself of the
comfortable application of this Mark, and so there is no inconsistencie here.
4ly. This stands firmly as a truth, that though a Believer had many other
Marks, yet they cannot bear him comfortably through, if he want this sincere
endeavor to keep a good Conscience; And it is so very necessary to a Christian
walk, that a Believer dare not conclude his sincerity, when he (contrary to his
light) dispenses with himself in the commission of any known sin, or in the
ommission of any known duty.

The 3d. Use is of Reproof and Conviction; If so be Christians ought ^o to
walk, and when they are tender, will so walk, as in nothing they may offend
their Conscience; then there is a clear ground here to reprove them, who
profess themselves to be Christians and Believers, and yet aim not at this, to
keep a good Conscience, yea, who, in a manner cut out the ears, shut the eyes,
and stop the mouth of their Conscience; Is this Christianlike think ye? Happy
were they, if Conscience had not an ear to hear, a tongue to speak, nor an eye
to see, who live so, as if they cared not what Conscience has to say to them:
if men should in all things walk according to Conscience; then the most part
fall under the discovery of their Rottenness, that never so much as honestly
aim to keep a good Conscience, though generally few will deny it; but it will
be readily said here, who are these that will sin against their Conscience?
Therefore we shall speak a word to these two, 1. Can it be that men will ^in
against their Consciences 2ly. How comes it to pass that men sin against their
Conscience?

For the 1. Needs it proof, That men will sin against Conscience, and be
careless to keep a good Conscience? 1. I would pose, put you to it, and ask
you, whither is there sin in you or not? And if sin be in you, then sure
Conscience is offended. 2dly. I would ask you, Is there not sin against Light?
Did ye never that which ye knew to be sin? Do you not know Fornication,
Drunkenness, Tippling, Lying, Swearing, Vanity of thoughts, Id^e words, Neglect
of Prayer, want of Seriousness in it, etc. to be sins? And do you not often go
about duty, knowing your selves to be under the guilt of these Sins. 3dly. I
would ask, Sin ye never against Convictions of your Conscience? According to
that word, Romans 1. ult. Who knowing the judgment of God, that they who commit
such things are worthy of death yet not only do the same, but have pleasure in
them that do them. Will any of you dare to say, but that you have been
convinced, that Drunkenness, and Tippling, or the like, was a Sin? and yet ye
have gone on in it. over that Conviction. 4ly. Have you not been challenged for
sin? And yet ye have gone over the belly of these challenges of Conscience,
even when it has been presently stinging for such a sin: And on the contrary*
when Conscience has been putting at you, and poussing you to such and such a
duty, and saying, It is no time now to put it off, and shift it, yet, have not
these suggestions and challenges been slighted, and these poussings to duty,
smothered, and the Spirit grieved? 5thly. Have there been no engadgements
sometimes come under, to abstain from such and such a sin, and to perform such
and such duties? And have not all these engadgements been broken? Even merely
natural men have come this length, as to come under such engadgements, who yet
have flidden back from them, and violated them grossly. 6ly. Have ye not had
your own kind of spiritual exercises? Your outcryings under the sense of sin,
and apprehensions of wrath in fits of sickness, or under hard and heavy
Crosses; and yet notwithstanding, have you not continued in the same sins? And
if all these be clear, can ye deny that ye have sinned against Conscience? Or
dare ye say, that ye have endeavored to keep a good Conscience, in all things?
I grant that people fa^l into sin diverse ways; some fall out of infirmity, and
through the force and violence of temptation, and a great speat, and
high-springtide (as it were) of corruption, giving them no leave to advise; as
it was with Peter: Others sin presumptuously, as these did, who are spoken of,
1 Timothy 1. 19. Who put, or thrust away a good conscience, and erred concerning
the faith, and made shipwreck of them: They sin with presumption, and with an
high hand, and their falling into sin is not rashly, but deliberatly, and
designedly, with the full bencil and inclination of their will, whither their
Consciences be silent, or speak to them; they have such and such a sinful
design, and they will needs follow it over the belly of all Convictions; and
will not quite their old courses, but with the dog, do return to the vomit:
Now, if this be a just, and wellgrounded Reproof, what will the condition of
most part of men and women be found to be, when brought to evidence their
Sincerity by this Mark, even an honest aim, and serious endeavor to keep a
good Conscience? And if this be a good and desirable thing, as indeed it is*
and as few or none of you will deny it to be; why do you thus put off, linger
and delay to come at it? If ye should incline it, how can ye shift this
Conviction? Conscience may be silent for a time, but it will speak, and speak
loud, when Sickness and the Cross comes; As we see it did in Joseph's Brethren;
in such a case, many of you will find that Conscience has been much slighted;
O! when Death shall come and stair you in the face, what a terrible thing will
a guilty Conscience be found then to be? The terror of mad Dogs, of wild Boars,
of felrce Lions, and Tigers, will not be so terrible as an evil Conscience will
be, when awakened, and having death at it is back; Nay, suppose that Conscience
should not be awakened while ye are alive, and in this world, but that ye
should slip, and sleep away like Lambs, Having no bands in your death, and that
ye should die applauded of all men; yet what will ye do with your Conscience?
or how will ye stand before it, when ye shall be sisted before Gods Tribunal,
and when the Books shall be laid open? Are there not many now in hell, who, if
we could hear their language, would very readily bid us, beware to thwart with
our Conscience, and to make it our enemy? Woe to them that take an evil
Conscience with them to their Grave, it will be a worm that will gnaw
eternally, and an inward poison and Venom Stinging, Burning and inflaming the
very bowels (as it were) and all that is within the man, beyond what is here
conceivable. We would therefore earnestly beseech, and obtest you soberly to
think on it; for there are many of you whom this Challenge, and Reproof will
reach; And if we should say otherwise to you, who never had it for your aim, to
keep a good Conscience, and who were never exercised to, nor seriously taken up
with Religion, we would but cheat and beguile you: Is it possible that ye can
thwart with the Law of God, and not also thwart with your own Conscience? or
can you thwart with your Light, and your Conscience be still silent? Or shall
the having and keeping of a good Conscience be ane exercise to Paul? And do you
think to come so easily, and without all labor to it? These, and other such,
are palpable evidences of an ill Conscience; It is not sure a good Conscience
that yields you peace and quietness in such a Case, but it is your deep
security, and your being regardless of wh^ Conscience says, that lull and
rock you a sleep.

For the 2d. How comes this to pass, or how can it be that men and women thus
thwart with their Conscience? Answer. 1. It needs not at all to seem strange,
seeing God and his Word are thwarted with; will they think we stand in awe of
Conscience, who stand not in awe of God, and who do not lay weight on his Word,
to regulate their Conscience by it? This is the great ground of peoples
thwarting with their Conscience, and of their regardlesness of it, even their
not standing in awe of God. 2dly. The most part never consider their obligation
to Conscience, nor what is the consequence of thwarting with, or of going cross
to their Conscience; therefore it is, that they care not what Conscience
says; is there any considerable number of persons, who think that thwarting
their Conscience, is such a terrible thing, at it is indeed, and as one day it
will be found to be? Many had rather have a very little money in their hand,
then the Testimony of their Conscience; and this regardlesness arises from the
ignorance of it, and of what great concernment it is. 3ly. Men, even by
accustoming, and habituating themselves to thwart with their Conscience in
lesser things, do, by little and little stupify, and in a manner, put out the
life of their Conscience, and ^s the Apostle has the word, They cauterize, or
sear it as it were with a hot iron: Hence it is, that when some truly tender
Christians are troubled with, and have for the matter of their exercise, any
little things, or things that have in them but the least appearance of evil,
others will be ready to pray to be saved from such madness and folly, because
they were never accustomed to, nor acquainted with any challenge, or exercise
of that kind, but have taught themselves a way of steping over their
Conscience; and this provocketh God to give them up to a reprobate mind, to do
things which are not convenient* They harden themselves by resisting the
Challenges of the Word, and Rod of God, and of their own Conscience; and are
judicially hardened, so that either Conscience says nothing at all to them, or
they do not at all value what it says; Thence, and therefore it is, that the
prophanest have most ordinarily fewest challenges, and these few that they
have, they trample on them; and stiffle them, as but un-regardable, and
trifling things; Whereas the most tender Conscience has readily manyest
challenges: Though I deny not but that sometimes challenges will bear in
themselves irresistibly on the profanest of men, but they are to such very
un-welcomeguests, and they endeavor quickly to smother them, or to drive them
out again. 4ly. Many bias their own Conscience, and teach themselves shifts*
not so much to satisfy their Conscience, as how to answer it, and to stop the
mouth of it, and to please their own humor; if they can give a reason for such
and such a thing (such as it is) to their Conscience, they think they do very
well; Thus deceiving themselves, and being deceived; for a deceived heart has
led them aside: Hence it comes to pass, that in some things men take as much
pains to bias their Conscience, and to have it saying as they say, as one man
would take on another to satisfy him and to bring him over to be of his mind
in any matter: Hence also is the debating, and struggling exercise that some
will have within themselves, before they can be brought to an ingenuous
confession of that they are guilty of. 5ly. People seek to please their
Conscience, when they cannot bias it; and when Conscience challenges, they
will make amends; As (it may be) they will pray when they are going to commit
such or such a Sin; as some profane men will do, when they are going to fight a
Combat or Duel; this is to bribe the Conscience: Thus many Papists, when they
have done an evil turn, will give so much to the poor, or dot so much to some
pious work, or use, as they judge to be a sort of recompense; what else is this
but to bribe Conscience in one thing, to hold it is tongue in another thing? so
some though they tiple all the day, think they do well, if they have been a
while in the Church, and will seek to stop the mouth of their Conscience with
that at night; for they could not at all keep quarter (to speak so) with their
Conscience, if they had not some form of Religion; And therefore they will (to
speak so) be brave Religious men in some things, that they may get a
Dispensation to themselves in other things. But none of these will be found
Law-byding, when God comes to reckon. 6ly. People in a sort bargain with their
Conscience, like these spoken of, Isa. 28. 15. They make a Covenant with death,
and are at agreement with hell; and (like Naaman, if that was indeed his
meaning) they will yield Conscience such or such a thing, but no more; They
must have a Dispensation in, and a liberty of making Reservations, and
Exceptions, of some one or more things; Though this may not always be done
distinctly, formaly, and explicitly; yet it is so on the matter, implicitly and
interpretatively; But that Covenant with death however made, directly or
indirectly, shall be broken, and that agreement with hell shall not stand, and
the hail of Gods wrath will sweep away the refuge of lies; and Conscience will
speak at last, but not with, or under such covers of figleaves, that men now
wrap themselves in: Therefore I beseech you dally not with Conscience, for it is
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of it, when it is wakened, as it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, who acts in, and by
that Conscience.

The 4th. and last Use, Is an Use of Exhortation; seeing it is the duty of all
men, and more especially of Believers to walk so, as in nothing they offend
their Conscience; we exhort you in the name of the Lord, that ye would order
your Conversation so, as in nothing your Conscience may have a challenge
against you; ye will all readily think that this is very reasonable; and
indeed, if we prevail not in this, wherein can we expect to prevail with you?
We seek no more of you, but that ye would so walk as that living and dying,
your Conscience may not flee in your face, but may give you this Testimony,
that ye have aimed to keep a good conscience in all things, and to live
^onestly: Ye may possibly think that this is a fair general, and that he is a
very gross and profane man that will deny it; and yet we would think that many
of you were come a great length in Religion, if we could prevail with you but
this far, as that in all things, living and dying, (as we said) ye might study
to have a good Conscience: And this being no contraverted, nor debeatable
thing, we may with the more confidence press it upon you, especially, seeing it
is the very Soul and Life of Religion, and where that is not* there is nothing
of truth in Religion.

That this exhortation may be the more clear and cogent, we shall speak a word
to these Three 1. To what this is to keep a good Conscience in your walk. 2. To
some motives to stir you up to it. 3. To some helps to it.

For the 1. It includes these Four, which should go along in your walk; 1.
That ye commit no known Sin, for there will be no good Conscience, if that be
adventured on; Ye who know that ye should not take liberty in drinking drunk,
in swearing, in profane or idle speaking: etc. Walk so as ye may not thwart
your Knowledge. 2ly. It takes in this, That as ye would commit no known Sin,
so ye would ommit no known duty; because, though every sin does wrong the
Conscience, yet the sin that we know, and yet commit, and the duty that we
know, and yet omit, does more directly strick against Conscience; ye who know
that the Sabbath should be kept holy, that ye should pray in secret, and in
your families, that ye should not offend one another, etc. Beware of hazarding
on these contrary to your light. 3ly. It takes in, and supposes, that ye do
nothing doubtingly; for Romans 14. He that doubts, and does is damned; he is
sentenced, and judged as to that particular. 4ly. It includes this, to
endeavor to be right in the manner o^ performing all duties, and to have a
single end; It is not enough to pray, or to be in the practice of any other
commanded duty, that will not quiet the Conscience, if ye study not to be right
in the manner, and to do it for the right end; The want of these requisite
qualifications of acceptable Duties, will make such things as are lawful on the
matter, turn to be grounds of challenge from the Conscience: But somewhat to
this purpose has been spoke of before, therefore it has now been but touched.

2dly. For Motives, 1. There is nothing that is a more clear duty; It is
written in the hearts of all by nature, Heathens have it engraven on their
hearts, as we see, Romans 2. 15. Their conscience bears them witness, and their
thoughts excuse or accuse one another; and they have called it a brazen wall to
have a good Conscience, as to a sound walk in their moral sense. 2dly. there
are many and great advantages attending it, As namely, 1. It gives a man much
boldness in approaching to God. 1 John 3. 20. If our hearts condemn us not,
then have we boldness toward God, when we go to pray. 2. It gives ground also
to expect ane hearing, 1 John 3. 22. Whatsoever we ask we receive of him,
because we keep his commandments, and do these things that are pleasing in his
sight; and cross not our light and Conscience in neglecting any of them. 3ly.
It keeps a man from much sin; and is that, think ye, little advantage to have
little (comparatively at least) on a man's score to reckon for? 4thly. It makes
a man's life cheerful, so Prove. 15. 15. He that is of a merry heart has a
continual feast; Which is nothing else, but a heart cheerful in God from the
testimony of a good Conscience. And this is it on the matter, which guardeth
the the heart and mind, so that no cares can considerably disquiet it, as we
have it, Phil. 4. 7. The heart is guarded, yea, garisoned (as the word is) with
peace, that there is no storming, nor intaking of it by outward troubles: It is
the joy that strangers inter meddle not with. 5thly. It is a sweet and strong
cordial in affliction, when Christians are persecuted by Strangers, or by false
Brethren, are in Sickness, in Prison, in Perrils by Sea or Land, etc. This is
our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, says the Apostle 2 Cor. 1.
12. in the midst of afflictions* 6thly. And more particularly. It is a sweet
and sovereign Cordial when death approaches, Hezekiah can say then, Remember,
Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart; It
puts the Soul in a posture of dying, somewhat like old Simeon, and gives
some ground to say with him, Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation. The Necessity of it will yet further appear,
if on the other side, we look to the disadvantages that wait the want of it,
though men could be content to live a heartless life, to hazard on sin, to
neglect Prayer, and other duties; yet they would consider the terror that
follows ane evil Conscience, and how it breeds and breweth a hell within
their own Bosom: There is then a necessity, an absolute necessity of a good
Conscience, that quarrels be not, and abide not betwixt God and us for ever.

3ly. For some Helps or Directions to keep a good Conscience (and we wish we
were all in a posture and frame of Soul to meet with, to receive, and make
suitable Use of them) 1. Endeavor to have light and clearness in the matters
of God, and what concerns your own good; Let every one be fully persuaded in
his own mind, as it is, Romans 14. 5. It is not possible, that ye who are
grossly, or very ignorant, can keep a good Conscience; ye know not when ye
sin, nor when ye do duty aright; yea, although ye may do duties, or things good
on the matter, the want of knowledge, makes you want the Testimony of that
good. Alace! that many wise and rich men, that can speak well of the things of
this world* should be quite ignorant of the things of God* and many of you
would think shame of it, if we would point you out. 2ly. Advert and take heed
to what Conscience says; The truth is, most men, take heed to what may
further their designs in externalls, to what their wit and reason carveth out
to them, and to what their own light thinks, or (as it were) overly says is
right, and presently step to it, and never ask what science well informed from
the word says; This makes many men say, and do in their haste, that which
they repent of afterward: Therefore ye should learn to put Conscience to speak,
consult not with your designs, nor with your wit and reason only* nor mainly,
but retire, and consult seriously with your Conscience, Commune with your
heart, and be still, stand in awe and sin not* as it is, Psalm. 4. 4. Consult
not with Flesh and Blood, let not their advice come in betwixt God and you, and
finally determine you; but reason with your selves, think, this and this our
inclination says, and this and this our overly light says; but we will put
Conscience to it, and hear what it says; and yet it is but an inferior Rule,
and therefore we should not take every thing from Conscience without ground,
but hear what the Superior Rule of Gods Word says; And this is a right
circle wherein ye should turn your selves, even to try your Light by bringing
it to Conscience, and then to try your Conscience by putting it to give a
reason from the Word. 3ly. Be exceedingly aware to thwart with your Light in
the least thing, and abstain from every thing that seems to come in tops with
it; For Conscience is a very tender thing, if we stand not in awe of
Conscience, we may provoke God to give us up to do what we will, and to send
us, Like lambs to feed in a large place; Therefore I say again, beware of
thwarting in the least thing with your Light, and your Conscience. 4ly. As ye
would hear what Conscience says, before ye do any thing; so when ye have done
it, ye should consider how ye carried in it, according to your Light, and
whether ye have had a good Conscience in such a thing, both as to the matter,
and the manner, and put your Conscience to speak to that, and hear what it
says concerning what is done. There would be in this much singleness; for if
the eye be evil, it will make the who^e body full of darkness; Hence Paul
puts a good Conscience, and Sincerity together, 2 Cor. 1. 12. If we should
speak never so many good words, and do never so many good things on the matter,
if we be not singly minding Gods honor in them, they will not be acceptable:
The want of Sincerity will be as the dead ^ie, in many a man's pot of Ointment,
of called for duties; that will make it cast forth ane evil and stinking smell,
the savor of a good Conscience will sure be wanting where singleness is not,
or where Conscience is made subordinate to our carnal Interests; Many may have
a resolution to do such and Duties, who yet make these to keep level with
carnal designs* and interests; It Is impossible, when men come not as new born
babes to drink in the sincere milk of the Word* that they can profit, let be
grow thereby. 6ly. Be frequent and serious in making humble and believing
applications to the Blood of Christ, to the Blood of sprinkling, that thereby
your Consciences may be sprinkled and purged from dead works: for the great
ground of your p^ace is not your seriousness and sincerity, but his
satisfaction; many of our works and duties, alace! want life, and if they be
not sprinkled with the virtue of his Blood, they will be but as so many dead
weights on the Conscience; and indeed there can be no truly good Conscience,
whatever else be, if this be neglected: Let then these that would be at a good
Conscience make use of these* directions and helps, and they shall doubtless
come the better speed: Now* we are sure that this is the Truth of God, to wit,
That we shoold endeavor to have, and to keep a good Conscience in all things,
and always toward God and men* which a very Heathen, were he present with us
would not contradict; and it is very useful for you; though it may be, some
profane wretches will be ready to say, What needs all this niceness? And as
it is a Truth, and a most concerning Truth, so nothing will make your life more
truly cheerful and comfortable; And if it be neglected, or slighted, all your
Knowledge, all your Disputs about Religion, all your Tastings of the good Word
of God, all your Prayers, or what else ye can name, will be to no purpose; And
seeing it is so very important, and concerning a Truth; we leave it on you
before God, and put it home to your Conscience, to make it your exercise to
have always a good Conscience void of offense toward God and toward men. We
mind not to come back again on this Text, nor to touch on the rest of the
Doctrines at first proposed from it, what we have said being principally, if
not only, designed; and most, if not all the other Doctrines being one way or
other reached in the Prosecution of these that we have at length spoken to: The
Lord graciously bless what ye have heard.

SERMON I.
1 PETER 3. 21. (Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer
of a good Conscience toward God.)
COnscience is in it self a most excellent Gift of GOD, given to Men, having an
excellent nature, being waited with many Rare and choice Uses, and Advantages
throughout their whole Life; and when it is rightly used, it is one of the
special Friends that men can have on earth, and one of the great things that
this Gospel, and the preaching of it aims at; even to direct and help them
how to come at a good Conscience, and how to keep a good correspondence with
their Conscience, so as they may be comfortablie assured, that they indeed have
this good thing* which is called a good Conscience; Yet when Conscience is
abused, or not made right use of, it turns to be one of the greatest
unfriends and enemies that men have in this World, nay in that World which is
to come.

Having spoken somewhat to this before, and in the last Observation that we
drew from the former Text, which was, that men ought to walk so, as not to
offend their Conscience in any thing; we shall now speak somewhat to one
Direction and help that is greatly, if not mainly contributive and useful in
order to the attaining of that notable end; which is this, That men who aim to
walk answerably to that Rule, so as in nothing they offend their Conscience,
had need to observe carefully the language of Conscience.

It is not our purpose to stay on the particular consideration of the scope of
this Scripture, nor so much as to name, let be to prosecute all the points of
Doctrine that may be drawn from it, but only to discourse a little from the
Words enclosed, and shut up within a Parenthesis, as they relate to our end and
design.

First, then in a word, The Apostle is here putting a difference betwixt
external service, and the internal power and efficacy of the work of the Spirit
of God on the Conscience; And when he is speaking of Baptism, he gives this
Caveat and Advertisement, That it is not the washing of water in that
Ordinance, that reaches the great end of it, But the answer of a good
Conscience. 2ly. He shows that the differencing, and March-ridding Character
of the one from the other is, in what answer the Conscience gives concerning
the thing that the man is about; and declares that it is not simply a good
Conscience, but the answer of a good Conscience that gives ground of Hope, and
boldness of Confidence to obtain the Promise.

From the Words these Three Observations arise clearly, First, That there is a
faculty in Conscience, that is able to give ^ne answer to a man concerning his
spiritual state and condition, and concerning his Actions; So that if the
question about these, or any of them be put to the Conscience* It can return
answer, and signify it is sense, and give it is verdict concerning that which it
is questioned about; The answer of the Conscience implies so much. 2ly. That
the answer of the Conscience is different and distinct from the outward answer
of the mouth or profession; for a man's mouth and profession, and the external
ingadgement that he comes under in Baptism, or any other Ordinance or Duty,
may say one thing, or give one answer, when the Conscience may say another
thing, or give another answer concerning the man's sincerity in the thing. 3ly.
That the answer of a good Conscience, That is, ane answer from the Conscience
on good grounds testifying a man's sincerity, is a most excellent and
comfortable thing.

It is the First of these, that we intend to speak a word to at this time, viz.
That there is a way of getting an answer from the Conscience, and of
understanding it is mind about any thing that men shall put to it: Or thus,
Conscience has a way of making known it is mind, and giving an answer about any
thing that is put unto it: These words Answer of Conscience, implies so much
(as we said) especially being distinguished from the external service, and
administration of Baptism spoken of in the words before; And it is yet more
clear, if we consider how the scop runs in comparing of these two together,
viz. The verbal restipulation of these that are come to age, and the inward
answer of Conscience; There is the Gospel on the one side requiring such a
thing, and the answer of the Party Baptized on the other side; and the Apostle
makes the answer of the Conscience distinct from that, though sometimes it
goes along with it; so that a man will not answer more clearly to the thing
then his Conscience will, when it is seriously put to it.

This might be branched out in these Three, 1. In respect of a man's state. 2.
In respect of some truth of Religion, and of the hearts embracing of it, 3. In
respect of some practice or duty that a man is called to: all these do fall
under the answer of Conscience, when it is questioned about them; but it is the
last of them that we intend to speak to, viz. it is answer as relating to a
Christians duty and practice, about which Conscience being asked or posed, is
able to give him an answer; which I shall clear from Two Grounds, and then come
to the Use.

The 1. Ground is taken from the Nature of Conscience, which we some way
explained, when we began to speak of this subject; Conscience being deputed of
God, in man to take strick notice of every piece of his walk and practice, and
being the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly, to
let men see what God calls to, and to put them in mind their duty: This (I
say) being the office of Conscience, and the end why God has placed it in men,
it is no doubt furnished with such a faculty (if we may speak so) as to be
able to give an answer concerning what it is queried about.

More particularly it has a threefold power in reference to a man's way; and
thus it represents God in Three of his Attributs. 1. It has a power of
counselling, advising and carving out of a man's duty; So that when he doubts
what is to be done, Conscience has a power to advise him, and give him an
answer; And this is called the dictating of the Conscience, answerable to the
Sovereign authority of God, whereby he commands all his creatures; to whom
Conscience is subordinat; in which respect men are condemned for thwarting with
their Conscience, Romans 1. ult. Who knowing the judgment of God, that they that
commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure
in them that do them: Here is Conscience dictating to men, what they should do
before they do. 2ly. There is a Power, or something in the Conscience, that
goes along with a man's acting, or that waits on him in the time of his
acting in Duty; And this especially, is called the Testifying of Conscience, or
it is bearing witness, concerning the sincerity, or un-soundness of the Act; Not
on^y does the man's mouth speak, and his hands do, but the Conscience will give
answer, if the heart be going along with the man's speaking and doing, or not,
wherein it represents Gods Omniscience, or All-knowledge; Hence it is, That
Psalm. 27. 8. David says, when thou said, seek ye my face, my beart answered,
thy face will I seek* O Lord. And Psalm. 16. 2. O my soul thou have said unto
the Lord, thou art my Lord; This is the language of the sincerity of the heart
testifying by the Conscience; or Conscience answering the sincerity of the
heart. 3ly. There is a Power in the answer of the Conscience, which is
subsequent unto, and follows upon the Action when done, either approving, or
disapproving, either accussing, or excusing, either absolving, or condemning,
called the Recognoscing, or Examining of the Conscience; which is done, when
Conscience puts the man's deed or action when performed to the Trial, and
having tried it, passes Sentence on it; Thus Conscience represents God as
Judge, and as a just Judge: Now all these Three being in the Conscience, viz. a
power of Counselling, Commanding, and Dictating to a man what he should do, a
Power bearing Testimony concerning the manner of his doing, and a power of
Recognoscing, and Examining after he has done: It tells us plainly that
there is such a thing as Conscience declaring it is mind, and giving an answer
to men concerning their duty, in what it is put to give an answer about; else
they could not know it is mind. The 2d. Ground is taken from the clear and
manifest effects of Conscience, it is testifying or answering; What, I pray,
makes a restlesness in the bosom of people? but Conscience its Challenging or
Reproving; what causes tranquillity and peace within, when Reproaches and
Revilings are without? but Conscience bearing witness to the man of his
innocence in, and his being free of these things wherewith he is charged; And
what is it that l^yeth on a restraint, and bond as it were on the man's Spirit
(as Paul says of himself, Acts 20* 22. I go hound in the spirit to
Jerusalem,) but the Conscience? It is not only the weight that flows from the
word of God, but also the weight that flows immediately from the Conscience
joying with, and backing the Word; Now if the Conscience had not a direct, and
distinct language, or answer to give to men about their actions, there could be
no such effects following it.

The Uses are Two, The 1. for Direction. The 2. for reproof; The Use for
Direction, is, That seeing there is such a thing as the answer of the
Conscience, whereby it makes known it is mind, when it is asked concerning our
way, we ought, if we believe that we have Consciences to put them to answer,
and to observe what they say, and what answer they return; If Conscience has a
Language (I say again) let us put it to speak out, and let us be very ready,
and attentive to hear what it speaks.

To clear this a little, We would consider that there are Two things in a
Christian walk, in reference to this correspondencie which a man should keep
with his Conscience, The 1. (which is universal and irresistible) is, when the
Conscience asks men, or puts questions to them, such as, Why did you this
or that? Why did you leave this or that undone? As it is 1 Cor. 10. 25. Asking
no question for conscience sake. That is, asking no question for answering of
these questions which Conscience will ask. The 2d. is, When men ask questions
at their Conscience, to prevent it is questioning of them; as indeed we should
be taking pains before hand to know, and take up the language of our Conscience
concerning our practice in this, and that, and the other particular that it may
have no just ground of Challenge against us.

I shall instance this in Three things, and hold at the First for the time* 1.
We should observe the language of Conscience before we put our hand to any
Duty. 2ly. We should observe the language of Conscience in the interim, or in
the very time of our going about Duty. 3ly. We should observe the language of
Conscience concerning Duty, when we have done and gone through with it: In
which my meaning is not, 1. That we should in clear and necessary Duties start,
or put questions; but that in things indifferent, in their own nature, and in
such Duties as are necessary, and do semper, or ever oblidge, though not ad
semper, or in all differences of time, but only hic and nunc now and then, to
wit, at due and seasonable times; or as to the right timing of these necessary
Duties, (for every thing is beautiful in the season thereof) Wherein a great
part of our work along our whole life lies, the answer of our Conscience
should be observed: For though many conditions, stations and actions be lawful,
yet Conscience decideth, whether I be called to such and such a station and
condition of life, and whether such a thing be a Duty to me at such a time, and
how it ought to be gone about, as to the manner. Neither. 2dly* Do I mean, that
we should, in these things expect any extraordinary thing, or somewhat more
then an ordinary impulse of Conscience, laying on a sort of constraint or
necessity on us, in an immediate way, which would be dangerous; But my meaning
is shortly this, that there is a possibility in Gods ordinary way to know, what
Conscience says, to them that will observe the answer of it, both before, in,
and after Duty, and that we should aim, and endeavor to understand and take up
that.

For further clearing of this Use, we shall speak a little to some Five or Six
Questions: As namely, 1. What this answer of Conscience is? 2dly: How the
Conscience gives it is answer? 3dly. What is called for from men, to find out
this answer? 4ly. How this answer of Conscience may be discerned? 5ly. If this
answer of Conscience be discernible at all times? 6ly. What is to be done in
such cases, wherein the answer of Conscience is not so clear as men would have
it?

For the 1. What this answer of Conscience is? I answer in short, That it is
distinct from a man's inclination, from his affections, and from his naked
Judgment or Light; There is something in a man's natural inclination, that is
ready to swey him to this or that, but that is not Conscience; There is also
something in a man's affections, as in that which he fears, or desires, and
loves, that may swey him; neither is that Conscience but often that which is
contrary to Conscience; There is likewise something in men's Light* from which
al^o Conscience differs; because an natural, and un-regenerat man, that
makes no Conscience of his ways, may, notwithstanding have a light in his
Judgment, by which he is put to come to Church, an^ possibly to pray, and do
other Duties; and yet it may be from no answer, or dictat of Conscience, that
he does these Duties: We conceive therefore that this answer of Conscience, is
something different from, and beyond either Inclination, Affection, or bare
Light; and that it is Light and Conscience going jointly together* or some
conclusion drawn from the Word (for we are speaking here of Conscience as it is
in people living in the Church, under the Ministry of the Word) that such a
thing is Duty, and Conscience thereupon putting on to it, or a conclusion drawn
from the Word, that such a thing is a ^in, and Conscience thereupon deterring
from it; Thus it differs from Light simply considered, in as far as it is a
Conclusion drawn from such grounds as the Judgment, or Light in the Judgment
lays down to, or before it; It is an answer that not only has Truth in it,
which may be from light; but its ane answer as having a truth in it that is
drawn from such a ground warranding such and such a practice; Conscience
looking on it, as Gods mind, for directing it in it is Duty, and on that account
putting on to it.

As to the 2d. Question, How the Conscience gives this Answer* or how it
makes it is sense and language of things known? In Answering to it we would be
sober, and not curious, no^ more particular then we have ground for; In short
then, we conceive that there are these 4. ways, how, and whereby Conscience
gives It Is answer* to let people know when it is pleased or displeased. 1.
When it binds and tyeth such or such a word, ^mporting such or such a Duty on
a man, that he can no way get himself rid of; nor it shaken off, as when he is
disputing and debateing within himself, whither such a thing should be done or
not done? Conscience answers on good ground, and either bids him abstain
or do; and has a pou^s with it, because the word of God commands, or
forbids it, and this is not only because there is a word for it, or against
it; but clear light drawing a conclusion from such a word, whereupon the
Conscience binds it on the man, so that it cannot be got shifted, nor shaken
off; For we know that men may know many Duties, and yet not do them; and upon
the other hand, that men may be stirred, or poussed on to do that which it is
not Gods mind they should do; so then it is the answer of Conscience, when the
Word, and the Conclusion of Conscience are connected, and joined together; so
as the one is the ground of the other, and flows from the other; and this is
the most special way how Conscience makes it is sense of things known; The Word
of God being the rule of Conscience. A 2d. way, is* by some secret discontent,
or restlesnesse in the Conscience, if a man do such a thing as is not Duty, or
if he do not such a thing that is pointed out to him to be Duty, either through
ignorance or inadvertancy; The Conscience then as it were, hunteth the man with
Challenges, disquieteth, and makes him restless till he practice such a Duty,
or abstain from such a sin; And this we find to have been often in the Saints
recorded in Scripture, they having had no rest till such a thing was done, and
such a thing abstained from; which flows from the nature of Conscience,
accusing, or breeding discontent, because of un-answerablenesse to the Rule.
3ly. Conscience has a way of signifying it is mind, by making some impression
of terror, to back and second more than ordinary convictions of, and
threatenings, and challenges for sin; When sin is committed, Conscience
convinces and challenges; when this does not the turn, upon the back thereof
comes the threatening, and some fits of terror; sometimes the threatening is
conditional, sometimes the peremptory certification is added; sometimes again
the impression of the threatening will be more sensible, sometimes more
insensible: When Conscience gives advice, and dictateth from the Word, it
makes use of the Commands; but in the sense we are now speaking of, it makes
use of the threatenings; As for instance, It Is said in the third Command; The
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain; Now for any
degree of this guilt, Conscience challenges, and when that is slighted,
thereupon Conscience goes on, and makes the threatening terrible; for
challenges bear in convictions of sin, and convictions represent the
threatenings as more terrible; and threatenings bear in the apprehensions of
wrath; and hence is the exercise of Conscience in some that wakneth, and
raises a terrible storm in it. A 4th. Way, How Conscience gives it is answer,
and makes it is mind known, is by an inconceivable inward calmness, peace,
serenity, and tranquillity in the Soul; So that when a man reflecteth on his
doing of such and such a thing, and comparing it with the Rule of the Word,
finds it agreeable to the same, all his terrors evanish, his mind is calmed,
and he finds much sweet Peace, Delight and Acquiesence in the thing; this is
nothing else, but Conscience giving it is answer: all which had great need to be
carefully compared with the Word of God, and that his mind therein be very
clear; because, as there may be much bastard peace on the one hand, so there
may be many groundless challenges on the other, which are not to be taken for
the language of Conscience.

As for the 3d: Question, What men are to do, that they may find out, and get a
clear answer from their Conscience? or what is called for from them, to find
out the answer of Conscience? We shall Answer this in these Three; 1. Something
is to be done before we put our selves to the search, or Conscience to give
it is answer* 2dly. Something must accompany this Duty. 3dly. Something is
called for after this Duty is done. 1. We are to do something before we put
Conscience to it to give it is answer. And 1. It is necessary, that men be well
informed of the Truth of the thing in general; for to come blindly to
Conscience is to tempt it, and make it a snare to our selves; Therefore (I say)
we should be well informed* to the end that Conscience may have ground to give
a clear answer; For our Conscience is like the Judge, and our understanding
like the Advocat, that makes the Cause known; And if all things pro and
contra, for, and against, be not proposed and discussed by the Advocat,
Conscience, which is the Judge cannot give a distinct answer or verdict; This
is the reason why many Consciences do err, because there is not pains taken to
inform them. 2ly. When the Judgment is informed, men should put the Conscience
to it to answer; They should not content themselves with this, that they have
filled their heads with so many Arguments for such a thing, but should let them
sink down to the Conscience, and study to know what Conscience thinks of
them; For Conscience (as we said before) is some way beyond bare Light;
therefore, when we have gotten Light in a thing; we should not hold there, but
take it aside, and communicate the matter to Conscience; As the Word is, Psalm.
4. 4. Commune with your heart upon your bed; There is a communing with others
in speaking with them, a communing with Books i^ perusing them, a communing
with our Inclinations and Affections, and taking notice what they would be at;
and a communing with our Light, if we be clear in the thing; But beside all
these, there should be a communing with the heart, or Conscience; which we
conceive is often neglected, and men often start, and strick in with things
without deliberation, thinking if they have Light for such a thing, that it is
enough for making such or such a thing to be Duty: It is true, ane Argument
from Light may induce to the thing, yet we are neglective, when we bring it not
to the Conscience. 3ly. Men should bring things impartially to the Conscience,
we should take heed that we we be not pre-occupled, or prejudged, lest we get
ane answer according to our Idol* as well as we should beware of byassing and
bribing Conscience: If the eye be single, the whole body will be full of light,
but if the eye be not single, darkness may be had from the Conscience in stead
of light: Not that in clear things, that are Duties at all times, we should be
sticking and mo^e questions, which was Balaam's fault; but in things
indifferent, or though lawful, yet not called for at all times, nor from us in
such a station or relation; when the question runs, whether the thing be
lawful to us or not? or if we be called to it at this time, we should be
single, and take ane answer from Conscience as God clears it. 4ly. We should
give attention, le^d to our ear, and take good heed what Conscience ^nclineth
to, and says, whither it inclines this way or that way: As when we ask a
Question at (...), we use to be silent till they answer, so should it be here;
And if Conscience seem not to speak, we should want on, and not be hasty;
especially, we should look well that we distinguish betwixt Inclination, the
Affections of Fear, Passion, and the like, and the answer of Conscience; Lest
we take the one for the other, we should both take heed that it be Conscience
that answers, and that we take up the meaning of Conscience, it is answer
aright: in order to which there should be a quieting, and hushing of all things
within the man, that there be nothing to disturb in taking up the mind of
Conscience, or that may prejudge Conscience in speaking, and giving it is
answer. 5ly When Conscience has spoken, we should put its answer to proof and
trial, and see if it be the answer of Conscience indeed; We should take the
answer of Conscience to the Rule of the Word, and see if it be agreeable to the
same; even as we should take our Light to Conscience, that Conscience may
testify of it, so when we have gotten ane answer from Conscience, we should
take it back to Light, and see how it agrees with the Word; for there is a
great correspondence betwixt these two, Conscience and Light, Conscience
serving to balance Light, and Light to confirm Conscience, which being Gods
Deputy, set up in man to speak his mind, ere we can follow ought as the
language of it, we should ask for his warrant; And if it produce no word for
the warrant of what it says, we should not take it for the answer of
Conscience, or at least it should be looked upon, as a mistaken answer; Hence
it is, that some when they get a little lightning after prayer, and do not put
it to the trial, and yet rest on it as ane answer of Conscience, are mistaken;
Yea, this is the reason why many of Gods People, who have some access and
liberty in their addresses to him, are mistaken; for it is not access to him,
nor liberty simply that warrandeth Conscience to speak, but the Word of God.

As for the 4th. Question, How this Language of Conscience may be discerned,
and distinguished, or differenced from men's Light, Inclinations and Affections,
of fear or desire, and liking to be at a thing; Which will stir and make
restless, as well as as the Impulse of Conscience? We Answer, 1. The answer
that Conscience gives is always from the Word, if it be right; and upon that
account, that the Word warrandeth it, it not only says, that such a thing is
agreeable to the Word, but presses to it, because agreeable thereto; As for
instance, to allude to that Word, (if not more) He that gives to a disciple a
cup of cold water, in the name of a disciple, shall not loss his reward; We may
give somewhat to a man that is a Disciple out of pity, or on some other
natural, or moral Considerations and Relations, and Light will direct to that,
and the natural Conscience may pousse to it; but to make it the answer of a
good Conscience, it requires a Re-duplication, that we give to him, as, or
because he is a Disciple, and member of Christ; so one may Pray, and come to
Church, and have an^ impulse to it, and yet not from a good Conscience, as
another does; because the one comes as in obedience to a commanded Duty, the
other not, but on some other account; The reason is, because Conscience
presses to obedience on that account; but Light, Inclination, and Affection,
press to obedience on another account, as from some selfish Motive, or
Consideration, supposing it to be a Duty. A 2d. way to discern it is answer, is
this, Light, Inclination, and Affection put to the thing in the general only,
but the answer of Conscience respects all the circumstances of the thing;
Conscience does not only say, go and Pray, but Pray in this manner, to wit,
with Faith, Love, Fear, Reverence and sincerity of Heart; The reason is,
because Conscience considers the Duty, as circumstantiated in the Word, and
therefore it is answer is no broader, nor narrower then the Word is; Whereas,
when a man is put to such a thing from Credit, Fear or Desire, his practice is
extended no further then to such an^ end; Credit, fear of Loss, or the like,
(if he have any regard to circumstances) Levelleth and Moduleth him in all the
circumstances of his acting; So as he may attain that which drives him on to
such a Duty; but when Conscience puts to Duty, that God may be obeyed, and
peace in Him enjoyed, it regulateth the man in all Circumstances of his Duty,
in order to that end; And this is the reason why some are so soon, and so well
satisfied with Duty, others are never thoroughly satisfied; because the one
goes about Duty for the fashion, to guard against, and hold off challenges, or
for some other sinister end, and so is still driven on from such a principle,
and for such ends: But the other goes about Duty, in obedience to God, and so
as he may have peace in him* and while any thing is wanting that may m^rr that,
he is disquieted. 3ly. We may discern it from the nature of the answer, and the
effects that it has on the (...), to whom the answer is given; Conscience
being Gods Deputy, and the most divine thing in man: Even The candle of the
Lord that searches into the (...) and inward parts of the belly, and when
acting it is part aright, the most excellent representer of God; if it be well
observed, answers. 1. In another manner, and with another kind of Authority
Boldness, and holy Statlinesse then bare Light, Affections or Passions do,
which, though they drive more violently, yet not with such divinness (to speak
so) nor with such majestic authority. And therefore, 2ly. When Conscience
answers, it some way silenceth lusts* and sinful passions, which confuse, and
(to speak so) put a person through other, so that there is not that serenity
and calmnesse, that there is in the Soul, when Conscience is asked at, and
clearly answers; The Light of Conscience well informed, being the Light of
God, is clear, and quieteth, though often it be not so sensible to us, as our
own Inclinations and Affections that agree better with us. 3ly. The answer of
Conscience has more influence on the man to humble and abase him, and to make
him vile in his own eyes, because it speaks Gods mind, it serves to exalt
God, and to advance the work of Mortification in himself; But where this is
not, and men are soon made frothy and conceity, by the answer which they get*
and the very first re^ of it, is to puff up, and make vain; It Is sure, at best,
but the answer of Light, and not the answer of Conscience, nor Gods speaking in
and by it. We shall proceed no further at this time; That which we aim at, by
all we have now said, is in a word this, to show, that as upon the one side, ye
should learn to give Conscience some Employment, and seeing it can give you an^
Answer, to put it to it; and not to bear about you such a noble Counselor and
Adviser, without making suitable use of it; so upon the other side, that ye may
learn to know when Conscience speaks, and what it speaks, and that ye may
give it obedience, when it speaks according to the Word: In a word, the right
use-making of Conscience is intermixed, and interweaved with the wholepractice
of Christianity And where it is rightly observed in one thing, there will be
ane honest aim to observe it in another, yea in every thing: And this may be
another difference, betwixt the answer of Conscience, and that o^ Light only,
or of any other thing; viz. That the supposed answer of Conscience, or of Light
in the Judgment, which is consistent with looseness, is never to be taken for
the true answer of Conscience; for* as we cannot keep communion with God, when
we are not walking in his way, so we have no warrant to expect keeping of good
correspondence with our Conscience, because the language of Conscience is Gods
language: Therefore it is the Duty of all to walk so, as they may keep a good
correspondence with their Conscience; And it is ane evidence of a sinful
incapacity to discern the language of Conscience; when there is not ane
constant endeavor to walk according to the strain of a good Conscience in
every thing.

SERMON II.
1 PETER 3. 21. (Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer
of a good conscience.)
AT a former occasion, we proposed this Doctrine from these Words, That the
Conscience which is in men has a way of signifying it is mind to them
concerning their actions, to let them know when it is satisfied, and when
dissatisfied, and to give them some sense of them, called, The answer of the
Conscience: The use of the Point was. That if it be so; Men and Women should,
in all their Carriage and Actions endeavor to know what sense Conscience has
of them; They should ask advice of Conscience, and take it is answer before they
Act, in the time of their Acting, and when they have done Acting.

In prosecuting of this use (which is the main thing aimed at) we proposed for
clearing it, 1. What this Answer is? Which is especially to be looked to, not
as determining simply what is right, and what is wrong, for that is done in the
Word; but that in things lawful and in those Duties* that (as was said) do not
oblidge ad semper, or in all differences of time, we are by the Answer of
Conscience to try our particular call to them, the right timing of them, and
the right manner of going about them.

2dly. What way Conscience makes it is mind known, and gives this Answer?
3dly. What way should be taken for finding out, and obtaining this Answer?
4thly. How it may be discerned to be the Answer of Conscience, and not our own
particular Inclination and Affection?

There are yet two Questions remaining, for further clearing of this use, to be
spoken to. 1. If even when men are desirous to know the Sense and Answer of
Concience, it may not be silent, and no distinct clearness attained to, whither
they be called (...) such a thing, or not, or how they are to go about it, or
how it should be timed? 2dly. If Conscience may sometimes be silent, or at
least not answer so clearly, what then is to be done in that case?

As for the 1. We shall Answer it in two Assertions, and then clear them.

The 1. Assertion is, That sometimes in Gods wise, holy, and sovereign
Providence, and in his secret, profound and mysterious way of ordering things,
it may so come to pass, that men may set themselves to enquire at Conscience,
and yet after inquiry not find, at least for a time, so clear an Answer, as to
warrant and direct them what hand to turn to.

The 2d. Assertion is, That sometimes Conscience may speak, and answer clearly
enough; and yet men from some one tentation, or sinful distemper or another
that they are under, and from negligence, and sinful inadvertancy, in taking
heed to the answer of Conscience, may think that it speaks not clearly, when
it does, and thus be le^t in the dark; So that Conscience is not always to be
blamed, as if it answered not, when we think so.

For clearing of the 1. of these, That Conscience may be silent, or not speak
so clearly, even when inquired at; we suppose it is clear, not only from the
experience of all generations, wherein Believers, (if put to speak) would
declare, that they have sometimes been very desirous of Light and Clearness
concerning their being called to this, or that Place, Station, or State and
Condition of Life; As also it may be, as to the way and time of performing some
called for Duties, and yet have not attained to clearness therein: This one
thing will both clear, and give the reason of it, viz. That Conscience being
Gods Deputy, whereby his mind is made known, cannot speak, when he keeps up
himself; And seeing he may, and will, now and then keep up himself for a time;
Conscience, during that time, may, and must be silent; because Conscience
cannot speak, but according to his order; And there being wise and holy Reasons
moving him (to speak so) to keep up his mind; and that he may, in some sense
and respect, deal with others, as it is said he dealt with Saul (whom, in a
great strait, he refused to give answer to, either by Dreams, or by Urim, or by
Prophets) so as not to give them clearness, by one means nor another; neither
from his Word, nor by their Conscience, as calling them to such or such a
particular thing; it is no marvel, that in such a case, men be in the dark, and
that Conscience keep it self silent. Yet 2dly. For clearing the Matter further,
ye would consider two sorts of Causes that this proceeds from, some whereof
are Culpable, and sinful on our part, procuring this as a just punishment of
some former sin, or of some present evil, and sinful frame: other some are
sovereign on Gods part, yet tending in his secret providence, to promote some
designs of good to the Person, of a Believer: as to these Causes that are
sinful, and culpable on our part, we shall instance them in four or five Cases.

As, 1. When there is a sinful Ignorance in the Persons, who desire to be clear
in such or such a particular; Through that their ignorance, they are not in
case, clearly* and distinctly, but rather very darkly, and confusedly, to
propose the matter to their Conscience, so that their Conscience cannot give
them a distinct answer: For Conscience is, (as I said before) as a Judge, and
our Light is as the Informer, and as a Judge cannot well decide in a matter,
when the Case is confusedly proposed to him, so no more can Conscience, when it
wants Light: And hence, oftentimes persons in whom there is some zeal, and
good affection, are left much in the dark, because (to speak so) they know not
the Laws and Practiques, on which Conscience proceeds; Therefore, Romans 14.
It Is said of some, that their Conscience was weak, because their Light was weak
and dim.

A second Case is, When men, in seeking the Answer of their Conscience, do
bound and limit it; They either do not fairly and fully propose the Case to
Conscience, or they come not to it with ane absolute submission* (supposing it
to be thoroughly informed by the Word) concerning the thing they would have
clearness in; and therefore they take the Answer in part, or but a part of the
Answer, and suppose the rest, or leave it to Conscience to be determined; as
when men first resolve to do such or such a thing, and leave only the timeing
of it to their Conscience; Here the Conscience may be limited, and made
indistinct in it is Answer, because it is prejudged and left free; It might
possibly have been somewhat, not al^gether unlike this that was in the rest of
the Tribes of Israel, their asking of God about the War against Benjamin,
Judges, 20. 18. Where they do not say at first, shall we go up, or shall we
for-bear? but first they say, who shall go up?

A third Case is, When Conscience is provoked by men's former miscarriages, then
it may be silent, and not answer: Now the Conscience may be provoked these ^wo
ways amongst others. 1. When People use not ordinarily to consult Conscience,
but at some particular, and solemn times only, and when they are brought to
some pinch, or put to a stand; but as for the ordinary course of their Life,
they follow Inclination, or a common Light, without advising with Conscience;
In that case, when such persons come to advise with Conscience, and to seek
clearness from it, about such a thing; the Lord may say to them, as he did to
his People, Judges, 10. 19. Go and cry to the gods whom ye have chosen, go
advise with them; or as Elisha said to the King of Israel, 2 Kings, 3. 3. What
have I to do with thee? get thee to the Prophets of thy father, and to the
Prophets of thy mother: Even so, if Conscience be passed by, and miskent by
People in the ordinary course of their life, it will readily misken and slight
them, when they are in a strait, and come to seek Counsel and Clearness from
it, and will, on the matter say to them, ye followed the counsel of flesh and
blood, in your ordinary walk, and course of life; therefore in this particular,
I will not answer you, go and seek Clearness from them whom ye use to consult.
2dly. Conscience is provoked, when me have formerly thwarted with some clear
intimations, or answers of Conscience, and have some way detained the truth in
unrighteousness, making, as it were, a Prisoner of it, and setting a guard of
corrupt affections about it; when such come again to enquire at Conscience,
what they shall do in this, or that particular, they may justly get such ane
answer* as is given, Prove. 1. 24. Because I called* and ye refused, I stretched
out my hand, and no man regarded, but ye set at naught all my counsel, and
would none of my reproof, I will laugh at your calamity, they shall call, but I
will not answer: I gave you answers before, and ye thwarted with them,
therefore when ye seek again, ye shall get none: And hence flows much
blindness, and be nummednesse of Conscience in men and women, because they put
out the eyes thereof, and frequently repel, and beat back what it says, or
answers; so that it becomes cauterized, and the feeling of it wears almost,
if not altogether, away; and it speaks very little, or none at all to them,
being so much baffled, and blunted with many repulses: We may add this Third
way, how it is provoked, and that is, when it is askings are slighted; It asks
us why we do such and such a thing, and forbear such and such another? and we
slight what it says, and ly still in sin; Is it not just that Conscience pay
us home in our own measure, and refuse to answer us when we ask it?

A Fourth Sinful Cause on our part, of the silence of Conscience, is, When men
come not singly* and in a Spiritual Frame to Conscience, to seek it is answer
and advice, but either have an^ Idol s^t up before their eyes, and are almost
already determined in the thing; or else they bring with them some one or other
lust unrepented of; Hence it comes to pass, that though they think themselves
submissive in that particular, and possibly may some way be so, yet not being
absolutely submissive in all, Conscience keeps silent; To the former, the Lord
some way says, as he did to these men, by the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 14. 2, 3.
Son of man, these have set up their idols in their hearts, and put the
stumbling block of their iniquity before their face; should I be inquired at
all by them? When men come to seek Light, and bring their Idols with them, the
Lord that speaks by the Conscience, will some times, in that case, not suffer
it to speak a word. The other is like that which we have, Psalm. 66* 8. If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer; When men come in
a profane temper and frame of Spirit to God, and are not single, and (as I
said) absolutely submissive, Conscience will not answer; For Conscience has
not one word to speak, but to them to whom God speaks.

A Fifth, And last Case is, when men are driven, and stirred up to seek to know
the mind of Conscience, from a corrupt* or selfie principle, and for such or
such a selfy end; As for instance, when men seek clearness, and resolution
from their Conscience, anent such ane estate of Life, such a calling or
station, or anent the undertaking of such a journey, or voyage, and are not put
to seek that clearness anent them, out of respect to the honor of God, but
from respect only, or mainly to their own interest, profit, pleasure, or
credit; As it was with Balaam, Numb. 22. 10. That which did put him to ask Gods
counsel, was not regard to the honor of God, but love to the wages of
unrighteousness, as Jude calls them: And here many fail, and make a silent
Conscience, when they are seeking clearness; Which may be known by this, that
they would never ask, if it were lawful for them to take such a calling or
place, or to ingadge in such ane employment, except some pleasure, preferment
or gain led them to it; And the reason why they ask the advice of Conscience in
the matter, is not that they may be the more stirred up, to improve such a
place, employment or state of life for Gods honor, but that they may with more
quietness, freedom and confidence, follow their design, and come by their end;
neither do they intend singly (if at all) to follow the answer of Conscience,
but would rather have Conscience to follow them; as is clear in Balaam;
Therefore, when the Answer comes contrary to their Inclination, or Affection,
or to the selfie end, that they have before them, they will ask over again, as
Balaam did; Hence James says, chap. 4. v. 3* and 4. Ye ask and receive not,
because ye ask a miss to consume it upon your lusts: As men may seek to be
assisted in the performance of Duty, for the praise of men; so they may seek to
have Conscience to be on their side, to prevent a challenge from it; And that
they may intertain a carnally confident expectation of what they would be at:
Thus carnally profane and wicked men have often sought advice of the Lords
Prophets, as they did, Ier. 42. 1, 2. In these, and the like cases, men may
take pains to know the mind of Conscience; and yet the Lord may make it to keep
silence, and not to Answer them, or, if it do; to answer them according to the
idol of their own heart.

2dly. Another sort of Reasons may be drawn from Gods Soveraignity, so ordering
it for his own wise, and holy ends; to wit, for the good of his People, and his
own Glory: as he afflicts them in other things; though not without sin in
them, yet not always with respect to their sin; As we may see in Jobs trial;
Even so when they are taking pains for clearness of Conscience, and to get Gods
mind in such a particular, he may, and sometimes does blast all their pains, so
as they attain not to the desired clearness in it, I say in such or such a
particular; because (as was hinted before) the main bussinesse of their eternal
state falls not under these debates; and this we say he does in his
Soveraignity, for these and ^he like wise and holy ends.

1. That he may empty and humble his own People, That when they see they
cannot win to clearness, and satisfaction in a Particular of so little moment,
and consequence, by making that to be so much their exercise, he may hide pride
from their eyes, and lay them low before him. 2dly. As in this, he minds
their humbling, so their upstirring; by such means, he puteth them to be more
serious in seeking him; for oftentimes, when men find things to go easily with
them, they are in hazard to betake themselves unto, and sit down in as easy a
way of Duty, and to ^lack their diligence. 3dly. He does this for trial; to
make discovery of the unsoundness of some, and to prove the sincerity of
others; he will, by suspending Light and Clearness in such a particular* take
a proof of folks tenderness, whither they will forbear, while they are
unclear, or, whither they will untenderly go on; It being a main thing that
makes trial of men's tenderness, when God, by this means, lays, as it were,
a Bond and Restraint on us, and so puts us to it, to try whither we will
hold here, or proceed further; if there be tenderness, it will appear in such
a case; This discovered Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 6, 7. When God answered him not, who
went away immediately to a Witch. And hence it is, that many, when they cannot
win to Satisfaction, or Clearness, in a lawful way, they betake themselves to
the nixt shift; when others that are tender, will halt, and stand ^ill, till
God further reveal, and manifest his mind in the thing: As the Prophet does, 2
Kings 4. 27. Let her alone (sa^eth he of the Shunamite to his Servant) her soul
is vexed within her, and the Lord has hid it from me. 4ly. He does this to
make men prize Light more when they get it, knowing that it comes from God; We
are disposed to think as long as we are not much difficulted, and brought into
some notable strait, that our Light flows from a stock within our selves, and
that we have it at command: Thus, many think little, or nothing of being clear
to marry such or such a Person, to take such a place, or to engadge in such ane
Employ, and Station; as it may be of Magistracy, or of Ministry; Conscience,
as they think, clears them at the first hand; but the Lord will have us to
know, That to have Light and Clearness in any particular, especially of such
moment, is a greater matter, and mercy then so, and that it is a sin to flight,
and undervalue it, when it is come by. A 5th. and last end is, to draw men to
more immediate dependence on himself; that when Conscience is silent, they may
come to him, and count themselves to be so much the more in his common, and
debt, for any Light that they shall win at; and be made to know, that
Conscience is but his servant: all this is clear, frow Gods way in afflicting
his People, and from many instances in Scripture.

The other Assertion that I proposed to speak a word to, was, That though it be
sometimes thus, That Conscience is silent, and speaks not, at least, so soon,
or so clearly, when it is inquired at; yet it is not always so, but sometimes,
nay, often Conscience will speak, and answer clearly; and our unclearnesse in
that case, may proceed from some one tentation or other; or from our own sinful
distemper; or from our negligence, and inadvertancy, as I shall shortly clear
in some cases.

1. As a sinful Ignorance in the Person who desires it to speak, will make
Conscience keep silent; so there is a sinful Ignorance* that may, and will make
us mistake Conscience, when it answers clearly, And this comes to pass,
when, through Ignorance we know not, nor can take up, the voice of Conscience,
as different from that of our Affections, or Inclinations, nor the grounds, by
which Conscience does evidence it is Answer; as young Samuel took Gods voice at
first, for the voice of old Eli; Thus men may have an impulse, and some
exercise of Conscience, a^ out a thing; and it may be telling* it is mind to
them, and yet through their Ignorance, and Inadvertancy no^ discerning, and
taking up what it says, their exercise may continue, and they remain in the
dark, anent the particular.

A 2d. Case, wherein folks may remain unclear, or mistaken, where Conscience
answers clearly, is, when their Inclinations, or Affection* swey to one side,
and Conscience sweyeth to another; Then readily the Affections make such a
noise and clamor, and Inclination and Tentation so swey, and drive to the
contrary, that the voice of Conscience is not taken up, yea, scarcely heard:
Even as when a Case is proposed to a Judge, and he speaks soberly, in
determining the same; the unsatisfied party raises such a clamor and noise,
that his determination is not understood, no^ it may be, so much as heard; so
it is, when men are biased with their own Inclinations, and Affections, though
Conscience speak, yet these will speak out answers to convince, and persuade to
the contrary; As it was with Balaam, who would not understand, as it were, nor
take the answer which he got, but went again and again for another: Or as the
People of the Jews did often, when the Prophet told them clearly the mind of
the Lord, yet they would needs contradict him (as we see they did, Ier. 43. 2)
and say, It was not the Word of the Lord, but he was set on by some other, to
speak so; their Inclination and Affection being sweyed to such a side.

A third Case is, when men's own particular interest lies one way, and the
answer of Conscience sweyeth another way; as suppose gain to be on this side,
and Conscience speaks Duty to be on the other; Interest will say, that such a
place, calling, or station should be taken and ingadged in, because it has
gain, and preferment with it, but Conscience says, it should be forborne; And
here Interest sustaineth the Dispute, and carries it on toughly, and
pertinaciously, against Conscience, with plausible Arguments, that side and
suit well with, and much please, and gratify our flesh; which yet might be
very easily refuted, if Interest had not the great hand in proposing, and
managing them; Hence the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 5. Speaks of some perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, who suppose
gain to be godliness; For when gain presents it self, as easy to be found,
and come by in such a way, it will readily pass for godliness; This is very
dangerous, and makes the answer of Conscience to be either mistaken, or ^asten
and rejected.

A 4th Case, more readily incident to the people of God, though it may be also
in others, is, when fear and unbelief thwart Conscience, pressing to such a
Duty; As suppose it be a Duty that has many difficulties attending it, as
hazard of Life, or of State, of Confinment, or of Banishment; Fear and Unbellef
will come in, and dispute, that such and such a thing cannot be Duty, though
Conscience say the contrary; So it was with Achaz, Isa. 7. 12. I will not
(says he) ask, neither will I tempt the Lord; In his Fear and Unbelief, he
will not wait the answer of Conscience, neither ^an he abide to take Gods Word
and Direction; But this did not only prevail with wicked, never do-well Achaz,
but it was in a measure in eminently godly Moses, Exodus 6. 12. Who, in his Fear
and Unbelief disputes against Gods clear call, and says, Will Pharaoh hear
me? As also, in Jeremiah, Who chap. 1. v. 6. alleges against Gods clear
call, that he was but a child; And the like of such excuses, and shifts as
these being made to Gods own calls, and answers, much more may they be made to
the answers of Conscience: And so much for the first Question.

The 2d. Question is, Seeing Conscience may be silent, or though it answer, may
not be taken up, nor understood, what is to be done in this, and the like
Cases? Answer, 1. We should aim to know, if our unclearnesse in such a
particular, proceed from the silence of Conscience, or from some Tentation, or
distemper of Spirit in us? 2dly. Whither it flow from a sinful Cause on our
part, or from Gods Soveraignity? 3dly. We should learn how to apply our selves
aright, to take up these causes. 4thly. What it is that we should do, when none
of these are discerned? 5thly. What it is that we should do, if our
unclearnesse and darkness continue? or what general grounds may warrant us in
our choice? or, how we ought to make use of these general grounds, when we
cannot take up Particulars?

For the 1. Direction in such a Case, we say, when men have unclearnesse, they
should inquire, (...) it be ane unclearnesse from a silence in the Conscience,
or from a Tentation, or Distemper in themselves; And if this once be known, the
Cause is in a manner win; for, if it be known to be a Tentation, or a sinful
Distemper, it is not to be stood on, though what we are called to, thwart our
own Inclination, and Affection, and speak out matter of Fear and Hazard; As we
see in the Case of Moses, and Jeremiah; when God makes the man to put his hand
into his bosom, as it were, (as if the result were to be had there,) that
clears him, and he yields; And if it flow not from any Tentation, or
Distemper, we should look forward, and inquire from what Cause it comes.

But it may be Asked here* How shall People know whither their unclearnesse
does proceed from a sinful Distemper in themselves* or from the silence of
Conscience, not speaking at all? Answer, To find out this, will be a piece of
Christian exerc^e* and will need much humility, and self-denial an heavenly
frame, and much serious Prayer to God; And thoug^ (...) be difficult to
condescend on particular Rules in (...) Cases, yet we shall give some general
considerations, that will help how to find it out; And 1. See i^ ye be
indifferent in the thing, (if it be so in it is own nature) for if it be a
Tentation, or sinful Distemper that prevails, ye will not be indifferent, but
fixed, resolute, and peremptory; Inclination, Affection or Interest will swey
you, to one side and hold you there; And therefore your great work should be,
to see if ye be single, and unbyassed; And for this end consider, 1. If ye had
your choice what it would be; And if the heart confidently adventure to make
the choice, and if ye be inclined more to the one side then to the other; it is
presumption to say, that ye are indifferent in the thing. 2dly. When you go to
Prayer, see that there be not one side that ye incline to, more then another;
and that ye sl^p not insensibly into a Petition, or Desire* that your Light may
incline you this way; Somewhat of this seems to have been in that Desire, or
Petition which Abraham has, Genesis 17. 18. O that Ishmael might live before
thee; As suppose ye were to pray for a way of living, yet it is readily, O!
that this were the way of living, calling, or station, rather then another*
3dly. When there are some hopes that (...) may be one thing rather then
another, or when providence binds you up more from the one then the other,
^ee how ye are affected with joy or grief, if ye be much delighted, when one of
the things seems hopeful, and much grieved, when it seems to be marred, and
crushed, that tells, that ye are not suitably submissive, and indifferent in
the thing: As suppose a Husband, or Wife, or Child, or other near or dear
Relation, who is near to death, that ye pray for, and think that ye have
attained to submission in the matter; but if there be a little reviving* and
that does much ^ickle, and lift you up: It says, the submission has not been
so found and absolute: So upon the other hand, when the Husband, Wife, Child,
or other dear Relation draws near death, and all hope^ are gone; and that
lays on an over-charg^ ^eight, it gives the same verdict of your submission,
as before: Or suppone that God offers to a man, a way of doing good to the
Church, and it comes to be much blasted; and the door is more opened to some
others of the party, that is on the other fide of the difference amongst honest
men, who both designed the advancing of the great Work of the Gospel; For the
thriving whereof, ye pray by what ever of the sides, or parties; Yet I say,
when the one side has a wider door in Providence opened then the other, that
grieves, and some way fre^s you; It tells that you are not so indifferent and
submissive, as to the success of the Work, by either of the sides, as ye
suppose; For, when it comes to the Decision, there is a loathnesse to take the
answer, that thwarts the Inclination and Affection. 4ly: When doing, and
forbearing compete together, so that ye are difficulted in your choice,
consider which of the two, Carnal Reason, and the Grounds that it goes on,
sweys you most to; As suppone the Case be, whether to take such a Place, or to
follow such a Calling, or Course, that has much Profit, or Preferment
attending it, or to forbear; if ye inquire at Conscience (which should
determine you) and yet still remain unclear, if these Grounds swey you, that
would swey a merely natural man, it is to be suspected: Therefore, though in
some Cases, God may call a man to such a thing, to such a Place or Station, yet
he should search well, and see that ^e be clear in his call to This was in a
time when places of power, and trust, were sought after, offered and embraced,
under the Usurper.
it in particular, because there is something here of a self-interest, that
will be very ready to cast the Balance. 5ly. Consider, and compare your own
Inclination, with the advice of others in the thing, when it may be ye get
diverse advices anent it, and none of the different advisers offer Reasons for
their advice, or, if they do when the Reasons of such as comply not with your
own Inclination* are not so narrowly examined, and the reasons of the other,
that seem to be more complyant with your Inclination, are listened to* in that
Case, what your Inclination sideth with, will easily tell you, if ye be
indifferent, and have indeed attained to submission in the thing, or, if ye be
led by a sin^ul di^emper: Hence it is, that when some persons seek after
clearness, in such or such a thing, they will not readily advise with such as
they know, or apprehend do, or may differ from them, or that will probably
^hwart them in the thing; but with others, who, they know, will (...)* and
(...) satisfy them: Where these, or some of these, are found after search to
meet together, there is ground to suspect, that though Conscience has spoken
clea^, yet men have smothered, or slighted to notice the answer of Conscience.

2dly. We may add some (...) Directions; as First, Because our own (...)
singleness usually makes us d^k, and doubtful, therefore these who would have
a good Conscience* and be in capacity to take up the Answer of it, should keep
their eye (...), for if the e^e be single, the whole body (...) (...) (...) of
light* bu^ i^ m^n in their (...) (...) any way unsul (...) byasled, they will
readily mistake* the Answer of Conscience. 2dly. We would consider what others
think* who will probably be more impartial in our case, then our selves
because, not being in our circumstances* they have not the particular interest
to swey them that we have. 3dly. consider, wha^ we would sa^ to another in such
a case* to whom the Tentation comes not ^o ne^t as it does to us, who are
particularly (...) ^n (...) thing; Y^a* consider what we would have thought of
the thing before it came to our own do^r, and we to be exercised about i^. But
4tly. Consider especially* and ^ry the rise of our pu^se, and exerci^ about the
^ing* whit^er it be ze^ to the honor of God. that pu^teth ^s to consult
Conscience (...), or because such a thing is now come in our way, and seems to
be waited with such and such external advantages, or to comply much with our
humor and inclination; For, when Gods honor puts us not to ask the Answer,
we may suspect, that it is not that which determines us: We would readily
never seek Light in such a matter, if it came not thus to our door, and if it
were not in our offer; and others will make no such a do, or business, for
Light in it, because they are very clear to let it alone: This much for the
First Direction, what to do when Conscience is silent, or, it is Answer is not
taken up, or mistaken; Men should impartially search, and see, that they have
not some way determined, and decided the matter before hand within themselves,
to the thwar^ing, or smothering the Answer of Conscience; And that their
Inclination, or Affection, or some one or other selfie aim* or Interest, swey
and byasse them not, but that the matter be left betwixt God and their
Conscience singly, and that they be waiting on him for clearness, in a humble
submissive and self-denyed way.

SERMON III.
1 PETER 3. 21. (Not the putting away of the (...) of the flesh, but the answer
of a good Conscience toward God.)
BY counsel every purpose is established, and ^e that ^neth to council is wise,
says Solomon* There are two great Counselors that God has given to all them
that live within the visible Church, To wit, His Word without us, and ou^
conscience within us; That by them, we may be helped clearly to know (...) is
pleasing to him, and profitable to our selves; concerning which councillors we
may not only safely, but with highest assurance, say, that they are happy, who
hearken to their Advice and Council.

That which we have have been speaking of from this v. Is the right way of
discerning the Advice and Counsel which the Conscience gives, That so we may be
the more able clearly and distinctly to follow it.

And in prosecution of this, ye may remember, we came to answer that Case, or
Question, what men are called to, or what maybe their duty, when, after some
pains taken to know Consciences, Advice and Counsel, they do not discern, and
take it up? Seeing experience tells us, that sometimes there may be Darkness,
even when men would have Light; In Answering of this, we gave you this
Direction, in the first place, after the premitting of some things, for
clearing of it; That such as are thus in the Dark, would once put themselves to
it, to try whither their Darkness proceed indeed from Conscience, or from some
Distemper, and Tentation within, letting, and hindering them from taking up that
which Conscience says; till once this be clear, men cannot make great
progress, for if they should study to have Conscience speaking, and yet have
their own ears stopped, this seems to be but lost labor; There is some other
thing called for, that once they may be in a quiet, and composed Frame, to hear
what Conscience says to them.

A ad. Direction, for Answer to it, is, When men cannot discern any Temptation,
or Distemper in themselves, but that they are content to hear what Conscience
would say to them, and yet cannot take it up, then they would set themselves to
try whither that silence proceeds from some sinful Cause in themselves, justly
procuring that silence of Conscience, as a punishment to them, or from some
Sovereign Cause in God, ordering that silence to try them, and to humble them,
and that they may, by being kept a while in the mist, more singly give proof
of their dependency on him: For, as in other affictions so in this, sometimes
God will exercise his Soveraignity, and if it be once known to be for trial,
the thing that we are called to, is sweetly silent submission to God, and
allowing him so to dispose of us as he pleases; As that Word, Isa. 50. v. 10.
holds forth, He that walks in darkness, and sees no light, let him in that
Case, stay himself on the Lord; He may be kept quiet, and from thwarting with
God, if he can take up that to be his design; But if some sinful Cause hes
procured this, Men are put to it, as they would not ly under any effects of
Gods anger, to be dealing with him, to have that cause, that hes brought it on
removed, that in due time, this sad effect of it may be removed also. It is
true, that as in other Cases, so in this, it is not Ordinary nor Common for God
to afflict His People with Darkness, without some sinful Cause; And we may
easily know, that among men, who have corruption in them, there is no trial
that comes on them, but there is some cause in themselves, that may procure it,
and so may keep them in the dark if God should narrowly mark it: And hence we
may gather, that it is very difficult to discern rightly, by clear evidence the
one of these from the other; Yet we think in every case it is not absolutely
necessary, for godly persons to conclude a designed controversy for sin,
though they can never go wrong to take with sin, albeit yet they would not
always bind it on God, as if he were quarrelling for it, though he might very
justly do so.

Therefore we shall offer Four Differences, and then qualify them, and give
some Directions, how to walk in every one of these Cases.

First, Then, We conceive, when the silence of Conscience, and Gods refusing to
intimate his mind by it, proceeds from a sinful cause procuring it, in a
Person, it will readily look more horrible like; and will have some impression
of anger on it, when it comes out with such a word, as that, (...) 10. 14. Go
and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen, etc. And there is good reason for
this; that if it be an effect of sin, or of anger for sin, it should look liker
anger, then when it is an effect of Gods mere Soveraignity, which may stand
well with his being in good terms with that person whom he so tryes. Secondly.
We think the hiding of Gods face, and silence of Conscience, when it proceeds
from sin as the Cause, readily point out some particular ground of challenge
for which the Conscience keeps silence, it has a word of reproof with it, for
some particular fault, as in that same place, ye have done this, and this
says the Lord; Though I have brought you out of the land of Egypt, yet ye
have served other gods, therefore now I will deliver you no more; Conscience
though it will not, in that case give an answer to the thing that is asked at
it, yet it will give a reason, wherefore it answers not, and will point at
somewhat, that may make it known, that there is just ground for it is keeping
silence: Job being thus smitten in holy Soveraignity, Says to God, Chap. 10.
2: Tell me wherefore thou contends with me; He is indeed now somewhat jumbled,
being exercised by the Sovereign Holy Lord; and his exercise is not so much,
for this and that sin, in particular, as to know wherefore God deals so with
him. 3dly. When this silence of Conscience proceeds from a sinful cause, it
leaves the Spirit of the Person in a far greater distemper, and confusion, then
whenit proceeds merely from Gods Soveraignity; For this having it is rise from
Sin, it has the greater influence to the stirring of corruption; Therefore in
such a case as this, men are much disposed to sret, as ye may see in Saul. and
others, who were ready. when God answered them not, to take another, and sinful
way of their own; But when God exercises in Soveraignity, as the Conscience
has readily more quietness, so there is more sweet Submission and Patience.
4ly. Persons would take a reflect look on the frame of their own hearts, before
their darkness came on them (...) they were careless, and carnal secure,
untender, and remi^s in stirring up themselves to obtain Light from God; If
darkness or any other affliction come on them, in such a case, it speaks this.
That they were sadly surprised in that distemper; but if it come on them at
such a time, when they have a Testimony within them, that they were making
Conscience of their Duty, it would seem to say, that God is not looking so much
at their sin, as to some Sovereign end, ^e would bring abou^t by that Rod: If
ye consider holy Ioh, who is the eminent Pattern of Gods exercising a a man
Soveraignly: the Case and Frame, he was overtaken in, by his affliction, was a
most tender one, rising in the morning* and offering Sacrifices for his
Children; and as he says Chap. 3. 26 I was not in safety, neither had I rest,
neither was I quiet, yet trouble came; That is, If I had been secure and
carnal, I would have thought the less to meet with such troubles* but I was not
at c^rnal ease, but was seriously at my Duty; It was this that made him that he
could not see what it was that God pointed out to him for his exercise.

We would now in the nixt place, give you these qualifications. 1. That when
God exercises from Soveraignity, yet, even then, there may be somewhat of
terror, reproof, and challenge, and somewhat of corruption stirring; and the
reason is, because we have corruption in us, and are not without the guilt of
sin, and therefore Tentations have just ground to challenge, and corruption is
ready on every occasion to be ^ed, and provoked; We would give this as a Second
Qualification, that oft-times Gods dealing with, and exer^ing of his People, is
mixed with some respect, both to their sin, and to the good end, that he
intends to bring about thereby to them: And yet there are these (...) things,
that we would look to in these Cases* First* That though corruption may stir,
yet comparatively it (...) ^ar less in the one case, then in the other: If
(...) (...) affected with sin, even* when he was afflicted in Gods
Soveraignity; What would, he have been, if he had been chastised for his sin,
and surprised in a sinful distemper, when his affliction came on him? adly*
Though it may be so for a time, yet if God remove the exercise, he will make it
otherwise, he will compose the heart, and make the exercise effectual for that,
for which he sends it; As ye see in the case of Job, who, though he was
somewhat discomposed for a time, yet before God leaves him, he calmes him, and
makes him lay his hand on his mouth, Chap. 40. and 42. 3dly. That even then,
though persons may discompose, and put themselves through other, because they
have not carried suitably, and fair under the exercise; yet there will be some
honest Testimony of Sincerity, when they look back to their carriage before,
and even in the time; for Soveraignity in such exercises, will not prejudge his
peoples interest in him; Therefore ye see, that Job is clear, and resolved in
this, that he will retain his integrity.

Lastly, we would come to show you what is meet to be done, in this case,
Which, though there may be considerable difficulty to come by, yet a Believer
should not be idle, when his Conscience keeps silence; Therefore I would give
you these Three general Directions. 1. That Persons would endeavor to compose,
and calm the frame of their own Spirits under that darkness, be from what
cause it will; if it be from Gods Soveraignity exercising; This is suitable,
that we study to comply, and strick in with these ends, and designs that God
drives at, in exercising us so, such as, the humbling of us, the emptieing of
us of all self-conceit, the making of us to loath our selves, so as to say with
Job, Behold I am vile, The clearer knowledge of our own feebleness and
sinfulness, our making greater account of Light, and coming at a more near
closse and constant dependence on God; whatsoever that exercise proceed from,
this is always a Christians duty; And we have it warranted to us from Jobs
example, and from the Churches example, Lament. 3.

A second general Direction is, That whither God chastity for sin or not, yet
we would take a look of our own carriage, that we may see what sin or sins we
can find out, that might have been ground for him, thus to quarrel with us;
that so we may repent of them, obtain his Peace, and recover his favor and
friendship, in referrence to these sins; This sure cannot be any bad fruit,
whatsoever be the cause from which it proceeds; because though God take not
such narrow notice of our sin, yet it well becomes us to take such notice of
it, ye see Job does this, when he says to the Lord, Thou make me to possess
the sins of my youth; We would look well to this, and set our selves seriously
to have our peace made up again with God, and to come by the intimation of the
pardon of these particular sins, that if so be, our darkness continue, we may
have some quietness of Conscience; and this may also be the way for wining to
the other; it is sure, very suitable, that when a Person is in the dark, as to
some one particular duty, soberly to consider how often Conscience spoke, and I
took but little notice of it, how little Conscience I made to practice clear
duties; and therefore I am justly bemisted, and in the dark, as to this, this
helps to humble. There are these Three things we would have you to look back
on, when we call you to reflect in such a case on your ways, First. Look back,
and see if there was not something amiss before that darkness came on, that
might have procured it, and drawn on this, as a chastisment of that; And here
you would go back, if it were not only some few years, but seven years, and more
too, and see what sins, and sins against Light in particular, ye have fallen
in; And how, when Conscience did challenge for the same, ye took but little
notice of it; If I say it were after seven years, yea thrice seven (as Joseph's
Brethren were made to do) ye would call these sins, or that sin again to mind.
2dly. Look well if ye have been serious in searching out the mind of
Conscience, and if ye have taken pains to use all means to get Light; ye want
Light, and it may be ye have not studied to be well acquainted with the word,
nor have been single in prayer to God. for obtaining of it; ye would also look,
if there has been any defect in advising with Conscience, or in proponing the
case to Conscience, and discovering the same, ye would endeavor to amend it,
and to make a new address, as it were to your Conscience before God, for
finding out Light. 3dly. Look back on your carriage, since that darkness began;
for Christians may possibly have been in a tender frame, when this darkness
came upon them; yet because they get not Light so soon as they would have it,
and because the lord keeps up himself for a time, it may be their impatience
has broken out, and there has been sinful wrangling with God in secret, and the
heart has been somewhat raised, that he should deal so with them, especially*
^hen they have found that they have been honest in the main; somewhat of this
was in Job, who took on him, under his dark exercise (as himself confesses) to
meddle too much, and too boldly with Gods secrets, that were too wonderful for
him; It may be often thus with Believers, who, though they may be in a good
frame, and keeping up the peace when the dark exercise comes on them, yet
confuse themselves by other miscarriages under it, and by their carnalnesse in
reference to it; Whereby it comes to pass, that the exercise that at first
came from Gods Soveraignity, turns in the continuance of it, to be for their
sin a chastisment, which they are made to take with, whither they will or not;
We think this was Jobs case, and he was made to take with it, ere the exercise
was removed from him: These things ye would look to, and reflect on them, that
you may know how to apply your selves accordingly, and to do as they shall call
you, and as the case requires.

The Third General Direction is, That however things be, persons that are in
the dark, and yet would be clear of Gods mind about such and such a Duty, would
be looking well about them, that they may see, if there be yet any present
thing called for from them, if there be any thing left undone which they may
do, and which they should do, for finding out Gods mind; and they would go
throw Gods appointed means, and throw them again: There are Three or Four
particular Directions in this General one, First, Such as would be at the
knowledge of Gods mind, would betake themselves to him, and stir up them^eves
to be at more immediate nearness to him; That when the Conscience speaks not
to them, they may go to the Lord himself, to get some word of answer from him,
as Habakkuck did, Chup. 2. v. 1. While he says I will get me to my watch tower,
etc. The Prophet had his own darkness there, and was in some little dump, the
vision did not speak for the time, what course takes he in this case? He
resolves to act the part of a watchman, who goes up some steps higher, and yet
again some steps higher, even till he come to the top of the watchtower, that
he may thence see the more clearly; even so the nearer that any be to God, they
are in the greater capacity to take up the mind of Conscience: for then there
is both the greater awe on the Conscience to make it speak, and the greater
clearness in us to help us to take it up: And when we win^ not to clearness in
the utterroom (to say so) of Conscience, We would go in to the Holy-place, and
if we win not to clearness there neither, we would go in to the most
Holy-place, till we come even to the Mercy-seat it self; Where God uses not to
fail to give his answer: For there is one thing that does Christians much
wrong, which is, That when they cannot win to take up Gods mind so soon as they
would, they pray more faintly, and are discouraged to approach the nearer to
God; whereas they should do the just contrary, after Jobs example, who says,
in his dark condition, Chap. 23. v. 2. O that I knew where I might find him,
that I might come even to his seat: The Second Direction in reference to this
is, That persons would observe well, what measure, or degree of Light God gives
them; and would welcome it thankfully, and carefully make use of it, though
they come not to clearness in the whole case together, and at once; if they win
to know what to do to day, or for the present ^ow, they would (as I said)
welcome that, and make use of it; Thus it is said of Abraham, Heb. 11. 8. That
by faith being called of God, he forsook his country, and went out, not
knowing whither he went; sometimes God will call a person to go this step, and
he will not for the time, let him know where the nixt shall be; he should lift
as it were, that foot, and make that step, while he has Light, and so on, from
one step to another, till the darkness make him stand still. The Third
Direction, is, That though we come not to clearness at the first, yet we would
wait on, and not be hasty; It Is a notable folly, to be either rash in acting,
or hasty in giving up with God, when he will not speak to us at the first; my
meaning is, That we would neither do the thing that we are in debate about
before we be clear in it, for that is to do doubtingly; neither should we give
it over, but should be waiting on in renewing our applications to God, till he
think meet to speak to us; The vision, (says the Lord to Habbacuck) is yet for
ane appointed time, though it tarry, wait for* it; There are some times that
God will only say this much to a person, wait, and that is an answer; more will
come to the waiter in due time; and we may be encouraged to wait, if we will
consider, that honest waiters have a promise of Light: If one should say here,
I am in the mean time sadly exercised; I Answer, it may be meet thou should be
in exercise, that exercise may be good for thee; Nay, it may be thou makes a
piece of exercise to thy self, because thou would know more then is his
mind, thou should for the time know. The Fourth Direction, is, There would
be silent stouping to, and reverend adoring of the wisdom, and Soveraignity of
God, in ordering darkness in such a particular, which is not a necessary duty;
so that the person cannot stir, nor move toward it; It may be for the good of
the party, that he is thus, by this darkness restrained, and hedged in, which,
though it be not now known, may be made known, hereafter, to satisfaction.

It may yet be enquired, when there is silence in the Conscience, as to such or
such a particular, if there may not be use made of general Rules given in the
Scripture, for directing us in our walk? And if Conscience may not have peace,
in walking according to these Rules? No doubt, for keeping a good Conscience,
we would, in our respective Stations, and Capacities, learn by Conscientious
reason (that is reason drawn from Scripture grounds) to order our Conversation
so, as the Conscience may have nothing to say against it; As for instance,
suppose a person be debateing, whither ^ public Station, or a more private way
of living be the thing he is called of God to, and it may be there is not such
distinct, and particular clearness given about the thing, he would in that
case, betake himself to the general Rules in Scripture, how to discern the
Lords mind, in the matter.

And for your better help herein, I shall First, Touch on some general Rules,
that the Scripture lays down, according to which we would walk. 2ly. I shall,
offer some helps, how to collect and apply, from these Rules. 3ly. I shall show
the warrantableness of quieting our Conscience, in walking according to them;
First, then I shall name Four general Rules, to which we would have ane eye in
reference to lawful things; The First whereof is set down, 1 Cor. 10. 30.
Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God; We should choose that state of
life, and calling (and so in other such things) that may conduce most to the
glorifying of God; So we are to enter in the Dispute, or Debate, whither may
this or that contribute most to that end, and accordingly the Conscience may
well rest quiet, if it once come to any clearness, that this, or the other
contributes most to Gods Glory, therefore it should be followed. The 2d.
General Rule is, 1 Cor. 14. 26. Let all things be done to edifying; There is a
difference between things lawful, and things expedient, or edifying, All things
are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient; all things are lawful for
me, but all things edify not; Says the Aposile, 1 Cor. 10. v. 23. There is an
expedience, and regard to the edification of our selves, and of others, that we
would be sweyed with; as whither the doing of such and such a thing, at this
time, or another will edify* others most, and profit them most, as to the
saving of their souls; or help our selves most, in the mortifying of some Lust,
or in furthering of us to some D^ie; Here Conscience is to close with, and to
cleave unto that which is most edifying. A Third General Rule is, Phil. 4. 8.
Where, when the Apostle is showing them a way how to walk (as we suppose) in
the same kind of things; Whatsoever things, says he, are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, pure, lovely, and of good
report, (To wit, with those that are able to judge a^ight, of things that are
so) think on these things; There are many things lawful, that are not honest;
many things lawful, may not have a good report; and many things that are
lawful, may not be lovely; Now, when two lawful things are before us, we would
consider which of the two are most Christianly honest, and most Lovely, which
of them has the best report, and is best thought of among them that can
discern best; and though a thing be lawful in it self, yet if it be not honest,
and of a good report, it may give cause of ill speaking, that is not to be
allowed; As for instance, suppose in the matter of Marriage, there be two
single people, it is lawful for them to Marie; Yet suppose them to be unequal,
as to their Rank and Quality* the one a great Man, the other a poor Woman, and
despicable, or contrarily; or vastly unequal, as to Age or Parts, and
accomplishments; and that such a match is not honestly reported of; Or is not
counted gracious and tender like in a professo^ of Religion, Man or Woman;
though it might be simply lawful, yet in that case, He or She is to walk
according to the Apostles Rule, even according to this Rule: Particular
Circumstances, I grant, will very much vary the the case; Yet that Rule would
be still tenderly looked to. A 4th. General Rule, is, 1 Cor. 7. 17, and 20. As
the Lord (...) called every one* ^o let them walk* let every man abide in the
same calling wherein he is called; Which supposes, that Christians being once
clear, that the Lord has called them to be in such Callings and Stations, and
to sustain such Relations, as of Magistrates Ministers, Merchants, and Tradsmen,
Husbands, Wives, Masters* Servants; They should, for keeping a good Conscience,
continue quiet, and satisfied in them, without covering pre-posterously, or
itching curiously to be out of them; and without daring to move from them
without a clear and convincing call from God; and that they should make
Conscience to discharge the respective duties incumbent on them, by virtue of
these Stations and Relations while they are in them.

The other thing we proposed* was some helps toward the right application of
these Rules; And here there is great need to look very narrowly to our own way
of proceeding: I shall name Four things in reference to this; The First
whereof, is, that though we walk according to a particular Rule, yet we must
have a special respect to circumstances that may have great influence upon
varieing of the Case, and would therefore be well observed; for Cases at all
times, and in all persons are not a like; There is a time (says the wise man,
Eccles. ^3.) for every thing under the sun: Sometimes folks ought to speak, and
sometimes they ought to keep silence, sometimes to laugh, sometimes to weep,
sometimes to get, and sometimes to (...) and so of every thing under the Sun;
and here we would consider the Person. who does such a thing; it may be honest
in one person, and not in ^other; Thus Nehemiah says should such a man as ^
(...)? Especially more noted Christians should look to this; Then we should
consider the place wherein such a thing is done, and the (...) (...) (...) it is
done; We would also consider the consequences that may follow on the doing of
such a thing* both as to the persons self, that his own peace be not marted,
and as to others; that they be no way stumbled, or made worse; We cannot apply
such or such a particular practice suitably, and aright to the Rule, except we
present, and offer the Case to be tried by the Rule, according to all it is
circumstances; A general view of such and such a Case, and of the Rule will not
do the turn here. A 2d. Help, For making application of the General Rule, is,
that we would look well to Gods Dispensations, and to these things in his way
of dealing with us inwardly; and in his providence to us outwardly, that would
seem to point out ^o us one thing rather then another, this rather then that:
Providence, it is true, can never make a new Dut^e; or a thing that is sinful to
be lawful, but Providence may tell a man when he is called to put in practice
such and such a positive Duty; As for instance, where he should live, and in
what state of life; because providence may sometimes shut such a door, that he
cannot win out, and open another; He would, in this case* take the way that God
in his providence offers, and points out to him; As suppose a person
undertaking a Journey, or Voyage, about his lawful affairs, and he knows not
well what ^ellow travelers, or what Fellowvoyagers he may have, such a fair
occasion is offered* and it may be, not another for going to such a place; he
may quietly take that occasion, as that which providence seems to point out to
him; Thus the Apostle Paul Acts 21. finding a Ship going to, or near the place
whither he was bound, steps in without asking what company was in her* such
cases are frequently incident, when either on the one side, God in his
providence opens this, or this way and door, and not another; or, on the other
side, when he seems to open two ways, and they are both lawful, and alike
obvious; Then we would look which of these contributs most to the glory of God,
and which of these seems to be most countenanced by Divine Providence, most
^eazable, and likliest to to make the end effectual. A 3d. Help. Is, in our
sing^eness in our motions, and in our yielding to that which after examination,
and del^beration we have ^ound, or supposed to be most agreeable to the general
Rule; (...) that when Conscience has proposed the case, it has a Testimony in
it self, that it has made that proposal sincerely and impartialy* that respect
to the glory of God, and the edification of others* was the thing that mainly
sweyed us, and in^ned us to this, or that hand, and that we apprehended this
way to be most conducing to that end* In this case, though Conscience speak no^
so directly for the clearness of such a thing, yet it cannot readily quarrel
with a person, who has singly endeavored before hand to satisfy it, and who
has it is Testimony, that Gods Glory was the thing that mainly sweyed him, and
nothing else; This w^* conceive, is that whereof the Apo^ile speaks, 2 Cor. 1.
v. 12. This is our* rejoicing, the (...) of our conscience, etc. These Three
things being put together, the Conscience may have peace, the thing it self
being lawful; because this general Rule will bear it out in Scripture-reason,
which Conscience will not speak against.

There is only one word further, I would speak to this purpose, Christians will
be ready to think, that all the difficulty lies here, even in being single and
sincere, and indeed it does so; for the want of it ma^s peace, and the having
of it, gives great ground of peace: I shall give you therefore, Three*
Qualifications* whereby ye may try your sincerity. First, Consider, and try
what frame of heart ye are in; for if ye be not in a good frame of heart, it
can hardly be said, that sincerity sweyes you; There would, therefore much
tenderness be studied, and to have a deep impression of the Majesty of God, of
the awe and dread of Him, and of his Word on our Spirits. 2dly. Look what
weight challenges for by gone neglects, o^ (...) performances of duties, or
un-straightness in any of them have with you; For sincerity is never readily
more evident, then when we have distinct reflections upon our ways, and the
suitable sense of some bygon sin; in that case, we will no^ be in such hazard,
to give way to or to comply with what may breed a challenge afterward. 3ly. Try
it by what Conscience ye make of present known and clear duties, it is a good
token that persons are (...), when there is no clear duty, but they make
Conscience of it, laboring to be universal, and equal in the practice of all
known duties, and when they ^ar not hazard on any thing without clearness; but
when a person is clearly convinced, that such a thing is sin, and continues
still in the practice of it; and that such a thing is duty, and continues in
the neglect o^ it; And yet thinks that he is sweyed by sincerity, such a one
must needs be deluded, since, in such a case, no reason can be given for it: I
am ^old* here to say, that in the great Day, there shall never Man no^ Woman be
^ound to have a Testimony from their Conscience of sincerity, who have not
aimed, and endeavored to be universaly sincere.

The 4th. Help, is That Christians would endeavor to be in a very tender
frame* in the nearest communion with God, and in the greatest measure of
Heart-melting, and of ^ouring it out before God, that may be win at; Though I
do not say that it is impossible for Christians to mistake even in such a
frame: But my meaning is, that the rule would be looked to, and laid before us,
and that we would study to make application of it with the least by-respect,
and with the greatest singleness, and that then we may with some safety
conclude what side to swey to: I would not in all this have us debating duty,
but our particular call to duty. This may be looked at by many as a very great
and hard work, and they may think, that all this makes a great deal of business
about keeping a Conscience void of offense; and it does so indeed. I would have
you considering (...) three words for answering such thoughts. 1. That* (...)
great and difficult work to keep a good Conscience; and ye will find it that
(...) i^ now one day to your cost, to have been a great work, and ^n up-taking
exercise; yet we would not think the worse of it for that, since there is
nothing excellent that has not difficulty in it. 2dly. I would say this, that
ye would consider that though there are several things indifferent in
themselves, as eating and drinking, marrying, living here or there, etc. Yet to
us in the practice of them, and as they are circumstantiated, they are not
indifferent, but when done they are either sinful, as not being according to
the rule; or approven and acceptable, as being according to it; We would
therefore be very watchful and tender in our doing and using of things in
themselves lawful, nam perimus licitis. 3dly. Let me say that I do not intend
by what I have said to put your Consciences on the rack, or to stint and limit
you by Art, as it were, to find out light; for I know these things are not
always explicit, even in many conscientious persons; But that which I design
and drive at by this discourse, is, that ye may seriously mind and look after
the thing, and endeavor to walk according to these rules on the matter, and to
have the testimony of your Conscience, that it is these rules you allow your
selves in such cases to be sweyed and guided by; This will give you peace, and
nothing less will do it.

SERMON I.
ROMANS 9. 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost.
THe Lord our God is the true God, a God of truth, even truth it self, the
first great original and eternal truth, who by the most absolute perfection of
his incomprehensibly blessed Nature is infinitely removed, as from all
possibility of being (...) or imposed on by a lie himself, so from all
possibility of deceiving or lying to others; and to say (as some daring men of
late have done) that God may deceive, if he will, is not only of harsh sound in
Christian ears, but to be exploded and execrated; as insinuating, that the
glorious Majesty of God might, if he would, and so pleased, cease to be the God
of truth, or a true God; Which considering the identification of the Divine
Nature and Attributes, is as much as to say, that he might, if he would* cease
to be God; As the strength of Israel cannot lie* neither is he a man that he
should lie; so he loves truth in the inward parts; and commands men to speak
truth every one to his neighbor, and peremptorily, prohibi^eth all lying, not
only all pernicious lying on design to hurt* but also all officious lying, to
bring about some good to, or to divert some notable evil from themselves or
others; and lying in sport to make others merry, and all ^emerarious rash lying
through customary loos^ess and (...), called (it seems) in the Scripture, the
way of lying; And the more that men abhor lying, and love to speak the truth,
they are in so f^r the (...) like God, and the more unlike the Devil, who abode
not in the truth, because there is no truth in him, and who when be speaks a
li^, speaks it of his own (it is (...) and solel^ his own and none of Gods) for
he is a li^r, and the father of it: We would therefore watchfully guard against
all lying under whatsoever pretext, and look well that we always speak truth,
especially when we interpose Conscience, and yet more especially when we appeal
to God as witness of the truth of what we say or affirm; According to the
practice o^ the Apostle here, who (being one that exercised himself, to have a
conscience void of offense toward God and men) no doubt made conscience always
to speak truth, more especially, when he had used any more than ordinary solemn
prote^ation, or attestation, as he does in these words; The scope whereof is,
to roll away all ground o^ stumbling from his Contrymen the Jews, and from
any others who might think because of some of his discourses concerning them,
that he regarded them not, and that he was very indifferent, whether they were
saved or perished; and to concilia^ their affection and respect to the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and to his person for the Gospels, and their own souls sake: In
which words we have 1. His assertion concerning the heavine^s and sorrow of his
heart for them his brethren according to the flesh; Which he sets down first
positively, I speak the truth: Then negatively* I lie not, 2dly. The
confirmation of the truth of his assertion, which to make it the more solemn,
weighty, and convincing, and (if it might be) the more gaining of the Jews, is
threefold, 1. It Is in Christ, insinuating thereby that he is a believer in
Christ that asserts this truth, and one that draws strength from Christ to
enable him to what he asserts and refers to the honor of Christ as his main
end in it, and withal expects Gods acceptance of him therein on Christ's
account, and for his sake. The 2. is, My Conscience (an upright impartial and
tender thing, when right) bearing me wittness as to the truth of what I assert.
The 3. is, in the Holy Ghost, That is. it is affirmed by one who ha^h an
illightned and habitually sanctified Conscience by the Holy Ghost: by one who
is acted by him, and in a sanctified frame for the present; Nay, by one
infallibly guided and inspired by the Holy Ghost as his Penman in writing this
as a piece and passage of Divine Scripture.

I shall not here speak particularly to all the points of Doctrine that might
be deduced from these words, but to such only as make for clea^ing the purpose
that we have in hand, and that is, the particular influence that Conscience
has on a man in the time of his acting, and the particular respect that he
ought to have to his Conscience in carrying it along with him in his actions,
Yet we shall passingly point at, and little more* than name some general
Observations, and then come to the particulars that we mainly aim at.

And 1. We Observe this, That a man's Conscience is some way different from
himself, as in some respect (to speak so) another Party, I speak the truth in
Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me witness; I and me is one
thing, and Conscience, as it were another, and the Holy Ghost a third; all
which he joins together, yet so as he makes them different Parties: Conscience,
I say, considered as Conscience, and more especially, as it is renewed, well
informed, and tender in the exercise of its duty, differs from the man himself.
1. In respect of it is place of more direct and immediate subjection to God
himself, as it is Master, to receive i^'s orders from him; whereas the man is
more directly and immediately subject to Conscience, by which, as his Deputy,
God rules him. 2ly. In respect of it is Office, viz. To dictat to man what he
should do, and what he should not do, and that according to the light that it
has from God in his revealed Will and Word; Whereas man is not to dictat to
his Conscience, but to obey it is dictats in ^o far as they agree with Gods
revealed Will and Word. 3ly. In that by it is Office also, it is to tell the man
that he should direct all his actions to the right end, viz. The glory of God;
For it is Office is not only to dictat our way, but to enjoin to us our end; Man
has not a power or liberty allowed to him to propose to himself, what end he
pleases, such as Profit, Pleasure, or Credit, as his main end, but is oblidged
to eye the Glory of God as such; Which Conscience, by virtue of it is Office,
and acting i^'s part aright (though, alace it often proves defective therein,
being corrupted and defiled by sin) injoyns him to do. 4ly. In respect of the
different considerations and sense of things; it will often he displeased,
accuse and condemn, when the man himself will be well pleased; It will judge a
thing unworthy to be entertained, which the man will judge worthy (...)
e^tertaining. And so Conscience is to be considered, though having it is (...)
in man, yet in many respects* as some way different from him, and (...), as it
were to him, and set over him (as (...) hinted before) to be a Guardian,
witness, (...) or sensor, to take notice o^ him in all his actions and carriage.

Let no man then (as the Use of i^) think that ever he is, or can be alone, so
long as he has a Conscience within him, for he has still something to testify
for, or against him; to reprove him for what is wrong, and to commend him for
that which is right* And though many poor wretches are ready to think, and
(...) to fancy themselves to be quiet, and well, when they bli^, or c^erize, or
bribe their Conscience, yet it will be found to be still waiting on them, and
watching them is all they do.

2ly. Observe, That Conscience is a most divine thing* therefore Paul takes it
to be more impartial then himself; and joins it with the Holy Ghost in
testifying; if it were not in some respect, a more divine thing the the man
himself, such weight would not be laid on it, and it is Testimony; And if we
look to these things (hinted at in the foregoing Observation) viz. to the
immediate Master of it, God; to the Rul^ that it walks by, his Will revealed
in his Word; to the end it directs to. or enjoins, the honor of God; and to
the whole way of of it is considering, and judging of things, not only as
pleasant, or externally profitable to us, but mainly as pleasing to God, and
for his honor, as conducing to the advancing of (...) with him, or Conformity
to him; It Is most divine. The Use teaches us to lay more weight on Conscience
as spiritual, and as that which takes up things better, and is a far better
di^cerner and judge of things then we ou^ selves are.

3ly. Observ^, That the attesting of Conscience is a most grave, important, and
solemn thing, ^ bu^ines of highest concernment, and such as ought to be (...)
great weight with others; It Is so mide use of here; yea ^t's Testimony is some
way to have weight with us, and to be respected as the Testimony of Christ
himself, and of the Holy Ghost; Therefore it is here joined with them in its
Testimony; and it cannot be otherwise, God being (as was said before) the
immediate Master of it, and it being so divine a thing; none can attest
Conscience, but they must needs attest God with it.

The Use is, To teach us to be more warry in attesting Conscience in a light
and trivial way; It Is in Scripture Language an attesting Christ, and the Holy
Ghost; and when ever we dar not appeal to them as Witnesses, we would beware of
appealing to, or of attesting Conscience, or taking it to be a Witness.

4ly. Observe, That there is a great difference among Consciences; for these
words, My conscience bears me witness in the holy Ghost, imports two things,
1. His attesting his Conscience not simply, but as it is sanctified by the
Spirit. 2ly. It not only imports Sanctification in the habit of it, but in it is
exercise also; for he knew that a man's attesting of his mere natural Conscience
is not of such value, it being a thing that may be easily deluded, and go
wrong; but says he, I attest my conscience in the holy Ghost, and as acted by
him; There is a difference betwixt a renewed, and unrenewed Conscience; and a
difference betwixt a pure Conscience and a defiled one, To the pure (says the
Apostle, Tit. 1. 15.) all things are pure, but to them that are defiled, and
unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience* is defiled;
Paul's appealing his Conscience, is as it is opposite to such a Conscience; There
is also an evil and a good Conscience, as these words lately spoken of, 1 Pet.
3. 21 The answer of a good conscience toward God, clear; There is likewise a
cauterized Conscience, and a tender Conscience: yea, there is some difference
of Consciences among Believers themselves; some Consciences are weak, some
strong; some are sleepy, some waking, some are secure, some in the lively
exercise of the Grace of God, and acted by the Spirit, according to the will of
God; and this is the Conscience meant here.

Use, This Difference would be well observed, for it will not be the Testimony
of every Conscience that will bear a man through^ it must be the Testimony of a
Conscience sanctified, and in that particular acted by the Holy Ghost.

5ly. Observe, That there is no Testimony of a Conscience that can be
satisfying, but the Testimony of a Conscience sanctified, and in a sanctified
frame; therefore he thinks it not enough to say, My conscience bears me
witness, but he adds, in the Holy Ghost; And in that passage, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
It Is not the answer of Conscience simply, but the answer of a good conscience,
of a waking, tender, spiritual, and well enlightened Conscience, that satisfies.

Use, Therefore ere men lay much weight on the testimony of their Conscience,
they would first put it ^o proof* and see that it be the Testimony of a
sanctified Conscience, and in a sanctified frame; if a man be not of some
credit, his Testimony will not be of much weight in any matter; it is even so
with Conscience, as to it is Testimony.

6ly. Observe, That sometimes, and in some Cases, Believers may very
warrantably attest their Conscience, and appeal to it is Testimony; some
Believers in the old Testament, and some in the new have done it: Tho (as we
said before) the attesting of Conscience be a very grave and solemn thing, and
would not be used at all times, and in all cases, yet at some times, and in
some cases, it may be warrantably used, when rightly gone about: I shall name
Three or Four Considerations, or Cases from the Text, for clearing of it. 1.
Conscience may be attested, when the matter that we assert, requires such a
solemn attesting of it; And these things concur here to clear, that the matter
wherein he attesteth his Conscience, is such, For, 1. It is a thing that
concerns Gods Glory not a little, that his Servant and Messenger is not
walking according to the flesh, 2. It tends to the edification of others; for
if he had not removed the prejudice that the Jews had at him, it might have
marred their receiving the Truth from his mouth. 3. It tends to his own
vindication, in as far as it tends to the former two ends, and he will not
suffer any blot to ly here. 4. That which he asserteth, is a thing not obvious,
and could not well be otherwise made out; and in this so great and grave a
matter, he spares not to attest God, and his own Conscience. 2. Consider the
manner of his proceeding; It Is spoken in the sight of God gravely and soberly,
I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in
the holy ghost; He does not rashly, and abruptly break out in it, as many do.
3ly. Consider, that he is most clear in the thing, ere he attest his
Conscience, he was sure that it was no lie, and that he had no mixture of
untruth in it; yea, he is so clear that he dar swear it, and take Christ, and
the Holy Ghost to witness in it: When men dar not attest God in a matter, they
should not attest their own Conscience in it, except they think that God will
say one thing, and their Conscience another, which is contrary to the nature of
Conscience; Men will say many things lightly, supposing them to be true that
they will be loath to attest their Conscience in, till they be very clear, and
sure that they are true. 4ly. Add this Consideration, that it is done, when he
is in a holy spiritual and lively frame, My conscience (says he) bearing me
witness in the holy Ghost; To attest Conscience in a carnal frame, is as
unsuitable, as to rush in rashly, and unmannerly before a grave Judge, to crave
a Sentence from him; If our frame be not right, Conscience will never speak out
an approving Testimony to us in that particular which we assert, and attest it
in; For though, as to the matter it be true, and no lie, yet as to our
circumstantiated attesting of it in so ill a frame, it will not approve us.

7ly. In the general, Observe, That Conscience it is Testimony, when warrantably
made use of, is a thing very useful, refreshing, and comfortable to a Believer;
There is nothing readily, that more comforts him in a strait* it is a singularly
good back-friend; Therefore, when Paul has few other friends, he makes use of
this, and finds much peace and comfort from it; And hence he says, 2 Cor. 1.
12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, etc. To clear this
in a word further: it is in these Three Cases exceeding useful, 1. In the Case
of Reproach, I have (says Paul, Acts 23. 1.) lived in all good conscience
before God until this day; And 2 Timothy: 1. 3. I thank God whom I serve with pure
conscience from my forefathers. 2ly. In the case of some notable Cross, when
Christians are brought very low, in a great measure outwardly afflicted, or
under great persecution; This is (says* the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20.) thank
worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully;
for what glory is it, if, when ye are buffeted for your faults, ye shall take
it patiently? but if when ye do well and suffer for it, and take it patiently,
this is acceptable with God. 3ly. It Is useful and comfortable as to our own
peace in the case of Challenges for guilt, it silenceth, and shoulders out all
Challenges, and gives holy boldness; If our hearts (or Consciences) condemn us
not (says John 1. Ep. Chap 3. v. 21.) then have we confidence toward God.

The Use serves to teach us to be much in love with such a way, as we may have
the Testimony of a good Conscience in it; and to be much in love with such a
Conscience, as may give us such a comfortable Testimony in all our straits and
difficulties.

More particularly, we shall speak to that which we mainly aim at, in these
Four or Five Observations; Consider then first, What Paul is about here, he is
asserting a truth, viz. That he was in great beavines for his brethren, and
kinsmen according to the flesh* And he attests his Conscience that it was so,
and that he was honest, and sincere in asserting it; Whence Observe, That there
is no action of a man's Life, but Conscience has a concern in it, and has
something to say to him concerning it; if it were but the speaking of a word,
let be the doing of any bussiness, Conscience has always something to say for
him, or against him; So that we may confidently say, there is no action of so
little moment, in thought, word or deed; as, whither a man be called to do, or
forbear, to speak, or to be silent, but in all these, Conscience has a sense
and consideration of it, and a Testimony to give for, or against the man about
it. I am not now speaking of things sinful, or unlawful on the matter, but of
such things as on the matter are lawful; As when a man speaks truth; whither
he speaks it truly, and with an honest intention or not, Therefore when Paul
is speaking a truth here, he looks to his Conscience, and hearkens what it
says: Put these Four together, and ye will find it clear, that a sanctified
Conscience, in a sanctified and good Frame, will always have something to say,
for, or against a man, in every thing that he goes about; I say, a sanctified
Conscience, in a sanctified Frame, because that is the Conscience we are
speaking of, and the Conscience that most completely discharges it is duty. 1
If we consider this, That there is no humane action, but God has given man a
Rule, directing how it shall be ordered, how he shall eat, and how he shall
drink, how he shall plow, pray, hear, read, confer, how he shall walk in
Company, and out of Company, how he shall go about the Duties of his Calling;
and it prescribes the manner of doing these things, as well as the matter;
Therefore, 1 Timothy 3. 16, 1^. It Is said, All Scripture is given by divine
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
instruction in righteousness, and for correction, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work: It furnishes him with light
and direction* not only in the matter (as ^ said) but in the manner of doing.
2. (...), That a man in all his actions is either walking* according, and
agreeably to that rule, or not, his action is either conform or disconform to
the Rule, there is not a mids; He either does according to it, or he does not
according to it; If he do the action as the word prescribes, Conscience has
something to say for him; if no^, it has something to say against him. 3.
(...), that in all actions as they are ^one or performed, and as (...), God is
either pleased or displeased; If the action be done according to his will, he
is pleased: if it be not done according to his will, he is displeased. 4.
Con^ider, That a sanctified Conscience takes up a man's actions, and
considers him in them, not according to the matter only; bu^ also as they are
agreeable to the Rule for the manner, principle, motive, and end; and
^estifieth of them accordingly: So that if God have an interest in all a man's
actions, a sanctified Conscience has also an interest in them: I say, a
sanctified Conscience, because it most singly plea^eth Gods interest.

This is true also of a natural Conscience according to its light, for even
such a Conscience (as it is said, Romans 2. 5.) bears witness, and the Gentiles
show the works of the Law written in their heat^s, their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts in the mean while accusing or else excusing
one another; And there is no natural man, if he take heed to his Conscience, in
the doing of any action, but will find Conscience according to its light,
speaking either for him, or against him; either ac^using or else ex^using him*
but this is much more to be found is a sanctified C^nscience, because it has
much more light, and much more tenderness to act according ^o that light, and
therefore it will find it self much more concerned in the actions of a believer.

The first Use is, for information and instruction in a ma^n practical point of
Religion relating to men's conversation; Most men, (...)! think that Conscience
is not concerned except in some great things, some pa^pably sin^ul things, or
some things immediately relating to Religion; and that in all other things they
may live as they like, without taking notice of Conscience: But ^ s^y, and have
cleared it* that Conscien^e has ^n (...) and concern in every action, not only
as to putting men to undertake it, (whereof we spoke before) but also as to
their manner of performing the same; It not only puts a man to think, speak, or
do* but it is concerned in the manner of his thinking, speaking, and doing;
Conscience in every one of these has somewhat to say, viz. That we are either
right or wrong. The reason is* because all a Christian man's actions may be
taken up in a twofold respect, or under a twofold consideration. 1. In
respect of the external action it self, or the matter of it, even though we
consider them as indifferent; as whether a man stay at home, or go abroad, eat
now, or for bear eating, etc. 2. As these actions are Christian, in which
respect men are not only to look on the action ^t self, mater^ally considered,
but they are also to look to the rules given to direct them how to walk
Christianly in that action; for there are many actions good in themselves, or
in the first respect that will not be found to be Christianly and religiously
good, or good in this second respect; The Christian should love God with all
his heart, soul, strength* and mind, Mat. 22. 37. He is not his own. he is
bought with a price, and therefore should glorify Go^ in his body and spirit,
which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6. 20. ^hether he eat or drink, or whatever he do, he
should do al to the glory of God* 1 Cor. 10. 30. Which three general precepts
show that we are not to level our actions as merely natural m^n do, but as it
becomes Christians, to level them at his glory, as the great end and scope of
them; that to us to live may be Christ, that we may live to him, and glorify
him who has bought us, and that from a principle of love to him who has loved
us: Now Conscience comes not in formally to deal on the first account, that
is, as the action is good in it self, or on the matter; There reason and
judgment come in rather, and tell when a man does that which is good or (...)
on the matter; But Conscience comes in on the second accoun^, and tells him
when his action is done Christianly, (...) wi^, in due manner, from a right
principle, and to a right (...): To make this out, it will be needful that we
shortly speak a word to these two: 1. We shall show what makes an action truly
Christian and Rel^gious. 2. We shall show that in all these things that make an
action such, Conscience has something to say to men whether ^t be so with them.

As for the First, I speak no^ of the matter of the action, or what makes it
good in that respect, as that it be war^antable, and in nothing sinful, as to
the matter, such as are ^aring, drinking, hearing, reading, praying, etc.
Beside this, there are these Four which must be present, and carefully carried
along in every action by the man that would act Christianly, and glorify God
therein; The want of which, or o^ any of these, will make Conscience to have
something to say against him, as ground of Challenge; as the having of them
will make Conscience to ^ay for him, and approve him: The 1. of these is, That
a man's action be levelled at an higher end then himself; and that is Gods
honor, and the ^fication of others; As for instance, men even in their eating
and drinking are not to satisfy themselves, or to gratify their appetite
only, but they are to make their eating and drinking a mean to pro^ove the
honor of God, as the great and ultimat end; sitting down on an ^our end will
furnish a ground of Challenge to the Conscience against the persons. The 2d.
is, That it be from a cleanly motive; that not only it be a lawful and good
thing which we do, but that it be done out of Conscience to God, and as service
to him; for a man may do a good action* and not do it as such; As for instance,
one man may give alms, and sin in the doing of it, and another, in giving, may
off^r an acceptable sacrifice to God; Therefore Christ says, Math. 10. 42*
and Mark 9. 41. Whosoever gives to drink to one of these little ones a cup of
cold water, in the name as a disciple, viz. Considering him as such, and giving
it to him as such a one, or in the name of, and because he ^elongs to (...) on
that account, and under that consideration, and being sweyed by that, as his
motive, verily he shall in no ways loss his reward, This two men may suffer
both a like unjustly from a churlish Master, or Superior; The one of whom may
have no thanks, nor peace in his sufferings, when the other suffering
Christianly, out of Conscience, to God, and in obedience to his Command, that
calls him to it, is accepted and has peace; This is thank worthy, (says
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 19.) If a man for conscience sake endure grief and
suffer wrongfully; So in the love of a Husband to his Wife, and of a Parent to
his, or her Child, it is one thing to love on a mere natural account, and
another thing to love such a Relation, Christianly, and out of Conscience to
God; though the former is not condemned, yet it is this latter that makes it to
be a conscientious, and acceptable love before God. The 3* is, That the action
be gone about in the right manner, as such a particular action or duty is
commanded to be done; As for instance, if it be a word of Instruction, or
Admonition given by us to another; that it be given prudently, lovingly, and
tenderly; or what ever the action be in reference to others, that our manner of
going about it, be such as may adorn the Doctrine of Christ, and make the
action to shine the more convincingly to others, because of our suitable way of
discharging it; that we may have a Testimony in their Conscience, and may gain
them, or further gain them to the love of God, and of godliness: But this
cannot be so well instanced in particulars, because several duties require
their own suitable way of performing of them. The 4th. thing that must go
along, with every Action, is, That it be mixed with Faith, Heb. 4. 2. Not only
the Faith of such an Action being good, and lawful in it self, (for that is
always presupposed) but these two things here are further requisite. 1. That
the Action, or Duty be gone about in the strength of Jesus Christ, so that it
may have a Superior Spiritual principle, to wit, Gods strength acting in it,
and not our own simply; that crowd of witnesses chronicled, Heb. 11. are said
to do all they did, this way, viz. By faith, That is not only by Faith*
exercised on Christ, for accepting of them, but also by Faith exercised on the
strength of Christ, to be born through in the doing of what they did. 2. That
not only Faith be exercised for divine strength in doing, and that the doers be
denied to their own strength, but that there be also a resting on Christ, for
the acceptance of their Persons and performances; and this is al^e requisite,
as any of the former; because, though a Person do that which is good in it
self, and have all the other requisits to the Action, yet, if there be a
falling in this, Conscience will not speak peace; By faith (It Is said, Heb. 11.
4, 5. That) Abel offered a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain: Both of them
offered things that were good, and yet the ones Sacrifice was accepted, and the
others rejected; That which made the difference was, that Abel, in his
Offering, exercised Faith on Christ's Sacrifice, he offered it not as a
Satisfaction in it self to God, but with respect to Jesus Christ typified by
it, which the other did not; and proportionally there is somewhat required of
all these, and more especially of this last in all Actions, to make them truly
Religious, and Christian Actions.

Now, For the 2d. Particular, viz. That in all these things, that make an
Action to be truly Religious, Conscience has somewhat to say, and has an
interest, and concern, to testify for, or against the man; I shall instance
this in Six ^orts of Actions, to which all a man's Actions (I mean that are
properly human Actions, or rationaly deliberat Actions) may be reduced, as to
so many general heads. The First sort is, natural Actions, as Eating, Drinking,
Sleeping, etc. In which (what ever many think to the contrary) Conscience has
an interest, because they require the proposing of Gods Glory as their end; and
he has prescribed a way how to go about them aright. The 2d. Sort, Is Civil
Actions, as men's being exercised in this or that lawful Employment, Trade,
Calling, or Occupation; and here Conscience has an interest; for it is said,
that the plowing of the wicked is sin; Which, when gone about, after the right
manner by the Believer, is service to God, as well as his praying. The 3d. Sort
is Moral Actions, such as are done from a principle of moral honesty; As for
instance, when a man barg^neth, and makes a promise, anen^ such and such
things to be performed by him; to keep his word, which is morally good, yet is
it not truly, Religiously and Christianly good, except it be done in obedience
to the command of God, and with respect to his honor; And here also Conscience
has interest; for as a man comes short of these things requisite, for making
it a truly Religious, or Christian Action, it will challenge and accu^e in so
far, and when they are present, it will excuse, and commend him. The 4th. Sort
is, External Duties of Religion; What is it, I pray, that makes the difference
betwixt Formal and Hypocritical Service, and Worship* and that which is
accepted as service to God? Is it not, that one person performs such Duties
conscionably and Christianly according to the Rules prescribed anent the right
performing of them, and another not? The 5th. Sort is, Inward Duties (or
Graces) such as Repentance, Faith, Love* Hope, etc. Of all which there are
Counterfits, some things very like them, which yet are not indeed these:
Conscience has here likewayes a concern, and makes a difference; As suppose
two men are ^orty for Sin, and we man suppose them to be someway alike, or
equally sorrowful; and yet the sorrow of the one, is accounted the Grace of
Repentance, and the others not, because of the want of the requ^sits of Gospel,
or gracious sorrow, or sorrow after a godly ^ort, as the Apostle calls it, 2
Cor. 7. v. 11. So in the exercise of other Graces; where Conscience will
challenge. and accu^e, or excu^e, and approve accordingly. The 6th. Sort of
Actions are passive (to speak so) or Sufferings, wherein Conscience has a
concern, and tells the man that he should suffer, as a Christian from such a
principle, and for such ends; which he through Grace endeavoring to do,
Conscience speaks peace to him; And though another man suffer the same very
things, yet he may want that testimony, because he wants the grounds of it, his
sufferings being destitute of the requisite qualifications: And therefore we
would never think a thing to be of so little moment, that Conscience has no
concern in it, we cannot do, speak, think, nor look, but Conscience has
something to say of that deed, word, thought, or look, as it is
circumstantiat; either to accuse, if not as it ought to be, or to excuse and
approve, if right, as to its requisits.

The 2d. Use is for trial of a sanctified Conscience in a ^anctified frame, and
for differencing it from another Conscience that is not so; a sanctified
Conscience, and in a sanctified frame, is always meddling with all the man's
actions, not only when he is praying, hearing, reading, or conferring ^o a
spiritual purpose, but also when he is buying or selling, eating or drinking,
speaking or keeping silent, abroad or at home, alone or in company, etc. It is
very like that Paul had said many* things when he was a Pharisee, that his
Conscience meddled not much with; but now being a serious Christian, he cannot
speak, nor write, but his Conscience medles with it; In a word, a sanctified
Conscience is always going along with a man, is still with him, and letting
him know that it is with him, and a sanctified man will needs have, and loves
to have his Conscience constantly with him; The word Conscience in the Original
is significant, and says this much, that when it is right, the Christian and
it are joined together; Whereas an unsanctified man parts company (as it were)
with his Conscience, he loves not to take it, he will not take it with him, it
is a burden to him, he would ^ain be rid of its company; and it often refuses
to go along with him; It Is never the worst Conscience that is often meddling,
providing it be owned and listened to when it medleth; a sanctified Conscience
medleth, 1. Constantly. 2. It medleth in all sorts of things, it puts the man
when he has spoken to search his heart, whether he thought as he said. 3. It
speaks in the Holy Ghost, according to the mind of God* and interests it self,
on Gods account, cleanly, spiritually, and impartially, without all by-respect
to the man.

The 3d* Use, is for reproof to these that misken Conscience, and take none at
all, or but very little notice of it in the most part of their life; Ah! How
few are they that think and believe that Conscience is concerned in all their
words and actions: And as for thoughts they are looked on by such as free, and
therefore they never look, what it says of them, and so spoil themselves of
it is testimony, and lose their labor in not respecting it.

The 4th. Use is of Exhortation; and we would seriously exhort you all to amend
this great fault reproved, viz. the misregarding of Conscience, and to respect
Conscience in every thing, and to regard it more in your going out and coming
in, in solitude and society, in every thing ye do, suffer not your selves to be
cheated into a groundless apprehension, that any of your actions, even the
commonest, as circumstantiat, are of so little moment, that Conscience has no
concern in them; And if it has, then I beseech you, take heed what: it says,
and whether it testifies for or against you; and do not think that Conscience
is officious, and medles in a business that concerns it not, except ye think
that there are some parts of your life that should not at all be religious, but
that you are left in them to live as you list: It Is oft-times our fault that we
limit Conscience to this and that particular action that is of some
considerable concernment, and some way shut it out as having no concern in
these of lesser moment; And many, alace! shoulder it out from the tract of
their life; and current of their actions; O! let this by any means be amended.

SERMON II.
ROMANS 9. 1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost.
CHristians who have such a vigilant and constant attendant as Conscience
waiting on them, had much need of watchfulness, that they may be kept in some
suitableness of frame for intertaining that companion; Conscience its work, is
not only to be advising and deliberating what is to be done, but also to be
waiting on when it comes to the acting and performing of what it has been
advising to; and it is indeed no less practique to carry Conscience along in
the performing of duty, then it is in taking some pains to consult it, and
advise with it at the undertaking thereof, so as we may be answerable to
Conscience as to both; oft-times some pains will be taken in deliberating and
advising with Conscience what and when we should do, when we will exceedingly
relent in taking it along with us in the performance: Whence it frequently
comes to pass, that we lose the peace we gained in advising with Conscience at
our undertaking the action, by not carrying it along with us in performing:
This is the thing which we proposed to be spoken to from this verse, viz. The
influence* that Conscience has on men's acting, and the respect that they ought
to have to it, not only before they undertake any action, but in, and along the
performing of it. The last Doctrine we spoke to from it was, that there is not
any action of a man's life, but Conscience is concerned in it, and has
something to say concerning it, for or against him; If it were but the speaking
of a word, or the asserting of any truth; as we see in this instance of Paul,
his Conscience bears him witness, it has something to say to him anent his
doing it; We cleared this in several, yea rather in all sorts of actions that
men have to perform; There being none of them of so little moment, so
extrinsick, or so indifferent, but in the performing of them, Conscience ought
to be carried along, as having somewhat to say for, or against the performer.
We shall now add some four or five Observations more from the words; And the
first (which we may either take as an Use of the former, or as a distinct
Observation by it self) is this;

That men in the time of their going about any thing would advert and take heed
to that sense which Conscience has of their actions; And seeing it has
something to say, they would be lending to their ear all along the time of
their performing the action, and hear what it says; As before they undertake,
they would advise with Conscience that they be right; so in the time of
performance, there would be a reflecting on Conscience, to know its sense of
our doing; Paul is now speaking and asserting somewhat, and he reflecteth on
his Conscience to hear what it will say, and that he may get its testimony,
that he is speaking sincerely; he is not now advising with Conscience, to know
what he should do; nor to get its censure of what he has done; but in the very
time of his doing, he reflecteth and takes notice what it says; He asserteth
that he is speaking truth, and takes a look into his Conscience, to see if it
be not so, that he is indeed speaking the truth, and truly; Or we may take the
Doctrine thus, it is a main piece of a tender walk in a Christian, not only to
deliberate with Conscience before he do any thing, and when he has done it, to
take its censure if it be rightly done, but also to reflect upon his Conscience
in the very time of his doing of it, and to hear what it will say of that which
he is now a-doing, and of himself in the doing of it, And we conceive that this
is one of the main things meant by the testimony of Conscience; When Conscience
is put to it in the performance of a duty, to know what it will say concerning
the man and his action; for if so be that Conscience has something to say
concerning every duty, for or against the man (as it is, Romans 2. 15* Their
Conscience bearing them witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or
else excusing one another) Then it will clearly follow that it is a main piece
of a Christians duty to keep fair with his Conscience here* and to take good
heed what it says, in the very interim and mean time of his performing every
action; Yea, it is not only a main piece of a Christians walk, but a main
evidence of a tender walk in a Christian, viz. When he does not only aim to be
clear in undertaking a duty, but to carry Conscience along with him, and to
know what it says in following forth the duty. Take these two or three words
for clearing it. First, Consider that the right performance of our actions and
duties, or the making of them such as they should be, depends very much on
the nick of our discharging them; so that though a man should deliberat never
so well before, if he be in a carnal frame, or have a selfie end ^o the time of
performance, he will be at a loss of his peace, and much miss his mark; as the
Apostle has the word, Philip. 3. 13. I press toward the mark; In his aiming at
holiness and a good conscience, he levelleth all his actions at that mark, the
prize of the high calling of God; I shall make use of this similitude for
illustrating it, let a man with a Bow or Musket level never so well, or take
never so just a visie, if his hand waver in the instant of shooting, he cannot
readily hit the mark; Even so, though a man (as I said) deliberat and advise
never so well with his Conscience before he do a thing, if in the time of
doing, he take not heed tenderly and steddily to it, but fall carnal and selfie
in it, he cannot have peace as to the performance of that action. 2dly.
Consider that we are so very tickle in our frame (as the duties of holiness are
some way in themselves) and our hearts so unstable, light and frothy, that
though we should level them right just now, yet they will be ready quickly to
start aside as a deceitful how upon out hand; It cannot therefore be sufficient
ground for the testimony of a good Conscience, to deliberat in undertaking,
except a man observe and reflect on his Conscience, and study to carry it along
with him in the very time of his acting: Our hearts are like to a distempered
Clock or Watch, which being just now set never so right, ere we are aware, it
will go wrong; it will point the hour aright now, and within a little it is
quite out of course, because there is some defect or fault within, the Wheels
not being evenly, or the Balance not justly poised, or some other such cause;
Even so though our heart were in a suitable frame just now, presently, and ere
we turn us about (as it were) it is out of frame, so that we cannot well take
our aim from it; It is so very deceitful, that it abides not in frame. 3dly.
Consider that unless this reflecting on Conscience, in the time of performing
the action, or duty, be, a man will be at a loss of one of these two; He will
either be at a loss as to his ^ober composed and holy frame, and turn carnal,
which is frequently and readily incident even to believers, or he will be at a
loss as to the confidence, boldness, and peace that he might otherwise have in
the performance of such an action or duty; for suppose a person to be in a good
frame after he has resolved on a duty, let it be for instance, speaking to
edification, going about Prayer, or the making of some lawful Bargain, or the
like; and he has abundant light and clearness in his call to the thing, yet if
he look not to, and reflect not on Conscience in the discharge of that duty,
when a challenge comes on the back of it, as if he had been wrong; he cannot
well answer nor repel it; his being right being to him in that case (in some
respect) little or no better then if he had been wrong; because he observed not
Conscience in the time of the action: And this is one great reason, no doubt,
why believers have so little positive peace when they have done a good turn,
because they do not advert what Conscience says to them, in their going about
it; They are hereby also greatly at a lose, as to many sweet experiences of
Gods kindness, and condescending in assisting them, and of their own
singleness win at, through Grace in the performing of Duties: and we think
also, that Christians living so much by a negative peace (to speak so) flows
much from this ground, viz. Their little reflecting in the time of their doing
Duty, (if once they be clear in the thing) whither they be suitably serious,
and sincere in it; and so letting the opportunity go by, they are not so
thoroughly clear in these things, that are evidences of a positive peace, in
doing of such a duty rightly, as they might otherwise be*

The First Use, Serves, to give you an evidence, and mark of a tender walk, and
of a man that is tender in his walk; he is such a man that will not only ask
his Conscience ere he begin an Action, but when he is a doing of it, what it
thinks of it: There are Three things that a tender Christian will reflect
upon, in the time of his doing an Action or Duty; 1. He will reflect upon his
manner of performing it; whither it be a natural Action, such as Eating and
Drinking; a civil Action, such as Buying and Selling; a Religious Action, such
as Praying, or hearing, etc. He will look that in them all he be single; that
his Eating and Drinking be to fit him to serve God; That in his Buying and
Selling, he seek not only his own things, but the good of his Neighbor, as
well as his own good; That in his Praying, or Hearing, he be sincere, that it
be in Faith, and according to the will of God, etc. 2ly. He will reflect on
himself in the performing of his Actions, that he be in a right frame; that he
be tender, and sincere, that some awe of God, and of a good Conscience be on
him, that his Spirit be sober and composed, that a carnal frame steal not in
upon him, in the time of his doing a warrantable Action, or a commanded Duty,
because that will mar it. 3dly. He will reflect upon his Conscience, that he
may hear what it says of the Action; He will not, as it were, take his
Testimony from himself, but Conscience being as a distinct thing, some way from
himself, he will hear what it says; As Paul does here, it is truth which he
speaks, and he speaks it in the right manner* and yet he takes a look of
his Conscience, if he be doing so in very deed, to wit, sincerely, as in the
sight of God; yea more, he takes the Testimony of his Conscience, if it be not
so; And thus here he looks not to, nor reflecteth on his Conscience, to alter
any piece of his way, but to have it is sense of that piece of it; He gathers,
that the Action is good from the Word; and he inquires if he be, and collects
that he is right, in the performance from his Conscience, testifying according
to the Word; so that he will not trust himself, but goes to Conscience, as
being more impartial, to take it is Testimony: The reason then (as I said
before) why few Christians have solid peace, is this, if the matter of their
Actions be good, and if they can answer their light therein, they reflect but
little on their Conscience, in the performing thereof, and therefore want much
of the peace and consolation that might otherwise accompany them in their
Actions, and when they are done, and over: and this evidence of tenderness
kythes rather, when a man is in the Act, then either before or after; for fear,
or awe may make a man seek Light before an Action, and a challenge may put him
to reflect, and examine when he has done; But here mainly lies the evidence
of sincerity, and tenderness, when in every step all along the Action, or Duty
so far as is requisite, and humane infirmity will admit, he takes heed what he
is doing: and, as we said the other day, That it was an evidence of a tender
Conscience, to be always meddling in every thing that a man does; So we say
now, that it is an evidence of a tender man, to listen and hear what censure
his Conscience passes on him, in performing his Actions*

The 2d. Use, is for reproof; Ah! may we not find* but by overly reflections,
if we did advise with Conscience at our undertaking of such a work or Duty,
that yet in the time of doing it, there was but little reflecting on our
Conscience, if it did bear us witness of our sincerity in going about it; How
many times will Men and Women be found Eating, Drinking, Buying, Selling, Going
or Riding a lawful Journey, speaking of a Sermon, etc. And yet in these
Actions, but seldom, or never looking in, if they have the Testimony of their
Conscience, that they are right in their going about of these things? Can this,
I pray, speak a tender frame, that is so neglective of Conscience? It is
certainly an evidence of ane untender Frame in Believers; and where ever it is
habitual and regnant, it is an evidence of an evil state; For, if one be a
tender Christian, when should his Conscience be tender, if not in the nick of
the performance of an Action? For that is the time when he will, or should be
levelling, least he miss the mark: and knowing how fickle, and unconstant he
is, and that he has a heart like an unsteady hand; how should he guard against
it is levity, and unstablenesse?

The 3d. Use, Is of Exhortation, to advert more to this Testimony of
Conscience, in performing Duties; O! Learn to reflect on your selves in every
thing, and to ask your selves what ye are doing, that ye may know, if ye be
right or wrong; if wrong, that ye may take with it, and be humbled for it; if
right, that ye may be comforted in it: We conceive this would be a notable
guard to tenderness, and keeping communion with God; and a sovereign help to
prevent many sins, and much hypocrisy in our way of doing things; even to be
taking exact notice, if we be indeed doing that which we profess to be doing,
if we be speaking to Edification, if we be praying in earnest, when we pretend
to be praying* etc.

2ly. Observe, That when Conscience is well satisfied in a particular Action,
or Duty* it can signify it is sense thereof to the man that performs it, and
speaks a good word for him; This is the thing that Paul's Con* science does
here; he is sincere in the thing that he asserts, and it bears him witness of
his sincerity, when he adverteth to it: First, I say, Conscience can signify
it is mind and sense of a particular Action, or Duty, if it be well pleased, and
can speak a good word for the man; it can signify it is mind at any time, but
when it is well plea^ed, it signifies, it by testifying for the man: And 2ly* I
say, That not only does it testify it is satisfaction with the Action, but with
every thing in it, when there is a right end, a right motive, and a right
manner of performance, when Christ is duly respected in it, and made use of
for strength and acceptance. And 3ly. I add this, If men advert to it, and if
it be asked; because it has something to say always, yet men will not hear,
nor know what it says, except they advert well, and reflect, and take good
heed to it.

3ly. Observe, That it is very strengthening, confirming, comforting,
refreshing, and satisfying to a man in a particular Action, to have the
Testimony of his Conscience for him; This bears Paul through here, amidst all
challenges that might have been raised, from seeking of himself, or from
following revenge, in what he asserts; There is no such thing, says he, my
Conscience bears me witness of the contrary: It Is not a man's Action simply,
that will give him boldness, confidence and comfort; for several persons may
concur, in one and the self same good Action on the matter; and yet some may
have a good, (...) others an evil Conscience in it, were it but as to a man's
thought and opinion of himself; For it is not he that commends himself, but he
whom God commends that is approven. When Conscience (I say) bears witness for
a man, It is a very strengthening, confirming and satisfying thing; The Reasons
are, 1. Because Conscience is the more single, and impartial Judge and witness,
and therefore a man may lay the more weight on it. 2ly. Because Conscience
speaks, and bears witness with respect to God, and when it testifies on
solid grounds, it is Gods Testimony; Now when a Debate arises in a man about
any of his Actions, the man himself is the party arraigned the Challenge, or
Tentation, is the party accusing, and Conscience is as the Witness, or Judge
that decideth, and being un-byassed, it bears Witness, and passes the
Sentence truly, and impartially; It (as it were) says, it is true, he said
such and such a thing, and that sincerely; and I know that his thoughts and
intentions were honest; and thus Conscience decides the Debate in his favors,
if so be he has it on his side; and so confirms, and comforts him.

The Use is, To exhort you to lay more weight on Conscience, and on it is
Testimony, and less weight on any other thing; for it will not be your good
meaning, nor good hopes (as ye use to speak) but a sanctified Conscience, in a
sanctified Frame, that will be found fittest to decide in any Action.

4ly. Observe, That the Testimony of Conscience speak ing for a man, and his
performing of a good Action on the matter, are separable; That is, a man may do
that which is good in it self, and yet not have a positive and approbative
Testimony from his Conscience concerning it; otherwise Paul needed not to have
attested his Conscience, if he had not known, that Conscience it is Testimony
might have been separat from what he speaks; It Is well enough known, that he
was saying, his heart was grieved for the rejection of the Jews; but the
question was, if he had said it honestly and sincerely; and he asserts, that he
has Conscience it is Testimony for that, as a distinct thing: There are but too
many proofs of the truth of this Doctrine; are there not many, who speak good
words, and do good deeds on the matter, who yet have not a good Conscience in
the speaking, and doing of them? As it is said of Amaziah, 2 Chro^. 25. 2. He
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect
heart* So it may be said of many others, that they do that which is good for
the matter, but they want the Testimony of a good Conscience in the performance
of it: This will be further clear if we consider these two things. 1. That
there are many things that concur to make an Action Truly, and Christianly
good, such as we spoke of the other day; many care for no more, but that the
Action be good for the Matter, but it is moreover requisite, that it be good as
to the manner of performance, that it be from a right motive, to a right end,
done in Faith, by strength drawn from Christ, and with an eye to acceptance on
his account, a corrupt end in Prayer, in coming to the Church to hear, in
reading the Word, or in any other Duty, will spoil the Action. 2ly. That there
are different Rules to try these by; there is one Rule to regulat us, in the
matter of our Actions, and another to regulat our manner of going about them;
and a good Conscience looks to both these Rules; And if anyof the requisite
qualifications to the suitable and acceptable performance of them, be absent
and wanting, in so far Conscience will withhold it is positive approving
Testimony: a good Conscience it is Testimony is like the harmony of a well tuned
Instrument; It Is one thing to have all the strings on the Instrument, and
another thing to have them all in tune; when it is not rightly tuned, though it
have on all the strings, it cannot give a sweet, nor harmonious sound; so is it
with the Conscience.

The Use is, For exhortation to watchful advertance in every thing to
Conscience it is Testimony: Seeing there are many that do good on the matter, who
yet want it is Testimony, it becomes us to be the more watchful to keep a good
Conscience; and seeing that Conscience it is speaking for a man, and giving him
it is approbative Testimony, and his doing that which is good, on the matter,
are not only separable, but are often actually separated, the one from the
other* not only in natural, but even in regenerat men* as fr^quent experience
puts beyond debate; We had need (I say) to be the more watchful, both as to the
matter, and manner of our doing, least we be at a lose of the Testimony of
Conscience for us: And none would think it to be as easy a bussinesse to keep
a good Conscience, as to the manner of performing of Duty, as it is to do so,
^s to the matter of it. How many come to the Church, but without due
preparation, and without having a heart ready to hear, what God will say to
them, and meddle with with other Duties, without regarding the due manner of
performing them? We ^ight instance it in all these Six Sorts of Actions, we
spoke of the other day, in all which there is a propensnes i^ us naturally, to
degenerat, and go beside the Rule; As namely, 1. In natural Actions of Eating
and Drinking, or of loving Husband, or Wife, or Children, men may be very
carnal, degenerat, and become like very Beasts. 2. In civil Actions* as Buying
and Barganing, wherein men man turn basely covetous, selfie, and seeking their
own things, and not the honor of God, no^ the good and advantage of others.
3ly. In Moral Actions, as speaking truth, dealing fairly and honestly; wherein
men may turn legal, proud and vain, and seek to establish a self-righteousnesse
thereby to themselves. 4. In external Religious Actions, as hearing the Word,
Praying, etc. Wherein men may turn hypocritical, and formal, having a show
without substance, and a form of godliness without the power of it. 5. In
inward Duties, as repentance, contentment, etc. Wherein men may turn worldly,
and carnal, therefore a worldly repentance from fear of punishment, or of shame
in the World, or worldly sorrow that causes death, is spoken of, 2 Cor. 7. v.
10. So the^e is a worldly contentment. 6. In passive actions, or sufferings;
some may suffer from inevitable necessity, and have no thanks for it* as it is,
1 Pet. 2. 20. We may, from the unstraightnesse of the end, to which; from the
unsoundnesse of the principle, from which; from the unsuitablenesse of the
motive by which, duties are done* and several otherwise, prejudge our selves
of the approving Testimony of our Conscience; which we would carefully advert
to, that we divide not betwixt a good Conscience, and a good Turn, Action, or
Duty.

But it may be Asked here, What is the reason that it is so difficult to keep a
good Conscience, and to carry it along with us, in the very interim, mean time,
and nick of performing the Action, above, and beyond what it is, either to
deliberat and advise with it before we do, or to reflect after we have done?

I Answer, And give these Two or Three Reasons of it; The First whereof, is
drawn from the necessary concurrence of so many things that must go together,
in the performance of an Action; Which makes it easier to resolve before doing,
or to reflect after doing, then to perform. The 2d. is, Because there is such a
ticklenesse in the frame ol our hearts, that they are unstable as water, stable
in nothing: There are Three distempers of heart that we are subject to, which
all hold forth this difficulty, 1. A declining humor (to say so) or distemper,
whereby we are given to backslide, or turn aside like a deceitful bow, that
keeps bensel while the arrow is a drawing, and when it is at, or in the very
letting off, starteth aside. 2ly. A levity, and unsetlednesse, even such that
the weather* cock is not sooner, and more easily whirled about, by the least
wind, then we are by the least breathing of the air of Tentation; So that were
we just now in a good and suitable frame for Duty, ere we be aware, we fall
off; and a good Conscience requires a composedness and stayednesse of Frame.
3ly. A rashness, and hastiness, or precipitance, which makes us, that so soon
as we are clear in the thing, to rush forward, and to think all is done that is
requisite; so that we wait not to carry Conscience along with us, in our
performances; which rash precipitant, and hasty humor, or distemper makes us
often miscarry; As David says of himself, Psalm. 116* I said in my haste that
all men are liars* and I said in my haste, that I am cut off from thy presence,
Psalm. 31. So Believers often mar the composedness of their own frame* by
their h^steing* and not taking heed to what Conscience says, while they are
in performing Duty; Thus many post, as it were, through their Prayers, speaking
of many good things in them from light; but not endeavoring to carry
Conscience its testimony along with them of their sincerity, they spoil and
mar that which was well intended and begun by them. A 4th. ground, reason, or
cause of this is, the great difficulty that there is to maintain and keep up a
right frame of heart for any considerable time; and a man will never keep a
good Conscience along particular duties, if he maintain not a right frame of
heart; though a thing good in it self were never so fairly floored (to speak
so) and its ground never so well taken up, yet the least bias or rub easily
puts it by, and makes it go out: All which should in reason make us study the
more watchfulness.

5thly. Observe (which will help to the Use of the former, and is of some
affinity with the first particular Observation,) That persons would endeavor
to walk in every particular duty or action, so as they may not only advert to
what Conscience says of it, but may also carry it along with them in it, and
have the positive approving testimony thereof all along the doing of it,
which may be, though there be not reflecting on it every moment; That is, not
only would they before they undertake any thing, be clear that it is a
warrantable duty (as was marked before) but further when they have done this,
they would so carry Conscience along with them in it, as they may have its
testimony that they go about it conscienciously: Therefore Paul asks not only
what Conscience says of the action as to its matter, and as to his sincerity
in undertaking it; but he brings it out speaking for him while he is doing
it, My conscience (says he) bears me witness: The reason of the Doctrine is,
because it is not enough to hear what Conscience says, for it may accuse as
well as excuse, but we would endeavor to carry so, as we may have a good
testimony from it; Which it will not give, nor speak peace to us, if we study
not to take it with us all along the action* This is a notable way to curb sin;
to mortify lusts; to make us accurate in duties; to keep us from posting (to
speak so) through our prayers; from scu^ching through a Chapter of the Bible;
and from trifling in other duties; Why? because we have our Conscience to
answer to, and its good testimony to wait for; This is that which gives holy
boldness to a Christian, when 1. He knows that what he does is right for the
matter. 2. When he takes good heed to what Conscience faith. And 3. When he
has its good and approbative testimony: And we think that this is much of what
that Text, Act 24. v. 16. aims at; and is the main thing a Christian should
exercise himself in, even to have the testimony of his Conscience, for him in
this, and that, and the other duty, nay in every duty, to have its good
testimony, when he begins, when he goes on in it, or in the time of it, and
when he has closed it; This is it (as I have often said) which furnishes him
with holy boldness and confidence, and gives him much sweet peace and serenity
in his mind, that who ever and what ever speak against him, he is at a point
that he is right, having the well grounded testimony of his Conscience for it.

But it may be questioned here, How is it possible for a man to carry a
testimony of his Conscience along with him in every action? Can he always be
reflecting on every word he speaks, and on every action he puts his hand
unto? For Answer, we would first distinguish betwixt an explicit and actual
inquiring at, and reflecting on Conscience, and an implicit and habitual
inquiring at, and reflecting on it; and betwixt an explicit and actual, and an
implicit and habitual testimony of the Conscience; And then apply it to the
particular answer, that then is an explicit testimony of Conscience, when it
does actually, expressly and downright speak its mind; and that is an actual
and explicit reflecting on Conscience, when a man does indeed expressly and
downright put himself to it to inquire Consciences sense of his action: An
implicit and habitual testimony of Conscience is, when Conscience is not
always actually, observably, and expressly speaking by a positive approbation;
Yet it is so indirectly, virtually, and on the matter, and is ready actually to
do so, when put to it. And an implicit and habitual reflecting on Conscience,
is, when men are not always actually and expressly asking their Conscience what
it says; When yet they do it implicitly, virtually, and on the matter; and
are in a readiness to do it actually, when put to it: Which may be illustrated
by the similitude made use of before; The habitual and explicit testimony of
Conscience, and reflecting on it, is like the putting of an Instrument of
Music in a right Tune, and then we say it is in Tune, though none be playing on
it; because it is ready to give a distinct and harmonious sound, having all the
Strings right in tune; an explicit and actual testimony and reflecting, is
like a man's striking or playing on the well tuned Instrument, and bringing out
actually the just Musical sound, that was habitually in the tuned Instrument
before.

Now to apply this particularly in answer to the question, We say, 1. That in
three cases an actual and explicit testimony of Conscience, and reflecting on
it* is necessary, 1. As to a man's undertaking of any action or duty, that he be
clear in it, that it is a duty 2* In reference to the thing when done, because
it is that which gives him peace; for a man's reflecting on Conscience, and its
testimony here, is like playing on the Instrument. 3. It Is necessary as to a
man's stare. But 2. We say an explicit testimony, and actual inquiring at
Conscience is not simply necessary always along the action or duty, or it is
not simply necessary, that a man actually reflect and have a testimony from his
Conscience always, or in all difference of time along the action, though
habitually and implicitly he ought: for the keeping of a good Conscience, is
like to that general Precept spoken of before, anent doing what ever we do to
the glory of God, at the principal end of all our actions; and that is founded
on this; Where it is not necessary, that all along the action or duty, in all
difference of time, or in every moment (as I just now said) we should have
actual and explicit thoughts of this end, viz. Gods glory; but if this end be
intended in the whole current of our life habitually, and actually in the entry
of every particular action or duty, though there be not actual and explicit
thoughts of it always along the action, we may warrantably expect on Christ's
account Gods approbation, as doing to his glory: So is it here; As when a man
undertakes a journey to such a place, It Is sufficient before he set out, he
actually and explicitly mind that place, and that he do so now and then by the
way, and especially if he observe any turning off, or hazard of going out of
the way, or if he has not often gone that way before* though he have not
actual thoughts of it all along everystep of the way: But to clear this in a
word or two further, we conceive that these three particularly are necessary
for keeping a good Conscience, 1. The habitual Testimony of Conscience, that
is, that a man's Conicience be always in a readiness to give him a good
testimony; Which imports three things. 1. That he be right in the matter of his
practice, that it be nothing sinful that he is about. 2. That he be right in
the frame of his spirit, spiritual, stayed and composed. 3. That he be
carefully watchful to prevent what ever may man his peace, and to guard against
what may distemper and discompose his spirit; and that withal he be studious to
keep his Conscience in a good temper or tune (to speak so) that it may be in
readiness to give him a testimony when he calls for it: These three are
necessary (I say) in every particular action for keeping of a good Conscience,
that a man be in a thing that for the matter is right; that he be in a composed
and suitable frame; and that he be watchful against any thing that may hinder
or distemper him in prosecuting that action. 2. Though an explicit and actual
testimony and reflecting, be not always, or in all difference of time
necessary; yet it would be frequent* and the more frequent, readily the better;
Though (for instance) in every word of Prayer one cannot actually reflect on
himself, nor look after the testimony of Conscience; Yet in intervals this may
be win at, and would be endeavored: It Is in this case some way as it is in
reference to that command anent praying always, or without ceasing, though we
cannot pray always actually, or continually without interruption; nor are we
obliged to do so; yet we should be frequent in it, and intermix all our actions
with short ejaculations to God, and always keep our selves in a praying frame:
So though we cannot always be actually putting Conscience to it, yet
frequently we should, and more especially, if we be about a duty that is more
difficult and tickle; and wherein we are very ready to go wrong, and so to lay
the ground of a challenge; or wherein Gods honor is some* what more then
ordinarily concerned. 3. It Is required here, that we seriously endeavor to
keep things right, and be weeding out (as it were) what is wrong, as we find
Conscience hinting to us; for the frame of our hearts (as has been said) is
very unstable and fickle, we would therefore be often mending and righting it;
as a man does with a Watch that is easily distempered, he often looks to it,
and puts it right: Or it is here as it is with a Pilot who steereth a Vessel
that is very easily by a little wind put by her course, he bears up closs in
the eye of the wind, and when he finds her never so little off her course, he
steers about again till he set her right; or to hold us at the former
comparison of an Instrument, to preserve which in tune, it must not only be at
first tempered to a just and harmonious sound, and struck upon to give out that
sound; But when a man has played a while upon it, he must be tempering and
tuning it among hands (to say so) screwing up this and that, and the other Peg,
as the strings slack their benfil, else it will not be kept in tune; Even so
while we are endeavoring to keep a good Conscience, some one Peg or other (so
to speak) will readily still be a-unfixing, and we would study to bring things
back to their right temper, and watching that carnalness creep not in upon us.

The Use of the Doctrine in a word is, partly to reprove for neglect of this
walk, partly to exhort to the diligent and tender practice of it, even
carefully to advert to Conscience, and to endeavor to be in good terms with
it, in performing every action; in eating, drinking, in bargaining, buying,
selling, in riding a journey, in hearing, praying, etc, and not only to hear
what Conscience has to say, but to walk so as Conscience may speak good to us*
and give us its approving testimony for helping us to keep this good
correspondence with our Conscience in all our actions, which has so great a
stroke upon a Christian walk, upon a cheerful and solacious Christian walk; we
would now add these following directions to those formerly given to the same
purpose; The 1. whereof is* That in undertaking of actions or duties, we would
be very deliberat, clear and fixed. 2. We would study to walk soberly, and
composedly, and to be always in a good frame; Rashness, precipitancy,
hastiness, inadvertency, levity and untenderness, are very cross to these two
directions; as is also parting with Conscience as it were in the way, and not
bringing it up with us. 3. We would be much in ejaculatory Prayer, frequenting
Gods Throne much, often darting up blinks unto him, and into our own selves,
and our Consciences, intermixing these. 4ly. We would be much in self
examination; This is in some respect, the Life of a good Conscience, for where
there is not self examination, or reflection, we either are not right, or else
know not if we be right, and no thanks to us, if we be not wrong. 5ly. We would
study to have an holy indignation at, and a strick watch set against the very
first risings of any thing, that may in the least offend Conscience; Alace! We
often times observe not our own declinings, and fallings from a good Frame; nor
the stirrings of some one Lust and Corruption, or another, which would be
resisted in the beginning; for the one of these wears out the other. 6ly. As
we would endeavor, if we would have a good Testimony from our Conscience, much
singleness and sincerity* in the whole of our walk; and would in every duty,
endeavor to be setting our selves* as in the sight of God, and under his all
seeing eye; nothing more marreth the Testimony of Conscience then
unsinglenesse, and nothing contributs more to it then singleness; It Is a good
word that the Apostle has, 2 Cor. 2. v. last. We are not as many, which
corrupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God
speak we in Christ; Preaching is a good work, yet there were many Preachers
that had not a good Testimony from their Conscience, in that good work; but
Paul had it; and that which made him to to have it, was his sincerity and
singleness, that he spoke as before God, in the sight of God, without a
byasse, or any allowed carnalness in his end: if we could preach, and pray* and
live and walk thus in all our Actions, O! What sweet peace should we have,
living and dying; and O! what skaith, and prejudice does our inadvertancy*
rashness, and carnal walking work to us? and how much does it deprive us of the
benefit of this Friend, in the time of our need? God help us to amend it.

SERMON I.
2 COR. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards.
IT is no great bussiness, but a very ordinary thing for a man to be cheerful
when he is in prosperity, and has all things in the World smiling on him
(though often, even in the midst of that laughter the heart is sorrowful, and
there is an emptiness, and utter insufficiency in all these things, to make
the heart truly glad) but this is a great matter, a very rare thing, and to be
found but with very few, viz. In the midst of afflictions, reproaches,
tribulations and persecutions to be cheerful, and rejoicing, and (as it is,
Isa. 24. 15. to be glorisying God in the midst of the fires; This is Paul's
practice, and exercise here, who being (as the words before hold forth) brought
so near death, that he even dispared of life; who having to do with Professors
and Preachers of the Gospel, that made it their bussines to defame his Person,
and to depretiat, and disparage his Ministry; Who being riviled, buffeted,
persecuted, and counted as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all
things; who being always delivered unto death; and made a gazing stock to the
world, to angels, to men; and being moreover put to wrestle not only with flesh
and blood, but also with principalities and powers, and spirtual wickedness in
high places; yet has this for his rejoicing, the testimony of his conscience,
etc.

Not to insist on the Connection, We have in the words these Four things, 1.
Paul's continued cheerfulness, notwithstanding his formerly mentioned (...),
This is our rejoicing. 2. The ground and rise of this spiritual, and solid joy,
that no affliction can remove from him, The testimony of our conscience; in his
affliction and tribulation he takes a back-look of his way, and finds his
Conscience no^ simply speaking, but testifying good on his hehalf, telling him,
that though he and his fellows were accounted deceivers, and unknown. yet they
were true and well-known, etc. As it is, 2 Cor. 6. v. 8. 3ly. The extent, or
amplification of this ground, 1. More generally, we have had our conversation
in the world, (which is to be restricted to Paul's Conversation after his
Conversion, in his Ministry, and otherwise; For, though a natural man may have
a blamless visible Conversation, yet it is not such as a renewedman has for
the ground of his rejoicing) 2. More particularly, he not only had a good
Conversation, as to the general tract of his Life, but in his carriage toward
the Corinthians in particular, with whom he had been so much, and so long
conversant; and more abundantly to you-wards; what ever they might, through the
suggestion, and instigation of false Teachers, have been disposed, and ready to
upbraid him with, yet he had the Testimony of his sincerity, and integrity, as
to what all the world could say of him, which he alleges, and more
abundantly toward you; Partly to show his distinctnes in searching his
Conscience, not by the Lump (to speak so) but as to the several parts and
pieces of his Life; and partly to obviat an Objection, or Calumny that might
arise among them, where his conversation was most; and most carped at. 4ly. We
have the Characters whereby he confirms this Testimony of his Conscience, or
the qualifications of it, whereby his confidence of having it, is confirmed;
Which are Four, The 1. whereof is negative, not by fleshly wisdom, Not seeking
my own ends, nor my own good in a carnal way; neither by carnal reason
prosecuting the work of the Ministry; The other three are positive, The 2. Is
simplicity, that is, a holy singleness in reference to the end; He was a
straight upright single man, and in nothing double. The 3d. is, That is was in
godly sincerity; And this not only as it is opposite to gross hypocrisy, and
dissimulatiion, but as it differs from mere moral honesty; he walked not only
in a civil moral honest way, as merely moral and civil men use to do, in their
Barganings, and other Dealings, but in godly sincerity, doing every thing as in
Gods sight; as he says of himself, Chap. 2. v. last. We are not as many, who
corrupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God
speak we in Christ: The 4. Character whereby he proves that he had this
Testimony and was assured of it, is, that he did not what he did by his own
strength, or by the strength of nature, but by the grace of God; Which shows
(as we said before) that this Testimony reached no further then from the time
of his Conversion: The first of these positive Characters, or Evidences shows
the singleness of his end; The second, shows his singleness in the way of
prosecuting that end; The third shows the principle whereby, or where from he
acted; it was not carnal reason that gave him counsel, nor nature that
strengthened him, but Grace.

In these words then, we have, First, A short and sweet compend of a Christian
and comfortable life, and of the advantage of a good Conscience. 2. We have the
way how to attain, and how to entertain, and maintain the same. The Apostle (in
a word) being now put to it, and having both Foes and Friends on his top, he
takes a back look of his Life, and reflects on what was his carriage toward
all men, and toward the Corinthiens more particularly, and finds his
Conscience testifying for him, as to both; and on this Testimony of his
Conscience, well proved, and made out, he quietly settles and joyfully chea^eth
himself. Having already spoken of what use should be made of Conscience before,
and in the time of our doing any thing; we have now chosen these words, to show
what use should be made of Conscience in reference to what is past: Not to
stand on every thing that might be observed from them, we shall astrick our
selves to this scope, viz. To point out the right use making of Conscience,
it is sense and Testimony of our Way and Actions, after they are past; and the
Duty of a Believer in trying his bygone course of Life, and every part thereof,
as to Conscience it is Testimony of it, or as to what Conscience can say
concerning it.

1. Then Observe but in passing, That Conscience can signify it is mind to a man
concerning his Actions, and Conversation of a long time past, so that though he
has been in such a Country among such a people, about such and such an Action
many years ago, Conscience reflected upon, has a faculty (to speak so) of
signifying it is sense thereof, as of every other Action of his Life; much of
Paul's time was now past, and a part of it in the Ministry at Corinth, yet
looking so far back, his Conscience gives him this Testimony. Which will be
further clear, if we consider, first, The experience and practice of the
Saints, in attesting their Conscience, in past, and in long since past Actions;
Na^ we suppose there are few, or rather none at all, but their Conscience will
sometimes challenge them, for a^ evil Action that is by their hand, and that
for a considerable time; Joseph's Brethren are a famous instance of the truth of
this: Now, if it can Challenge, or Accuse, it can also Excuse and Approve a
man, and testify for him, when he has done well; For excusing is as extensive
in a good case, as accusing is in an evil. 2. It Is clear also, from the Office
of the Conscience; which (as we show) is not only to dictat, and to be an
observing companion, but to be a Judge; which supposes for ordinary, the thing
to be past; Therefore, 1 John 3. 22. both the condemning and absolving of the
heart is spoken of; Which infers, that the Conscience (called there the
heart) has a way of re-cognoscing of, and passing Sentenc^ on a man's way, and
actions, not only, while they are a doing, but when past.

2ly. Observe (which is that we mainly intend to speak to) That it is a main
piece of a tender walk, and of the practice of ^ Christian, to be reflecting on
his bygone way, and trying what Conscience says of it; not only (as I have
often aid) to deliberat and advise with Conscience before, and to carry
Conscience along in the time of the Action; but when the thing is past, it may
be many years since, and as to the course of his Life; to be looking in, and
reflecting on what Conscience says, for, or against him: This is Paul's
practice here; he cannot have the Testimony of his Conseience till he have
asked it, and tried it, and laid his conversation in the general, and his
carriage among the Corinthians in particular before it; And if the former
Doctrine be a truth, this will follow; that a tender Christian will be
reflecting on his bygone way, and trying what his Conscience says of it, and
of his Actions; Except we will say that a man may be tender, and not take heed
to his Conscience; to which for this end, God has given it this reflecting
power, or faculty (to say so). It will also be more clear, if we look to the
practice, and experience of the Saints, who, the more tender they have been,
the more they have been in reflecting this way; if we look to Job, we will
find, that most of all the discourses he has, are so many reviews of his
Conscience; particularly, Chap. 23. 11. He says, My foot has held his steps,
his way have I k^pt, and not declined, neither have I gone back from the
commandment of his lips, I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my
necessary food; How is it that he speaks so confidently, but from reflecting
on, and from the Testimony of his Conscience? Therefore, chap: 27. 3, 4, 5. He
says, All the while my breath is in me, and the Spirit of God is in my
nostrils, my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit, I
will not remove my integrity, my righteousness will I hold fast, my heart shall
not reproach me so long as I live; Importing that he cannot find his Conscience
challenge him as to that wherewith his Friends did charge him; So likewayes,
Chap. 31. 1. He says, I made a covenant with mine eyes, why then should I look
upon a maid? And he goes on through the Chapter, particularly making it to
appear, that he had been searching, and trying, and taking notice of his way,
and of all the pieces and parts of it. And that therein his Conscience had
given him a good Testimony: Thus David, Psalm. 7. 3. says, Lord my God, if I
have done this, if there be iniquity in my hands, if I have rewarded evil to
him, etc. Psalm. 26. 2. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, try my reins and my
heart; And, Psalm. 139. 23. Search me, O Lord, (says he) and know my heart,
try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me: All
which supposes his own trial accomplished in, and of his Conscience to have
gone before: Yea, not only the Believer, but the Believer in the tenderest
frame, is most in this work; Therefore in the most serious exercise of
Repentance, under the greatest manifestations of Gods presence, and the most
abundant pourings out of his Spirit, and when nearest to Death; they are most
ready to reflect on Conscience; which shows, that not only we should do it,
but that the more tender Persons be, they will be the more in this duty: and
there is also good reason for it, For 1. A man cannot know his condition except
he reflect, and search what his Conscience has to say of it; And it is not the
bare remembering of the Action, but the considering of it, by bringing it
before, and trying it by the Rule of the Word, in the ^ourt of Conscience, so
as to have it is approbative Testimony, that makes it pass for eurrent. 2ly.
Because, as a man knows not how to judge of what is past, so neither how to
carry for time to come; what he has to repent of, or what he has to amend in
his way, except he take a review, and back-look of it, as to the time past:
It Is the finding of such a thing to be wrong that makes him say, This I had
need to repent of, and this I had need to watch against for time to come;
Therefore these two are put together, Psalm. 119. 59. 69. I thought on my ways,
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, I made haste, etc. The examination of
his bygone way, helped him to go on right for the time to come. 3ly. Because
hardly will a tender man come to prayer without this; He knows not what to
confess, nor what to seek, except he reflect, and consider what he has to
confess unto, o^ to seek from God; And sure a man cannot be tender, if he pray
not: Therefore these two are joined together, Zech. 12. 10. I will pour (says
the Lord) upon the house of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit
of grace and supplications, and they shall look upon him whom they have
peirced, and mourn; Hence it is found in experience, that the more insight a
man has in his bygone way, the more liberty he has in prayer; and that
deadness and dryness in prayer flow much from the want of self-reflection.
4ly: Because this is the way for a man to win at peace; and no man can be
tender, and have solid peace that cares not what his Conscience speaks to him,
whether good or evil, peace or war; and he can never know what it says except
he reflect and try: And it is from this, that even Paul himself cannot have
peace, nor rejoice, till he try his peace and joy to be the effects of
Conscience it is Testimony, and Conscience Testimony to be the consequent of
self-examination.

The Uses of the Doctrine are Four, the first whereof, is for instruction, The
2d. For trial, The 3. For exhortation. The 4. For reproof, and expostulation.

The 1. Use, I say, ^s for ^nstruction, would ye know, and be instructed in a
main piece of a Christian walk, and practice, here it is, to be often
reflecting on your bygone way, and hearing what Conscience says of it; To
belooking from your youth up, what ye have done, what have been your more
habitual thoughts, words and actions, and hearing what Conscience says of
them, of such a word or discourse, of such a voyage or journey, and so of other
actions; and to be putting it to pass it is Sentence on them, and to be trying
whether we have peace in them, and Conscience it is good Testimony concerning
them, or not. To this purpose we might allege that place, Rev. 4. v. 6, 8.
(Which we suppose to be mainly* and most properly meant of tender Ministers of
the Gospel, yet it may well by proportion be applied to tender private
Christians) Where these Four beasts are said to have eyes before* and behind,
and to be full of eyes within; Eyes before, intimating that they should be
tender in finding out what is to be done; Eyes within, intimating that they
should be watchful over their own heart, and way, over their own present frame
and walk, looking not only before, behind, and about them, but within
themselves; And Eyes behind, intimating that tender Christians should have, and
in some measure indeed have, an eye (as we use to speak of very watchful, and
accuratly observing persons) in their neck, looking to what sticks and cleaves
to their heels, as it were, when they have past any Action or Duty, as the word
is Psalm. 49. 5. Where the Psalmist speaks of the iniquity of his heels
compassing him about; As knowing well that in every step of his way, he leaves
some ^oul vestige, or print behind him, and therefore looks back on it: This
then we propose as a piece, and a special piece of a tender walk, viz. That
Christians, not only deliberat before they do, and look to Conscience while
they are adoing, but that also they reflect, and look back upon the Action,
when it is done and past. To clear this a little further, there are Three main
things that a Believer is called to, in reference to what is past, 1.
Examination of himself, and his way, 2. Laying of himself and his way* to and
before his Conscience informed by the Word, 3. Judging of himself according as
he find eth his way to be, when he has laid it before his Conscience: We need
not curiously and nicely difference these, for they go always together when a
man is right; His examination of himself, and of his way, the examination of
his way by his Conscience, and his selfjudging; yet they may be some way
differenced: selfexamination is more large, and extensive, taking in the whole
that a man is concerned in, his ^ecklenesse, and his need, as well as his
sinfulness; but reflecting on Conscience considers a man's way as sinful, or
not sinful only; self-examination is a gathering, as it were, of things
together; but reflecting on Conscience is a laying of them to the Rule, a
putting of them to the touchstone; self-examination is the mids,
Conscience-reflection is the end; And if any should offer to divide them, the
gathering of things together by self-examination, will not signify much,
except they be tried by Conscience; self-examination is antecedent to the
Sentence of the Judge; self-judging is subsequent, as a Ratification of that
which Conscience has said, when we have examined, and found out things, and
when Conscience has on reflection agreeably to the Rule, given it is Sense and
Sentence: Our judging of our selves is our homologating, or owning, applying
and taking home to us the Sentence that Conscience has past, as it were from
our own mouth; somewhat like that word, Romans 8. 16. The spirit it self bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God; In our self
examination, and judging we are active, but in Conscience it is passing
Sentence, we are passive, as being therein (...) before the Judge, and when
Conscience has said, we say: however we put them together, and have marked it
for this reason; because oft-times, when we examine, and take a look of our
selves, and of our way, we are disposed to think that we have done enough, and
as soon as the I^ditement is read, we run away from the Bar, and do not abide,
and stay for Conscience it is decision, as if we knew what it will say before
hand; again sometimes we are disposed to Judge our selves, and to pass, or
leap over both examination, and consciences Sentence; being thus precipitant,
and preposterous to prevent any trouble and apprehended horror that may attend
the Sentence of Conscience; and are ready to say, that we know not what it will
say, before it be put to the ^ryal; And this is a reason why many will take
with a conviction, but it has no weight with them, nor (...) to them, because
it is their own, as it were, and not Conscience it is Sentence; Therefore ye
would by all means join together these Three; use Self-examination, Judge and
pass Sentence on your selves (as we are willed, 1 Cor. 11. 28. 31.) But miss
not this cup^e, viz Reflecting upon, and observing of what Conscience has to
^ay; for this (...) the first and the last together, and if they be no^ thus
knit, they will fall assunder and come to nothing.

The 2d. Use is for trial, take it then for an evidence and mark of a tender
Christian, thus to reflect on a persons walk, and actions, when he has done
them* The tender Christian will thus reflect on his way and actions done,
though it were for many years past, and will judge impartially according to
what Conscience has to say of them; They here behave like unto faithful
Ambassadors, or Messengers, who being Commissionat in some bussinesse, and
having gone about it, will sist themselves before these that gave them the
Commission to hear their Judgment and Sentence of their management of the
bussinesse committed to them; (...) they are unfaithful that receive such a
Commission, and never give an account of their discharge of it, nor wait for
the Sentence of it is giver^; even so tender Christians will not only consult
with, and take direction from Conscience, what, and how to do, but will also
turn back, and see, i^ Conscience does approve of what they have done, and of
their manner of doing: Now, when we speak of this, we do not say, that it is
always the mark of a tender Christian, that the man has Conscience speaking
for him, for Conscience may be misled, and it is Testimony in that case
signifies little; But this we say, that it is a mark of a tender Christian to
be always singly trying whether it be for him, or against him; and it will be
found in the experience of all tender Christians; Whereas these that walk at
random without all circumspection, look not thus to Conscience; yea, even
Believers themselves, when in an untender frame, desire not much to come in
Conscience it is sight, (to speak ^o) The reason is, because, as it is, Ioh. 3.
v. 20, 21. Every one that does evil hates the light, least his deeds, should
be reproved; but he that does truth comes to the light; (to the light of the
Word, and of his Conscience informed by the Word) that his deeds may be
manifest, that they are wrought in God. It Is no ^mal part (I say) of this
Light, even Conscience it is Testimony; And it says that the sincer man
desires to know, if he be right or wrong, and that he likes not to entertain
the thoughts of any practice or deed of his to be right, when it is not so in
truth; and that withal he allows not himself to judge of his deeds merely by
himself; but to submit them to the Sentence of his Conscience, according to the
Word.

To clear this a little, we shall point at some Characters of a person that is
suitably serious and tender, in reflecting on his Conscience, and that 1. In
respect of it is extent, and then 2ly. In respect of the effects of it.

First, then, as to the Extent, 1. He reflecteth on, and tries all his
Actions, even the whole tract and current of his Life, as Paul does here, his
conversation in the World, and toward the Corinthians. 2ly. He reflects on,
and tryes his very best Actions, were it even those of a man's Ministry, of his
Preaching, Prayer, etc. Not as some, who think it enough to reflect only on
sinful Actions, such as swearing, lying, deceiving, oppressing, etc. Which need
but little trial, the sinfulnes of them being often obvious, as it were at
first blush; but the tender man tries these Actions that have the best
appearance, that he may know, if they be in very deed, what they appear to be.
3ly. He is particular in his trial, he not only tries his conversation in the
general, ba^ (as Paul does here) his conversation at such a time, so such a
place, and in such company; O! in how many particulars does holy Job instance,
Chap. 3^. 4^y A tender man wiil go far back; even when old, to the sins of his
youth, as David does, when he prays, Psalm. 25. 7. Remember not against me the
sins of my youth. I remember godly Augustine in his Confessions, goes as far
back as he can remember and not only so, but he says, that when he looked on
the little cankerings, and ^rowardnesse of ^nfants, he was put to think of what
were the first out-breakings of his sinful nature, when he was on the breast;
David looks far back, when he says, Psalm. 51. 5. I was shapen in iniquity,
and in sin did my mother conceive me. 5ly. He is frequent in reflecting and
trying, and the more tender, the more freq^ant; he will not readily let slip,
no^ suffer to pass one day without it; yea, he will sometimes try often in one
day, on the back of this and that piece of his walk, especially of any more
Solemn Action; yea, (which is yet more) he will come often over one and the
same Action, or thing, so that when he has taken a look of it to day, he will
take another look of it tomorrow; knowing that there is a depth of iniquity in
the heart, that is not soon nor easily plumbed; he looks often on the same
Action, that he may find it out, that the discovery and sense of it may be the
more fresh, and deeply affecting for his humiliation; it is on this ground that
the Apostle speaks of his having a good Conscience; whereof, if the Testimony
be approving, the frequent going over it, makes it to be the more vive, clear,
and comfortable.

Secondly, This may be known (as I said) by the effects of it, which are
notable; For, 1. A ^ender man that is frequent in reflecting thus, is a
watchful man; The biting of Conscience by it is challenges for past, and bygone
(...), make him look better to himself for the time to come; and put him, with
holy and tender Job, Chap. 31. To make a covenant with his eyes, that he may
look right on, and not wander; To covenant with his Affections, that they
wander and range not up and down in pursuit of the World, and of the variety of
vain Objects therein, to the diverting of him from a close and con^ant pursuit
after God. 2. He can give a distinct account of himself, and of his way, and
does not readily and easily forget things, but is in case to give an account of
this which he did, and of that which he spoke; As Job instanceth, in a
multitude of particulars, Chap. 31. He can give a legend, as it were, of his
Life: which I fear but few of us can do, to good purpose, this way; I remember
that holy man Augustine tells, that at such a time, while he was singing a
Psalm, he observed his heart ready to str^y, and to be more taken up with the
external Music, then with Spiritual Joy in God; and relates several of his
pranks, when he was a Child. 3 He is a man distinct, and full in the consession
of Sin; He never wants an evil tale (to speak so) to tell of himself, yea, he
must, and will tell it, when it may glorify God, and edify others; he can speak
particularly of the evil of his heart, and of his way, he is not a stranger to
it, neither does he hide his sin as Adam, as Job speaks, Chap. 31. v. 33. It is
sure, one great reason, why we are so little in the exercise of Repentance,
even that we are so little in the exercise of Self-reflection. 4. He is
suitably affected with that which he discovers; he not only sees his way
with this and that, and the other Action, but it touches him; one great reason
why we see somany Sins, and are so little affected with them, i^, that we take
not the Censure of them from Conscience, and consider not duly, what weight
it is sense and censure of them should have with us; and by proportion, this is
a reason why Christians are so little comforted in good Actions. 5. The
re^ecting* tender man is a praying man; as he is much i^ co^ssing of Sin, so he
is much in Prayer, and Serious in it, and at no time readily more frequent, and
serious then when his Sin is before him; as David's sin was ever before him,
Psalm. 51. 3. Which makes him so very serious in Prayer there; and as he is
serious in prayer, so he has much holy indignation at Sin, and a great
loathing at himself for it; he can speak suitably of it, and demonstrat the
vileness of it to the Life, and aggravat it to the height; while he says,
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; He
looks not at it, as a Sin of in^mity, but as a sin committed with a high hand;
I know (says he) thou love truth i^ the inward parts, but I have thus far
played the hypocrite coming out with a fair show before men, when sin was raging
in secret within me; Thus, 2 Cor. 7. 11. True Repentance is described from it is
Effects* ^t has holy and high indignation and revenge attending reflections on
it; Ezekiel. 16. v. 61. and chapter 36. v. 31* There is a remembering* a blushing, a
being ashamed, and a loathing of themselves, The man is thus vile in his own
eyes, thinks very little of himself, and loathes himself very much* 6. He is
well content when he discovers a ground of challenge where it is, he hunts
not after approbation, and applause, but is satisfied to have a just and
necessary challenge, as well as to be approven, though the one has much more
peace, and comfort with it then the other; Let the righteous smite me (says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 141. 5.) and it shall be a kindness, and let him reprove
me, and it shall be an oil that shall not break mine head; So when his
Conscience smites him, it acts in his esteem, the part of a good friend, he
welcometh it when there is ground for it, and repineth not against it. 7. He
has a deep impression of the Majesty of God on his Spirit; for his laying so
great a weight on Conscience his Deput, suggests to him the suitableness of
thinking highly of God himself, and of carrying with due reverence to him; when
men think little of God himself, they think little of Conscience his Depute;
and on the contrary, a tender Conscience makes God very awful, dreadful, and
majestic; Therefore Job gives this for a reason, why he durst not contend
with his Servants, because the terror of God made him afraid; His carrying
along with him Conscience it is sense of his way, did mightily elevat his
thoughts of God. 8. He has many earands to God in Christ, he sees many things
amiss that need to be amended, he daily discovers much guilt, which necessi^ats
him to run to God for absolution; Grace both for pardoning of his iniquities,
and for healing of his diseases, is always lovely, sweet and fresh to him; And
to hear of it, is like a Box of precious fragran^ly smelling Ointment broken,
like Oil poured into a smar^ing wound, and as good news from a far Country.

By all which, in a word ye may see. 1. That it is a desirable thing to live
and walk tenderly. 2ly That it is a most necessary thing, in order to coming by
many choice advantages. 3ly. That it is bu^ a very rare thing, and to be found
with but few, notwithstanding it is many rare and excellent effects. 4ly. That
it is a very hard and difficult thing to be a tender Christian, and in this
frame of true tenderness of Conscience; consulting it, carrying it along, and
reflecting on it in all Actions; that being the principle that keeps tender
in them all.

SERMON II.
2 COR. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you
wards.
THere are many very sad and prejudicial practical Errors and Mistakes
concerning a tender Christians walk, whence it comes to pass, that most
persons lay the great stress thereof on things that will not bear it, while in
the mean time, they neglect, and overlook those principal and weighty duties
wherein it mainly consists, that make less noise and show before men, that
are less subject to be counter^eited, and tend more to the life and power of
godliness, then these other things, that are of more high esteem with men;
among which this duty of often reflecting on a man's Conscience, and trying of
his way at it is ba^, that he may know it is sense, and receive it is Testimony
thereof, is one and not the least; and is, (as we conceive) one of the pieces
of a Christian tender walk, that comes as near to the very Soul and Life of
Religion, and has as much influence on tenderness therein, as either much
hearing of the Word, Prayer, Conference, and the like have; to which, when this
is joined, theyare very useful, but when it is utterly wanting, they are
useless* it being not only an important duty in it self, but also very helpful
to other duties, contributing much to the reaping of those advantages that are
to be had by them.

We Observed the other day from these Words, that a tender Christian will be
often reflecting on his way, and taking notice what Conscience says of it;
and spoke somewhat to two uses of the point, as it clears a notable duty, and
gives an evidence and proof of a tender man.

We shall now proceed to speak to other two; The first, and principal whereof
is this, If it be a main plece of a tender Christian walk, to be often
examiningour selves, and trying what sense Conscience has of our way and
actions; then it serves for Exhortation to all men and women that would live
tenderly, to be putting this in practice, as a main piece of a Christian and
tender walk, as a main duty called for from them, and as a main evidence of
their tenderness; That is, to be often seriously reflecting on their bygone
way, to be often bringing their thoughts, words, and actions before the
tribunal of Conscience, for this end, that they may know what it says of
them; Not only to be deliberating, and advising with Conscience before they
undertake any Action, and to be watchful in going about it, but to be
reflecting when it is done, if it be rightly done, and so as Conscience may
testify for them concerning the same: This is Paul's practice here, This is
(says he) our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience; Which supposes that
he has been laying his way before Conscience, trying what it said of it, and
that he has received Conscience its Testimony concerning it. That which we
would in a word here commend to you, is, that Men and Women would ^ake a
back-look of, and reflect upon all their Actions, Words and Thoughts, and of,
and upon all the circumstances of the same; and that they would so reflect upon
them, as they may endeavor to know wherein they have Conscience its Testimony
for them; or wherein it stands up to speak against them* That is, that they
would not only study to gather into their memory their Actions. Which is
presupposed, and to lay them before the Word, but further, when their Actions
and the Rule of the Word are laid together, to hear Conscience its Sentence
anent their performing of the same.

We shall not insist in particular explication of this Duty, ye have heard
somewhat spoken of it these days past; If we could but gain this much of you,
as to have you thoroughly convinced, that somewhat lies on you, in reference to
the examination of your hearts, and ways as to things that are past, and to
get you in good earnest, ingadged to make more Conscience of this Duty for time
to come, it is the great thing we aim at; and if your Consciences were once
duly convinced, and cleared of the necessity and usefulness of the Duty, and
ye brought to be in love with it, ye would through grace be easily led on to
the particulars requisite to the right way of performing it: Seriousness in,
and affection to the thing would supply the room of many directions; And
therefore we would now earnestly press it upon you, to take sometime for this
duty of self-searching, and examination, as well as for prayer, hearing,
conference, and other such Duties; and to be as holily solicitous, and desirous
to know when ye have done any action or duty, whether it be right or wrong, as
ye think ye should be careful to advise before ye do it, that it be good upon
the matter; sure the awe of the Majesty of God, and of your Conscience his
Depute, and a just regard to your own peace, should incline, swey, and
determine you to the one, as well as to the other.

What we would further say in this matter, shall be to show you, what ye should
aim at in this self examination, as to the manner of going about it (for we
much mar and wound our own peace, by formality and overliness in this, as in
other duties) which ye may take up in these Four, 1. We would labor in our
self-examination to be up at that distinctnesse, that through grace may be win
at, that we may be so very clear, as to be in case to say, I wot well, I was
right at such a time, and wrong at such another time; in this I was right, and
in that I was wrong; yea, so clear and distinct would we be as we might, if
called to it, be ready to give our oath on it; as Paul does in the place we
spoke on before. viz. Ro^. 9. 1. I say the truth in Christ (says he) and lie
not, my conscience bearing me witness in the holy ghost; There would not be
guessing at things, but we would be thoroughly distinct and clear; Therefore Job
speaking of the evidences of his integrity, Chap. 31. Proposes them by way of
curse; being so very confident, that he durst confirm what he asserted, with a
curse on himself, if it should be found to be otherwise then he said. 2dly. We
would examine, and look on our way till we be brought under some suitable
impression of the awe and dread of the Majesty of God, and of his absolute
Dominion and Soveraignity over us; Thus holy* Job says of himself, when thus
exercised, Chap 31. v. 23. Destruction from the Almighty was a terror to me,
and by reason of his highness, I could not endure: We never follow our
self-examination far enough, till it leave some impression of this kind on our
Spirits. 3dly. It would be followed, till we be affected with what discovery we
get in the search of our own way; Its not enough barely to take a look or view
of it, but we would (I say) look on it so, as we may be suitably affected with
it; that either it may give us solid peace and joy, from clearness that we are
right, or else a sensible touch with the sharpness of a challenge, for that
whereof we are clearly convinced is wrong: And men are never rightly exercised
in the work of self-examination, and of reflection on their Conscience, till
something of this be; there is a great difference betwixt bare light, and a
well informed, and tender Conscience; Consciences sense of a thing is of more
weight, and is more divine, and has some more of the Majesty of God in it,
then bare Light, or conviction of the Judgment; It will neither smile nor
^rown, but it will suitably affect the man with some inward comfort, or sorrow;
For it represents God, either as smiling or ^rowning. 4ly. We would follow
this work of self-examination, and self-reflection, till we be clear, and fully
persuaded, as to the Duty we are called to, after such Examination; as when a
man finds things to be wrong; Conscience will say, there is here a necessity
of Repentance, and humiliation, and of flying to Jesus Christ, for taking away
the guilt thereof; and of setting about the righting and amending of things;
and till a man come to be clear in that which he is called to, by
self-examination, he follows it not ^th a right, and as he ought to do: The
Apostle speaking of worldly, and of godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 10* 11. Gives
these evidences of godly sorrow (a fruit of self-examination) that it not only
was waited in the Corinthians with a fight of the Fault, but it touched them in
the quick for it, and affected them with holy indignation at it, and with true
zeal to have it removed; And that with all it suffered them not to rest* till
they endeavored by all means a clearing of themselves; Behold (says he, v.
11.) the self same thing ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it
wrought in you; ^ea, what clearing of your selves; yea, what indignation, etc.
A man that ^ffers to ^et about self-examination, and yet lies still in the
fault that is discovered thereby, and is no more affected with it, then if he
were not at all guilty of it, nor any more now after the discovery made in the
search, inclined to flee to Christ then when he began; his self-examination is
sure not right: We would therefore seriously recommend to you these Four to be
well headed, and carried along with you in your prosecuting this work of
self-examina^on.

To press this a little, we would consider these three* 1. The clearness of the
duty. 2. The profitableness* and excellency of it. 3. The necessity of it; By
all which* we may be convinced of a necessity lying upon us, to press it, and
upon you to practice it; The Lord himself bear in upon us all with a strong
hand the conviction of the necessity of it.

For the first, It is as clear a duty, as it is for you to come to the Church
to hear; as it is to read* or to pray, or to sanctify the Lords day; Hence it
is that, 1. It is so often commanded* as L^m. 3. 40. Hagg ^. 5. Gal. ^. 4. and
Psalm. 2. 4. Commun^ with your heart upon your beds, or speak with your hear^,
or with your Conscience (as often in the Old Testament the heart is put for the
conscience) for it is the Conscience property that gives the answer, and not
the heart; So 2 Cor* 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the says,
prove your own selves, etc. the command is doubled* nay someway tripled. 2.
It Is clear also from the ordinary practice of the Saints (as has been formerly
instanced) so that hardly will ye find a tender man; but he is thus exercised,
and the more tender he be, the more is he so; Tender David was much exercised
this way, as he gives an account* Psalm. 119. 59. I thought (says he) on my
ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies.

For the 2d. viz. the profitableness and excellency of it, it is not only a
commanded duty, but a choice mean for bringing about many excellent ends; I
shall instance its excellency amongst others in these three respects. 1. it is
excellent in this respect, as it is a most clear, fresh, and refreshful
evidence of a tender walk, and of a man that makes Conscience of his way; He
that does truth (says Christ, John 3. 21.) comes to the light, that his deeds
may be made manifest that they are wrought in God; He is not only content to
abide a trial, but he puts himself to it; He brings his deeds to the
light, to see if they be wrought in God; on the contrary, he that does evil
hates the light, and comes not unto it, lest his deeds should he reproved;
Must not this then be an excellent duty, which is so clear a character and
property of one that walks tenderly in all duties? Nay, let all duties be put
together, without this none of them, nor all of them in a conjunction, can
evidence a man's tenderness; for it is this that gives him (as it were) a grip
of his duties, and puts them to the touchstone, and shows what reality is
in them; what are to be looked (...) acceptable to God through Christ, what
not; without this he is but a guesser. 2dly. It Is excellent in respect of the
great influence that it has on the life of Religion, and power of Godliness;
look to the most spiritual duties, it has great influence on them, not on a
few of them, but on them all, whether it be Mortification and Repentance, it
keeps the heart as it were melting; the word ^* Zech. 12. 10. They shall look
upon him whom they have pierced, and shall mou^ and be in bitterness; or humble
walking before God, it is impossible without it; or the high^ning our thoughts
of Gods grace, and the commending of Christ to us, it exceedingly contributes
to that; Every discovered infirmity in the search makes a new earand to him;
or the lively way of going about other duties, as praying in the Spirit,
hearing profitably, singing in the Spirit, etc. they cannot be performed to
purpose without it: A person that has been reflecting on a bypast duty as of
Prayer, or of a Sermon that he has heard, will readily have from it a memento
or watchword not to be so superficial in the next. 3dly. It Is excellent in
respect of the many advantages that come by it, as is already hinted in the two
former respects, and might be instanced in a great many more; its useful and
advantageous for the preventing of sin, for the promoving of holiness, for the
composing of the Spirit, for establishing of peace, and for helping to
comfortable and cheerful walking with God.

For the 3. viz. the necessity of it; this appears much from what is already
said; and is so very great, that its impossible to attain to holiness, to
mortification, to peace, to be distinct in our way, to be spiritual in any
duty, or to be tender in our walk without it: We may say that this duty in
respect of a Christian life, is like weeding to a Gardens It Is not sufficient,
that a Garden have fresh Seeds sown, and fine Plants and Flowers set in it, if
Weeds as they appear be not pulled up; without frequent and careful weeding,
the weeds will quickly overgrow and choke the Flowers and Plants; It Is just so
here, there being so many lusts and corruptions in the heart of man, and it is
so broody and se tile of these filthy weeds; that unless this self-examination
(...) conscionably and seasonably exercised, it will be overgrown by and by,
and filled full, with the stinking weeds of those corruptions; and our coming
over our heart and way by taking a review of it, is like a careful Gardeners
daily coming over his Garden with his Weeding-iron; the one is no more
necessary to the Garden then the other is necessary to our heart and way: And
the reason why so many heart are like the s^uggards Garden, all ^vergrown with
n^ttles and briars, is the neglect of this self-examination: Many alace! take
on a profession of Religion, but take no pains to be answerable to it, neither
do they look to the weeds and hemlocks of sins, that in stead of good fruits to
God, spring up in their heart, and overspread their life: Therefore from all
this I beseech you take this word of advertisement, as you would have the
profession of your Religion well stuffed and filled up with the power of it,
and would not have it as a Ghostly House, having a fair show outwardly, and
empty within, or as a painted Sepulcher, beautiful without, and full of
rottenness and dead men's bones within, and as ye would not have much false bulk
without substance; be much in the exercise of this excellent duty of
self-examination, and serious in it.

I shall here answer two or three objections that may be proposed about putting
this concerning duty in practice.

And first, It may be objected, that this is a very hard and difficultly
practicable thing, we cannot do it, we dow not do it, it will not go with us,
and indeed there is naturally in us all an aversness from nothing more than
from this: And we conceive that who ever will essay it in earnest, will find it
to be a difficult duty indeed, more difficult and harder to be gone about, then
either Prayer, hearing of the Word, or conference on a spiritual subject; It
being a duty wherein the inner man at the Bar of Conscience, and so in some
respect at the Bar of Gods Tribunal, is exercised and taken up; which makes it
difficult even to them that would sain go about it: We shall therefore in
answer to this objection, 1. speak something in general. 2. We shall speak more
particulary to some directions or helps, for making it easy. In general, We
say, 1. That the Duty would not be scared at, because of it is difficulty, for
the most excellent Duties that have the greatest influence on the practice of
godlness, that strick most at the body of Death, and are most discriminating
characters of the godly; ^hen suitably discharged, are ordinarily most
difficult, and we would love them the better, and prefer them in some respect
to others, that are more easy, and which Hypocrites, and mere Formalists may
go about; and indeed such a one is this (as has been showed) And* therefore we
have the greater reason to press toward the practice of it. 2ly. We would say,
that though it be difficult, yet ye would essay it; and if ye do so seriously,
and in the strength of Christ, ye will find it go far better, and more easily
with you, then possibly ye expect; And the truth is, that as to these Duties,
that are more inward and spiritual* that which is called for from us, is our
essaying of, and putting hand to them, and seriously necessitating our selves
to it; which, if we do, we have them, and this in particular, laid before us,
in the Promise, As Ezekiel. 16. 63. That thou may remember and be confounded,
etc. and 36* 31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and doings that
were not good, etc. And so particularly we come to speak in the 2d, place, of
the Directions and Helps for making it easiy. The 1. whereof, is this, That we
would essay it with an eye to the promise; for indeed this, and all other
Duties ly in Promises; and albeit we cannot pray a right without the Spirit,
yet we will essay it on this account; Even so should we do, as to this Duty,
how difficult soever it may be. 2dly. And yet somewhat more particularly, we
would endeavor to have a sober, serious and sanctified frame, in the
undertaking and prosecuting of this Duty; when our Spirits are Carnal, and
Discomposed, and when there is a noise and clamor of worldly lusts swarming
within us, it is no great wonder though we essay it, that it go not with us,
but miscarry in our hand: We would therefore abstract, and compose our selves,
as in Gods presence, and study to have our hearts in a sanctified frame; as the
Church does* Lament. 3. 28* 29. Sitting alone, and keeping silence with a
stopped mouth; We would table and state our selves before God, pursuing our
selves, as if we were pleading for God against our selves; and hereby
endeavoring a composed and fixed divine frame of Spirit, as being in a special
way before him, whose deputy the Conscience ^s; and in such a frame reviewing
our heart and way; it will not be every Frame, nor any common frame of Spirit
that will fit and dispose to go rightly about this business. 3dly. We would be
frequent in this Duty, and would not suf^er reckonings to run long on; for if
they do, it makes the work the more difficult: and thus alace! it is with
many, They have been so long a es^aying of it, and so little in it, that they
think it a desperate business to set about it now; Whereas, if men were weekly,
daily, and on the back of every Duty* or Action, stating and putting by their
accounts, it would be a great deal more easy: It is with many as to this, as
it is with these who have a multitude of businesses on their hand r^velled,
confused and through other; Or, as it is with these who have suffered their
accounts to ly long over unfitted; Whereas he that is daily in this work, is
like a man that every day fitting, and justing his accounts, does it easily,
and with little pains: And therefore the Direction in short, is, that these who
would have their spiritual Accounts easy* would not suffer them to run long
on. 4ly. We would be much in Prayer, begin it with Prayer, and carry Prayer
along with it; and a^ the heart starts our from it, by a look, by a darted
up-b^ink, or e^aculation to God, bring it back again, and arrest it, as it
were, and fix it before the Lord; because the heart cannot possibly be kept
any, the least moment in Gods company, if it be left to it self; There would be
a frequently renewed looking up to him, to fix it; I will (says the Lord,
Zech. 12. 10.) pour upon the house of David, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
spirit of grace and supplication, they shall look upon him whom they have
pierced, and shall ^ourn. Christians are then tenderest, when looking to God,
and so fittest for this Duty, and would therefore be much in it. 5ly. We would
not only look on it as a Duty, but as a mean exceedingly contributive to our
spiritual good, to the preventing of sin, to the promoving of (...), to the
keeping of our Conscience calm and quiet, and to the attaining and maintaining
of Peace, (as has been said:) There are many things which we count to be hard,
and difficult, because we consider not the great profit of them; Therefore to
make this insuperably like difficult Duty the more easy, we would fill the eye
of the Soul with the many and choice advantages that come by it; O! such
mortification of Lusts, such progress and advances in holiness; such thriving
and growing in Grace, with many other notable effects, that it through Gods
blessing produces. 6ly. To make it easy, we would in the going about it, have
a manifold respect to Jesus Christ, by the exercise of Faith on him, both in
the undertaking, and performing of it; There is a respect to be had to Christ
in all Duties; but here (as I just now said) a manifold respect would be had to
him. 1: A respect would be had to him as our peace, who only can purge and
pacify the Conscience; and take away guilt, and wash us thoroughly from it: It
may be some under-take self-examination as a sort of penance, or whipping of
themselves; and indeed in that case it cannot but be a very hard exercise, when
they mind nothing, but the bare ripping up of their sores, and the making of
them (as it were) to bleid; but if they went about it with respect to Christ,
to bring, and drive them to him, as to the Physician, that would make them to
endure the smart and pain; and would make the Duty far more easy; the (...)
end of self-examination, not being simply to aff^ict us, but to send us to
Jesus Christ for cure. 2ly. Respect would be had to him, not only as the healer
of our sores, and wounds; but also, as the inablet and strengthner of us, to
take a seriously reflecting view of them, and to look upon them indifferently,
universally, and impartially; The First way of looking to him, makes us to go
about this Duty, not heartlesly, but with hope; And the Second way of looking
to him, for influence and help from him, strengthens us. 3ly. Respect would be
had to him, as the pardoner of Sin (which is more generally hinted at in the
first Respect) and therefore, as Sins are discovered in the search, they would
be brought, to him for this end; it makes it a very ^oilsome, and unpleasant
^xercise, when Souls come only to the Bar of Conscience to get its Sentence,
that mightily faints, and they are ready in that case, to rue that ever they
looked after, and searched out their Sin* when they find nothing but bitterness
in it; Therefore we say that when a man has gotten the Sentence of his
Conscience, he would come forward, and bring his Sins to Christ, and lay
himself and them at his Feet; and when Conscience has past the Sentence of
Condemnation on him, he would flee to him for Ab^olution; This would make
self-examination not to have such un-pleasantnesse, and bitterness in it, as
otherwise it has, and can hardly but have; and would much prevent our
scarring at ^t, and being frighted from it.

A 2d. Objection, Is this, That some may think and say, that if they shall
essay this exercise, they know not where to begin, their condition is so
confused, that its like a revelled hesp, or parcel of yarn, they cannot find an
end in it, partly through their long and great neglect of the Duty, partly
through the confusion of their Spirits, and their Sins looking out on them with
a very formidable aspect. To which we would Answer, 1. That though it be so,
yet the Duty must not be delayed, nor neglected; The longer it be ere ye begin,
it will be on these, and other accounts still the more difficult; Therefore ye
would fall the sooner about it, and the more se^iously about it, with the
deeper humiliation for so much and so long neglecting of it, and the greater
dependence on God for his assistance to win at it. 2ly. In your going about it,
when ye discover much sin, and find your case to be very confused; if ye dar
not hazard to wade (as it were) into the very midst of it at least at first, ye
would endeavor to pi^ch on some particulars, wherein ye may be distinct; as
Soldiers use to do with an Army that is too strong for them; they are bussie
in gathering up the S^raglers as they come at them; and fall on some smaller
Parties: Therefore such of you as seriously, and sincerely mind this great work
of self examination, though ye may incline at first to fall in, on the very
bulk and heap of your Sins; yet honestly minding to balk ^one, but to go
through all, before ye give over the work; it will be better to betake your
selves to the search, and examination of such or such a particular Duty, or of
such or such a days work and duties; and thus ye will win the better in on it,
and through it, and the heap will grow the less; But meddle not with another,
till ye have, with some suitableness dispatched, and put by this. 3ly. If ye
cannot win for the time so to fix on particulars, take your confused condition
such as it is, to think on a while, and look not at this as nothing, that ye
have found your condition to be confused; David's condition was somewhat thus,
when he says, Psalm. 44. v. 15 My confusion is continually before me; The
taking, and laying of your case confused, as it is, before God and your
Conscience, may help to humble, and kindly to affect your heart. 4ly. The more
confused your case be, seek to take it so much the more to God, and to draw the
nearer to him; let it be made a motive to set you on to deal the more seriously
with him, to dispel your darkness and confusion; As Ie^ does, while he says,
Chap. 10. v. 15. I am full of confusion, therefore see thou to my affliction,
As if he had said, Lord, I cannot rid, no^ order my case, therefore see thou
to it, and give me clearness; For, though a person have a confused condition,
yet he may be somewhat distinct, in laying it out before God, as it is, and may
be clear in what Conscience says of it, when it says that it is confused.
5ly. Whether our condition be confused or no^, we would be suitably affected
with every particular that we find in it; and this may be one reason of our
confusion, that we have more clearness, then we improve well; we see many
things to be wrong, but the ^ight affects us not, neither do we suitably
endeavor to ^epent of the evils which we see, nor to amend them, nor do (...)
flee to Jesus Christ to get them pardoned and cured: But when the little
clearness that we have is well improven, it is the way to get more; but what
need is there of more light, and of more c^earness, when that which we have is
not duly made use of?

A 3d. Objection is, Some may think, and say, We are essaying self-examination,
and yet we find much difficulty, to know and take up Conscience its language,
whether it be awell grounded challenge, or an approving Testimony: This
Objection is much like unto that Question which we spoke to alittle in our
second Sermon on Acts 24. v. 16. Viz. Whether Conscience its impulse might not
sometimes be wrong? To which we Answered affirmatively, and do yet grant, that
it may mistake, and be mistaken by us, and what we said there, for finding out
the mind of Conscience may be useful here toward the answering of this
Objection; Yet we shall now speak a word further to it: For Answer then, we
shall easily yield, that it is indeed sometimes difficult to find out the mind
(to say so) of Conscience, and to understand its language, in reflecting, as
well, as in deliberating; either, 1. through the dimness of peoples Light, that
they scarcely know the Rule. Or, 2ly. Through their being partial and
negligent, in comparing their way and actions with the Rule; but either hide it
wholly, or at le^st some circumstances of it, without bringing it forth, and
laying it to the Rule; Or, 3ly. It may be through some byas^e in their
affection, that makes them unsingle, so that they will not take with a
challenge, when there is just ground for it; or, 4ly. It may be from some
unwarrantable and groundless prejudice at themselves, and their own way, so
that they will not take a testimony from Conscience, even when it gives them a
good one: And therefore in your self-examination, ye would carry some
advertisements along with you, which will be helpful to find out the mind of
Conscience, 1. Ye would try whether Conscience be impartial, and if (...)
speaks to both hands (to say so,) accusing ^n some things, and excusing in
others; in some things speaking peace, and in others challenging for sin; for,
if when ye reflect, Conscience speak all, or only peace it is certainly wrong,
because in the best there is less or more guilt contracted in what ever ye go
about; but, if beside what is right, it points also at something that is wrong,
it is Consciences right language; on the contrary when ye reflect, if
Conscience speak all to be wrong, though there was some sincerity in your aim,
it is mistaken; For when it speaks a right, it speaks always according to
the mind of God, and what he says is wrong or right, it says so of it also;
So in the epistle to Ephesus, Rev. 2. As the Lord charge them, that they are
fallen from their first love, so does Conscience; yet as he tells them, that
there is something right, in as far as they had labored for his names sake,
and hated the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which he hated, etc. So does Conscience
also testify the same; and so, in all the rest of the Epistles to these seven
Churches; as God is impartial in his Testimony, so is Conscience when right.
2ly. Ye would advert to the ground of Conscience, it is speaking, or to that on
account of which it testifies for you, or against you; for, as in our
forbearing of one Action and in our choosing of another, we are to forbear, or
to choose, and proceed, according as Conscience holds ou^ clear light, and
reason for it; So upon the back of any Action, or Duty performed, when we go to
reflect, we would try the ground, whether of Conscience it is challenge, or of
it is good Testimony; If it challenge, and accuse, try well whether it be indeed
a sin, for which it does so; if it approve, and speak peace, try on what ground
it does so, Conscience will some way testify of the Action, but ye would try,
if it be sinful, or not according to the Word ol God; Which supposes knowledge
in the thing, and of the mind of God concerning it; wherein any, especially
more considerable defect, even in conscientious and ^ender Christians, is
waited with its own prejudice; Hence it came to pass (as the Apostle gives us
an account, Romans 14.) that many of the primitive Christians, through the
weakness of their knowledge, were made to judge such and such things to be
wrong, as the eating of such and such meats, (their Conscience judging
according to their knowledge) when yet indeed the matter was not wrong; though
(as the Apostle there says) To him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to
him it is unclean; Therefore we would be the more holily jealous over our
selves, least we found our peace on a deluded Testimony of our Conscience; And
for preventing of that, we would put ^t to give its reason for, and evidence of
what it testifies, for Conscience being but a subordinate Judge, we must go,
to the law and to the testimony, and see if it speaks according to that;
otherwise it will not be an honest aim, or a good end proposed to our selves,
in the doing of such or such a thing; or because we are in a pardoned state,
that will be sufficient to make the Action truly good and acceptable, and to
give us ground of peace. 3ly. Ye would advert, and take good heed, if
Conscience challenges equally, for one sin as well as for another, and for the
neglect of one Duty, as well as for the neglect of another; and if, as the sin
is comparatively greater, or lesser, so its challenges be lesser or greater;
for, if Conscience its challenge lead you to the Word; the more weight that the
Word lays on sin, the more weight will Conscience lay upon it, when it is
right: Sometimes persons will be challenged for some things much extrinsick to
Religion, or for omitting this or that wherein very little, if any thing of
Religion consists, or at least lies very remo^e; who yet will not be much
troubled, for taking of Gods name in vain, or for neglect of Prayer, and the
like: I remember the saying of a godly man, to a Person under exercise for a
little sin, little in comparison of others (for no sin is little in its own
nature*) That he thought the hand, or work of the Devil (...) be in it, to lay
a ground for Spiritual Pride, because the person was so much troubled with so
^ittle a thing; or to divert from taking a view of grosser sins, for their
deeper humiliation: when Conscience is right, it challenges equally, and more
or less, as the sin is more or less aggravated; It is an evil in this time,
that extrinsick, and remo^e things trouble some so much, while in the mean time
known sins, and duties are but little minded, and laid to heart; as i^ forsooth
the Consciences of such were more delicat and tender, then the Consciences of
the Saints of old; Nay there are not a few, who will disdain to be challenged
for neglect of uncontroverted duties, who yet make a great deal o^ business,
and noise about these things, that are but of little moment, as if the whole,
and sum o^ Religion lay in them: This certainly shows a great deal of
untenderness, and slighting of Conscience, what ever pre^ensions may be made to
the contrary; and while a person is much, or wholly taken up with an
extrinsick, or very little thing, which, it may be, is but a mere circumstance,
and is more affected with, and exercised about that, then with, and about
another of far greater concernment; it is not sure any aw of God, nor of
Conscience, but somewhat flowing from the man's own Inclination, or interest,
that so might^ly influenceth, and stirs him in the one, beyond what he is in
the other. 4ly. Ye would advert in a special manner to this, If Conscience in
the challenge makes the sin vile and abominable to you, and your selves
loathsome to your selves; When Conscience whets (to say so) the edge of the
challenge, not only to the making of Gods wrath terrible, and the awe, fear and
dread of him weighty; but also to the deep affecting of our selves with the
vileness and loathsomeness of the thing, its an evidence, that the Conscience
is right; for, as its a good token of the soundness of Repentance, when it
makes sin as such loathsome* so its a good token of Conscience speaking
rightly, when it holds forth convincingly the sinfulness of sin. (...). Ye
may know when Conscience speaks a right, by the native fruits that follow
upon it; such as these, 1. It makes a deep impression of the awe of God, and
of the fear of sin on the heart; It makes the Spirit more composed, stayed,
and present, when after self-examination rightly gone about, Conscience
speaks its own language, for it knows that God speaks, and has a sort of
divinness with it. 2ly. It makes the man more watchful, and the loather to
adventure on sin, for the time to come. 3ly. It stilleth, and calmeth the
heart; O! but that be a stately and majestic Word, Psalm. 46. Be still, and
know that I am God. For we cannot conceive God to be speaking, if we be right,
but the Spirit will be calmed to hear, and will be gathered in, from its
waverings, gadings and vaigings, when it knows that he speaks, all which we
may see, Psalm. 4. 3. 4. Stand in awe and sin not; Where he exhorts to holy
fear, and watchfulness; and the mean to bring both about, is, Commune with your
hearts upon your beds; Betake your selves to this work (as if he had said) of
self examination; and then the 3d. Follows, Be still, as being stayed and
fixed, quieted and calmed, against reilling-to and fro, up and down, and
against all struggling with God, and fretting at his providence, because ye have
to do with him, and not with men.

We shall not proceed further for the time; only ye may see from what has been
said, if we look singly on it, that there is here a most clear, useful, and
necessary duty at all times, and more especially at this time: We say
especially at this time, for these reasons. 1. Because of the common and
general security, and formal way of going about duty, that is stolen in
amongst Christians at this time, and there cannot be a better mean to help
this, then to give our selves to the exercise of self-examination* and to the
trial of our ways; This seriously gone about would make us re^ze, and stir up
our selves in good earnest, to cry mightily to God: and if this be a time, that
has such an evil in it, as great security and formality; and if this be a
duty* that may throw Gods blessing help the same, let none complain of over
liness, coldness, and life-lesnesse in Religion, that is not seriously minding,
and going about this, as a necessary, profitable and excellent mean to amend
it* 2ly. Because there is much false bulk, and empty show of a profession;
Which we are afraid, but a very little trial will quickly evidence, and
discover to be so, even to be unsure work; I will not say, but there may be
some sickernesse, and solidity in the profession of some, but it is to be
feared, that many others are but building castles in the air, castles of come
down when the rain shall descend, the winds blow, and the floods beat, having
much more show then substance, and solid work; and the way to make it sicker,
sure and solid work, that will abide the trial, is to lay it to the Rule, and
to try it thereby; many professed Christians are like to foolish builders, who
build by guess, and by rule of thumb, (as we use to speak) and not by Square
and Rule; and if they have but bulk enough, they look not much to the solidity,
and straightness of the Fabric: There are many engadgements come under, many
fastings, prayers, hearings of the Word, etc. (which are good in themselves,
and commendable) but there would be Self-examination, to see what solidity is
in them all; else we will be like the men, who expend all their stock on the
stone and timber-work of a large house, and leave nothing to plenish, and
furnish it within; whereas, when a person is suitably, and seriously taken up
with Self-examination, it makes a house (to speak so) though it should be
less, to be well filled and furnished; and albeit there be no great noise of a
Profession there, yet there is more kindly Repentance, more seriousness in
Prayer, and in other Duties, more profiting by hearing of the Word, and more
holiness of Life, then where this exercise of Self-examination, and reflection
is either altogether or very much neglected, albeit there should be then, a far
greater profession. 3ly. Because we have been engadged in, and have put many
things, (to say so) through our hands, these years past; and we are afraid,
that many have not much consulted, nor looked well into Conscience, in meddling
with them; There have been several strange, un-couth, and scarcely heard of
things in the way of some, and lesser failings, slips and escapes, in the way
of others: and no doubt the less pains was taken by men to be cleared and
satisfied in their Conscience, before such things were meddled with, and
ingadged in; there would be so much the more pains taken now, to reflect on
them when past, and to bring them in before Conscience, to receive it is verdict
of them; and sure we can never walk for time to come, with that straightness
and solidity, if we be not at some point, by Self-searching, as to things past,
and present. 4ly. Because, if we know not what has been right or wrong in
things past; the dispensations of divine providence, which we have met with,
call aloud on us, to examine what God speaks to us by them; for he has made
us to be witnesses of very strange things, of public dispensations, such as
neither we, nor our fathers ever saw the like; and has not this same place in
particular, fallen under strange providence, both as to our Temporals and
Spirituals? and if the dispensations of God, call and press any to this
exercise of Reflection, and Examination, then certainly they call and press us
to it: Therefore seeing we are called to this, not only as a duty common to all
times, but as somewhat peculiar to this time, and to us in this place, we would
make the more Conscience of it; and would also know, that if it be slighted,
the greater will our guiltiness be, that have so many things urgently calling
us to it: Whether then, ye remember all, or most, or many particulars, or not,
remember, and carry along with you this general, that ye have a Conscience, and
that ye are called and concerned to remember to reflect on, and to examine your
ways, at the Bar of Conscience well informed by the Word; And if ye be
suitably serious in the general, God will graciously condescend to lay
particular helps to your hand.

SERMON III.
2 COR. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards.
IF a tender Christian walk be an excellent thing, and if the rejoicing of a
good Conscience that flows from it, be an excellent thing; then sure it must
be a very excellent and desirable thing, to study through acquaintance with our
own heart and way and to try our particular carriage by our Conscience informed
by the Word; This practice having so much influence on a tender walk, and being
so conduceable, to a well-grounded rejoicing in God; for doubtless there can be
nothing more contributive to these notable, and noble ends, then to give
Conscience its due regard and place, and to lay due weight upon it, in its
passing censure of our way, and to be clear, and distinct in its sentence of
our bypast carriage and proceedings: We may say of Conscience in this work, as
Solomon says of that King* Prove. 20. 8. Who sitting on the throne of
judgment, scatters away all evil with his eyes; When Conscience, as the
great and sovereign God his Deputy, sits on its Throne (as it were) it has a
Divine Authority, and Majesty, whereby it scatters all these evils that haunt
the heart; so that they cannot endure and stand before it, but must flee away.

And because this has so very much influence on a Christian walk, we shall
speak a word further to what flows from the Doctrine proposed the other day,
and it shall be for an Use of Reproof, and Expostulation, (which we named, as
the 4th Use of it) to and with Christians that profess to have a tender walk,
and yet much slight this duty, which is a main part of it, and singularly
helpful to the whole of it: for if the search of our way, and the trying of it
by Conscience be a main piece and part of a tender Christian walk, ^o that they
who are much in the one, have also much of the other; and none have been of a
tender Conscience and walk, but they have been tender in this part of it, to
have Conscience its sense and Testimony of their bypast walk; then there is
ground of Reproof to, and Expostulation with these, who either neglect or
slight it; and this is it that we would now speak to* even to reprove and
expostular, with many professed Christians, who would be loath to be accounted
gross and untender in their walk, who yet neglect this so main a piece of a
Christianly tender walk: and before we fall on particulars, we would speak a
little to ^ome evidence^ for making it out, what just ground there is, to
reprove and expostulat on this account, even for the neglect of so clear and
profitable a duty; And, 1. May we not in the general charge most for an utter
neglect of this, and all, for much overlinesse in it? ask your own Consciences,
if ye were called to an account before God; how ye would answer, as to this
particular; durst ye say, that ye have made Conscience seriously, and suitably
to reflect upon your case* and way? and that ye have been tenderly concerned to
find out what was right, and what was wrong in it, and to have Conscience its
approbatory, or condemnatory sense, and sentence thereof, and to be affected
answerably, as you found matters betwixt God and you? We are sure there is none
of us, though we can say we have been going about other duties of Religion,
such as Prayer, Reading, and hearing of the Word, etc. But we have reason to
charge our selves with much guilt, as to our little serious going about this
particular duty, to be dumb and silent, and to go with a stopped mouth before
God, is there any that can say, I have been clean in this matter? A 2d.
evidence may be taken from the sad effects, that in our way follow the neglect,
or overly performance of this duty; Which when found, they may let us know, and
convince us that it is either much slighted, or quite neglected; And 1. We
would ask you, how many are acquainted with, and seen in their own Souls
Condition, or could on distinct grounds, as having examined, and tried* their
heart and way, pass Sentence upon their case, and say thus and thus it is with
me? And if ye be un* acquainted with your own case, does not that say
undenyably, that ye walk by guess, as it were, and not according to this Rule.
2ly. What means the exceeding great security, presumption, and self-conceit,
that many are in* and under, concerning themselves, and their way? Which not
flowing from a well-grounded persuasion of the straightness thereof, must it
not necessarily flow from their neglect of this self-reflection and trial? And
whence, I pray, is it, that there is so little repentance for sin? Is it
because there is no sin, nor ground of quarrel? No certainly, it must therefore
be from men's not reviewing of, and reflecting on themselves and their way, that
they may find it out; which plainly says, that this evil is predominant. 3ly.
^ook to the abounding of sin* to the little grouth of mortification, to the
liveliness of Lusts, to the room that Idols have in the heart, and its gading
after them; will not these declare, that most persons, but very seldom bring
themselves before the Tribunal of their Conscience; otherwise lusts durst not
set up their heads, as they do; This King would scatter away all evils with his
eyes; And men would not have such delight in them, if they were often
arraigning them at this Bar. 4ly. What means the little solid peace and
rejoicing in God, that most professors have, and their living in such a
fluctuating, and conjectural way? Is it not from this, that they do not
examine, and put to the trial the grounds of their peace and joy? Now all these
sad and woeful evidences and effects being put together, it is beyond all doubt,
that there is at this time among us, much neglect of this duty of
self-examination; by the Conscientious discharge whereof, these dreadful
effects might be removed.

These Evidences of the neglect of this duty being palpable; we come now in the
Second place closse to the reproof of it, and expostulation for it; and is
there not just ground for both? I dar say, if many of you were alked about this
duty, it would be found to be an unknown duty to you; a duty that ye walk not
under the conviction of its necessity; a duty that ye are not mourning for the
neglect of, nor employing Jesus Christ for grace to get it suitably performed:
and can that, think ye, be a tender walk, that is so very short, and defective
in so main a duty, and in so great a piece and part of a tender walk? when
especially persons are not duly sensible of it, nor suitably affected with it;
Let me but ask such of you, who make little account of the neglect of this
duty, these few questions. 1. Do ye think that there is such a thing spoken of
in the Word of God, and that there is such a thing within you as a Conscience;
and if ye think ye have Consciences, have ye them for no end nor use? or will
ye let them (as it were) be in you, and ly by you, as things given you to no
purpose? 2ly. I ask you, is there nothing in your case, or way, that needs a
review? Is all right, and nothing out of order? will ye own these to be truths?
If not, ought not this mean to be used for helping you to find out what is
wrong, and what is right, if any thing be right? It were a strange thing for a
professed Christian, to think, or say, that he is altogether right, and that he
needs not to examine himself; and yet he must either think this; or else he
says on the matter, that he ears not whether he be right or wrong, which
indeed the practice of many says plainly, or he must examine to find out what
is right, and what is wrong. 3ly. I would ask you, do you think that your
Conscience will be always quiet, because ye command it not to speak; or
rather, is there not a time coming, when it will speak, whether ye will or not?
or do ye think, because ye have no remembrance of your faults, that your
forgetting of them now will blot them out of your Consciences Register, or
rather should ye not judge your selves, that ye may not be judged? According to
the Apostles word, 1 Cor. 11. v. 31. And on the contrary, should ye not think,
that if ye do not judge your selves, ye will most certainly be judged? 4ly. I
would ask you, is it not better to put your Consciences to speak in time, when
things may be righted and amended, then to let them ly over, and sleep, till
they be past remedy? O! When will ye consider, and lay to heart, what trouble,
terror and confusion reaches, and takes hold on the Consciences of many at
death, and will do so much more at the day of Judgment; and if it were not
much better in time to try things, and find out what is right, and what is
wrong, that Conscience may not have a just ground of challenge against you in
that day, and may not have it to say to you, ye never owned me, when ye was
living in the World, and now I will read to you a fearful Indictment and
Dittay, that has stood long on record against you; And upon this arises, the
horror and g^awing worm that never dies; hence is the fire blown that never is
quenched; all which (I say) flow from Conscience* representing to men and women
in a most formidable manner their way, which before they would never believe,
nor once seriously put the matter to the trial, whether it would do so or not.

In further prosecution of this Use, and to make that the more plain, which we
would mainly be at in it, We shall, 1. Speak a little to several sorts of
persons who we suppose, are guilty of the neglect of this duty, 2. A little to
the evils that follow, and flow from the guilt of this neglect. 3. To the
causes o^ their continuing in this sinful neglect. 4. A little to what may
^irect toward the facilitating, and making easy the practice of this duty, and
to the making of it profitable and useful.

For the First of these, viz. the several sorts of persons that are guilty of
the utter neglect of the duty; or of much short-coming, and overlinesse in
performing it; They may be reduced to these Six The 1. Soft are they that make
no Conscience at all of any thing in Religion, that never knew what it was to
make Conscience to pray, read the word, confer on it, repent, or of any other
duty; what wonder is it, that such persons neglect to reflect, and look back on
their way, and to examine themselves; for (as Job says Chap. 24: v. 17. Of
the morning to the Adulterers) their way to them is as the shadow of death; Yet
even these would know for a certainty, that their Consciences will speak, and
so much the more terribly, as now they neglect to take any notice of them. A
2d. Sort make a kind of Conscience of external duties in Religion, such as
hearing, prayer, reading the Scripture, and the like, but do neglect more
spiritual and inward duties, such as, the mortification of sin, the humbling of
the heart for it, wrestling with God to have victory over it, meditation, and
the like: Now this duty which we are pressing, being of that sort, and serving
not a little to further Repentance and mortification, and to make serious in
prayer, they must, and cannot but neglect it, because they design nor* neither
aim at these ends to which it is subservient. A 3d. Sort are such, who may now
and then have a sort of tenderness in the performance of some duties, and in
abstaining from several sins* and yet they mind not, nor make Conscience at all
of this duty: I suppose there are many of you, who have your own times for
prayer, reading, and the like, who take no (...) all for this duty: I would as^
such of you, if you can make Conscience of other duties, because God commands
them, who make no Conscience of this? Seeing its as clearly commanded as any of
these; deceive not your selves, God will not be mocked. A 4th. Sort are such as
make some essays, or rather mints to go about, even this duty, but are overly,
general, confu^ed, indistinct, soon satisfied, and put to a stand in it*
taking only a hasty view of it in the by; or a little transient look of it,
when they go to prayer; but fall not purposly about it, as a distinct duty, and
an up taking work, do not dwell upon, and insist in it, to have the
circumstances of their actions, and way un-folded, laid open, made naked and
bare, at the Bar of Conscience. A 5th. Sort may come some length in the duty,
but they follow not the work, till they be suitably affe^ted, humbled, and made
serious; much less till the duty be made delightsome to them, til^ i^ six an
impression of the Majesty of God on them, and lay a necessity on them, to
employ Christ more; but it is with them in this matter, as James speaks,
Chap. 1. of these, Who beholding their natural face in a glass, go their way,
and forget what manner of persons they are; The fruit of their Self-examination
is either not attained, or it has little, or no impression on them; and this
is it, which makes men not to be in love with the duty, because they follow it
not, till they get somewhat of the lovely fruit of it: And here many, even
Believers, are as to several degrees guilty. A 6th Sort are also here
reproveable, who, though they come a little further, to look on their way, and
to desire Conscience its sense thereof, and to be affected with what they find
in the search; yet they seek not to be distinct, and thoroughly clear in the
matter; Neither are they impartial, in setting about to discover every thing
that is wrong in their condition: but some come to look and see what is right,
to strengthen (on the matter at least) their security; others come to see what
is wrong (which is somewhat indeed preferable to the other) to strengthen their
unbelief, or mis-believing jealousies of themselves, and so make it a sort of
Penance to themselves, as if they were putting themselves on the Rack; whereas
an impartial search, and examination of our way (which is the thing called for)
sets us on seriously to discover what is right, and what is wrong in our
condition, and accordingly to take, and be affected with it; but there is
scarce any one, or other, but one way or other they fa^l, and are more or less
guilty in this matter, which would put all according to their respective guilt,
to be humbled before the Lord, to seek his pardon, and grace to amend.

That we may be brought to loath the neglect, and overly performance of this
duty, I ^all in the 2d. place name some evils that it brings with it, and that
in these Four respects, 1. As it evidences, and speaks out a very untender
frame; for if it evidence a tender frame to be exact in this duty, then it
certainly speaks out an untender frame to neglect it, or to be superficial in
it; and where the neglect, or superficiariness are habitual and regnant, they
are shrewd evidences of an evil state: The utter neglect of it says, 1: That
such a man cares not for God, and stands not in aw of him; that he cares not
whether God be well pleased, or evil pleased, when he will not so much as
reflect, and see, if there be an enemy to God within him. 2. It speaks out
little respect to Conscience, and says, that men care not whether Conscience
be for them, or against them; Yea, it says, that they think on the matter at
least, that its an useless thing to have a Conscience; and can he possibly be a
tender man, that is not tender in respect to his Conscience? 3. It speaks forth
a man not to be in love with holiness; for ^f Self-examination be a notable
mean to promove holiness, and if none without it can be holy; if there can be
no Repentance for Sin, no Mortification, etc. without it; Then sure the man
that neglects it, cares not for holiness; It evidences a man to be void of all
Religion, fearlesse of Judgment, and careless, whether his Debt be paid, or
not, when he will not so much as search out what he is owing.

2ly. We may consider the neglect of this duty as ^t is exceedingly obstructive
to the great spiritual good, and advantage that a man should aim a^, in the
mortification of Sin, and lively performance of duties, viz. To obtain solid
peace, and communion with God; and to have any measure of discerning, or
spiritual feeling thereof: and can any of these be win at without this? Can ye
pray seriously? can ye repent? can ye mortify sin? Can ye praise God, or
delight in him, who have not been re^ecting to find out sin to repent for, nor
considering, whether there ^e any Grace in you, for which ye should be
thankful? And for spiritual joy* can a man possibly have it, if he know not how
it stands with him before God? And a man can never know, how ^t stands betwixt
God and him, till he be in some measure clear, how it stands with him before
his Conscience, or betwixt him and his Conscience.

3ly. Consider further, the evil of this neglect, in respect of its sinfulness
in it self; and indeed it is exceeding sinful, as its a neglect o^ clear duty,
and a breach of a clear command; yea, as its the neglect of a notable mean for
the suitable performance of all other duties; so that wherever Prayer,
Repentance, Hearing, Reading, etc. is commanded, This is also on the matter
commanded: And as many duties as are commanded; of as many breaches of these
commands are we guilty, when this duty is neglected: Considering, that when
ever we are commanded to do any duty, we are commanded also, to use all the
means that may further us toward the suitable performance thereof; And this
being a special mean requisite to the right performance of every duty, it is
therefore commanded in every other commanded duty: We may in^ance it in the
observation of the Lords day, This helps a man to begin it aright, It goes
along with him, in all the duties of the day; and when its over and by, it
helps him to discover his ^ailings, and short comings; and his actings of
Grace, (where it is) and spiritual seize in these duties; and to be
accordingly affected; and the neglect of it, is a breach of the Lords day, both
before, and after, and in the time of public, or private, or secret duties of
worship, called for on that day; and so proportionably in other duties.

4ly. We may look upon it, In respect of its being a nursery of all sorts of
evils; it harbors end entertains Lusts; it hardens the heart, strengthens
security; it cherishes hypocrisy; It brings on formality, and impenitency; It
(as it were) locks up in presumption, and carnal confidence; It wears men out
from under the aw of God, and from under all due respect to Conscience: The man
that makes Conscience of Self-examination, will be afraid of a challenge; but
he that uses not, and cares not, to examine himself, pulls (as it were) the
bridle out of his own head, runs at random, gives himself up, and lays himself
open to every sin and temptation, without fear of challenges: And if ye will
look well about you, and observe narrowly; will ye not find, that the man that
rusheth impetuously into a course of sin, as the horse rusheth into the B^ttel,
is very readily he, that quite neglects and despises this duty of examination
of his way, by his Conscience, or before the Tribunal thereof? And when I pray,
are persons most tender, or untender? Is it not when they are most impartial,
or most partial in this work of setting themselves down to take a serious
review of their case and way, and ^illing themselves before their Conscience,
to review the sentence thereof?

As for the 3d. thing proposed to be spoken of, viz. The causes of this so
abominable and gro^ly sinful neglect; they may easily and soon be found out, if
we knew and considered what a nature we have, so very averse from true
holiness; yea, the more sublimely holy, and spiritual that duties be, the more
averse naturally are we from hem: as its much easier to bring a man to the
profession, then it is to bring him to the power of Religion; So is it much
more easieto bring a man to the practice of many external duties thereof, then
to the practice of this one inward duty; It being as it were, a ^neding knife
to Corruption, bringing a man to strick at the very Roo^, and Life of it; and
it being (as it were) a setting of him on the Black-stone; The Black-stone is a
Seat whereon, in some of our Universities young Scholars use to be set*
ordinarily, not without great bot^ reluctation and fear, when they are to ^e
examined publicly by all the masters, anent their proficiency in learning.
He is the more averse from it: We may add to this, the consideration of the
influence that the Devil has on us, in this neglect; who knowing well how
prejudicial to him, to his kingdom, and interest; and how advantageous to the
sinner this duty is; he labors mightily to hold all in confusion, and to keep
the soul fast asleep, as that which contributs much, if not most to the gaining
of his point; for he knows by experience (very galling to him) that
self-examination awakes a man, and gives him a view of himself, and puts him to
think, how he may be rescued from this destrover; and therefore he does in a
special manner, hate, abhore, and set himself against it; And though he will
suffer a man to do many other Religious dut^es, yet he labors by all means to
keep him from this duty, because it help^ much through grace to make him cast
out with himself, and his own way; and so makes Satan in a manner hope^esse of
him.

More particularly we may assig^e these causes (...) (...) from peoples own
practice; The 1. whereof is (...), that many men and women live so, that their
life cannot abide the trial; He that does evil (says the Lord* John 3.) hates
the light, neither (...) unto the (...), tea^t his deeds should be reproved;
Its no wonder that a Malefactor desire not to come before the (...); and its as
little wonder that a man or woman that lives a sinful and evil life, desire
not to come before their Conscience: Hence it is, that many dare not go to
their Conscience, because it never speaks good, but evil to them, (as indeed it
has no other reason) and on that account they even hate it, As Achab did the
Prophet Micajah, of whom he said, I hate him, because he never prophesies good
but evil to me: And that they will rather consult Flesh and Blood, their own
inclination and affection, then their Conscience in a particular; because they
dread, it will speak evil to them, especially when they know, that there is
something palpably wrong in their way; for in that case, they conclude it will
gloum on them, and gall them, and even prick them in the quick. A 2d. Reason
is, Because folks make not this work of self-examination habitual to
themselves, but delay and put off time, till their case become so ravelled, and
consused, that they are afraid to meddle with it; And though they should, they
grow heartlesse, and out of hope to get it righted; just like men that cannot
endure to adjust their accounts, which they have suffered negligently to run
long on and into great confusion. A 3d. Cause may be this (which respects
Believers in Christ) that even where persons make Conscience of their ways,
there is a kind of foolish precip^tancy, and haste making; They being disposed
to think, that examination of themselves takes up much of their time, and that
it is better to spend it in prayer, or in reading, then that way; Not
considering, that its much better to have some little thing of Religion solid,
then to have a great bulk of many duties without solidi^y, or with very little
of it; These are like to the builder of a house, who rickleth up stones without
Square and Ru^e, and without Mortar, which possibly falls, and comes down
ere he come at the top of it; A foolish haste to be forward makes our work in
Religion to be o^tentimes very unsolid; Alace! ^ts not what b^lk we have, not
how soon we come to have it, but what solidity, and sickernesse we have, that
will give us peace, comfort o^ joy; Our common proverb holds true here, That
work or thing that is well done is soon done. A 4th. Cause may be, (which also
respects even Believers) that we are disposed to think if we be always about
some duty, it matters not so much what duty it be; And hence it often comes ^o
pass, that the time that should be spent in self-examination, we spend it in
prayer, reading, or conference; which readily go the worse with u^, that
examination is so much neglected: Therefore there would be wariness, and
circumspection here; because that which gives peace, is not so much, to be
much in duty, as it is to be in the duty, that we are called ^o for the time;
there being a linking of duties to another in a Christian walk, (as so many
Jewels, Precious-stones, or Pearls in a Chain, Neck-lace, or Bracelet) so as
they stre^gthen and help one another; Meditation helps Prayer, and Prayer
self-examination; and self-examination helps Prayer, and every other duty: And
that which beautifies and adorns the Chain of a tender Christian Walk, is the
ordering and setting of every duty in its own place, every thing being
beautiful in its own season, and place; Thus the blessed man is said, Psalm. 1.
To bring forth his fruit in his season.

In the 4th. Place (according to the method proposed) We would very briefly
give you a few Directions, for facilitating the practice of this duty, and for
making it succesful and profitable: and to this purpose, 1. Learn to make
Conscience of all the pieces and steps of your way, and this will give you the
better heart to look back on it; if Christians were tender in their walk, it
would bread ease to them in this duty, in Two respects, 1. It would make it
sweet and refreshing, not having an evil and challenging Conscience to meet
with, 2. It would leave some savoury impression of the duty upon them, which
helps to reflect with profit; whereas, when they post through duty (to speak
so) and when they have done, know not what they have been doing; how can they
reflect? A 2d. Direction is; Ye would be much in laying out the (...) of your
way before God in prayer, ye would not only be much in the peti^* part of
prayer, but also much in confession, in reading over (as it were) the legend of
your life to God: hea^tily acknowledging his grace in that which is good and
righ^, and humbly taking with that which is evil, and wrong; for when ^e study
to look over, and review your ^ay in prayer, it helps you to get the better,
and more impartial sight of the particulars thereof in exam nation, and when ye
do not dwell in a manner on the thoughts of your way in prayer, it makes it the
more uncouth, and confused to you in examination: Thus when the Sabbath comes,
we would be particular in con^essing to God in prayer, the sins that haunts us
that day; and this would help to examination; and examination would help to be
yet more particular in prayer. 3ly. As for other dur^es, so for this, ye would
have your set times of purpose; I say for this duty as well as for prayer; and
would let no other duty shuff^e it out of its own place and season; for when we
leave the time thereof at an uncertainty, we readily shi^t and neglect it; As,
in prayer, though we would observe and take hold of all providential
opportunities for it; yet that does not hinder, but we have, and should have
our particular set times for it, so ought it to be here; Therefore its said,
Psalm. 4. Commune with your ^earts, (or Examine your se^ves,) upon your beds.
4ly. This set time would be, when persons are most fresh and fit for the duty,
and have the ^aitest opportunity to insist in, and to dwell on it, and to follow
it till they be suitably affected with it, and till somewhat of it be reached;
for when we straiten our selves, and take not such a time as is fit for the
duty, we will not get it followed out to any purpose, and get time also for
prayer and other duties; and that causes overlinesse readily in all: We would
therefore take such a time for this duty, that we may not (so far as we can
forecast) be diverted, and drawn away from it, by some other thing. 5ly. When
some other thing, not then necessary breaks in to divert, and draw us away from
it, we would take our selves again and again, and endeavor to bring our hearts
back, and up to the duty that they get not leave to break louse; for if the
heart get a custom of gading, and admitting of diversions, it will never
readily suffer us to be serious in this duty; And therefore by all means, when
ye go about this duty of self examination, beware of, and guard against the
intrusion of other thoughts whither they be vain, or thoughts of things that
may be at another time profitable, but at that time impertinent. 6ly. In your
review of your condition, or in your self-examination, endeavor to find out,
and acknowledge the good as well as the evil that is in it; and to find out the
evil as well as the good; and to ^e answerably affected with joy, and
thanksgiving for that which is good, and with grief and sorrow for that which
is evil. 7ly. Endeavor to have your Self examination always in the close of
it, leaving some k^ndly impression of your own sinfulness and unworthiness;
and of the necessity, usefulness and worth of Gods Grace on you; and laying
and leaving you at Christ's Feet for a remedy of every thing amiss in your
condition* This is ^he great scope and design of this duty, and of all we have
discoursed on it, even to send us to Christ, and this should be the effect of
it, to leave us on him, which would make the exercise of it heart* some,
pleasant and profitable to us.

SERMON IV.
2 COR. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in (...), and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you
wards.
THere is hardly any thing excellent, and very singularly profitable to men*
but it has some more then ordinary difficulty in the way of coming at it,
notwithstanding whereof they are not deterred, nor detained from pursuing after
it; the consideration of its excellency with the expectation of the great
incomes of advantage and profit by it, makes them the more easily comport with
the difficulty of it, and to think all their labor well bestowed, in
overcoming that difficulty: So we may truly say of the serious exercise of
godliness, that it is so transcendently excellent (as being that which
beautifully conforms the rational* to the image of God, and capacitats the same
to enjoy fellowship with him, wherein its true glory, and excellency
incontrovertibly consists) and so very profitable, even profitable to all
things (as nothing else in the world is) having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come, That the greatest difficulties should not
fright (...) (...), nor faint us in the vigorous, constant and closse pursuit
of it: We shall not deny, but that this piece of godliness in particular, that
lies in the conscientiously tender ordering, and disposal of all our actions in
order to wining at the joyful Testimony of our Conscience concerning them, has
much difficulty in it, as being contrary to the natural levity, wavering and
instability of our hearts, and mightily opposed by Satan, as gready prejudicial
to his interest in the Soul, yet it is so very excellent, and so exceeding
useful, and profitable to the Christian (as we made appear from our last
discourse on these words) that all the difficulty of it may be the more easily
digested; It has (as the other duties of Religion have, when rightly gone
about) its reward in the bosom thereof; O! what sweet peace, what strong
consolation, and what unspeakable joy has the Apostle here, from the Testimony
of his Conscience after discovering his actions, to be so ordered, by this
serious Self-reflection, and examination? whereof special notice would be
taken; We shall therefore now proceed to Observe some things more particularly
from the Text, to this purpose.

First then Observe, That when Conscience is well pleased with a man's way, it
will give a Testimony for him; or when Conscience has put a man's way to proof,
it will not only, in the general speak its sense, but when his way is well
ordered, and squared according to the Rule, and he in his design is found
straight, and to have taken his aim right, Conscience will, after Examination,
excuse, and bear him witness to his joy: Thus is Paul dealt with here by his
Conscience, This is our rejoicing (says he) the testimony of our conscience;
Which is not simply Conscience speaking, but Conscience speaking for
vindicating him from these aspersions that were cast upon him, or excusing him
(as the word is, Romans 2. 15.) And testifying that he was not the man that some
men counted him to be; He had this Testimony, That in simplicity, and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom* but by the grace of God he had his
conversation in the world* and more abundantly toward them in Corinth; Which
after search he found to be so: That which we spoke of the nature of Conscience
makes this out; for Conscience, when right, speaks of things as they indeed
are, and holds forth the mind of God, and gives sentence according to it; when
he is well pleased, to declare and pronounce pardon and peace; and when he is
displeased* to declare anger, and (as it were) to denunce War.

Whereof we would make this Use, Even to learn not only to study to know, take
up, and discern the work (...) Conscience, in challenging and accusing (which
for ^ost part it does, having so much ground to do so) but ^so its work, in
absolving, excusing, and giving a good Testimony.

2ly. Observe, That the Testimony of Conscience, or its bearing witness for a
man, after reflecting upon, and searching of his way, is exceeding refreshful,
comfortable and joyous* This is our rejoicing (says the Apostle) the testimony
of our conscience; There is nothing more heartsome, refreshing and cheering to
a tender walker, neither can there readily be any thing* on this side heaven,
more solacious and joyous to him, then when he has examined his Conscience, to
find it testify for him; This is the great ground of Paul's joy and rejoicing;
though he lived in the midst of manifold temptations, and tribulations; and was
accounted to be the most contemptible of men, Even as the filth of the world,
and the offscouring of all things; Yet he had solid peace and joy on this
ground, that when he looked back on his way, in the discharge of his Ministry,
his Conscience bare him witness, that he had been single and faithful therein;
And as it was thus with Paul, so it has been with many of the Lords people,
who have humbly boasted, and rejoiced in this Testimony of their Conscience
within, when men have spoken evil of them, reproached and reviled them without.

For further clearing of this point, we would consider a little, 1. Some
particular Cases, wherein this Testimony of Conscience proves in a special
manner refreshing, and rejoicing. 2ly. We would consider the particular
grounds, and attendants of this refreshing and joy; whereby we will easily see,
that this Testimony of Conscience for a man, upon the search of his way, is a
singularly good thing; for before a man search his way, he cannot solidly
acquiesce in the Testimony that Conscience gives of it; nor can look on it as
well grounded; because he is not, nor can be sure whether there be any ground
and warrant for it, or not; whereas, when he has suitably searched for the
ground and warrant, where they are, they will readily discover themselves to
him.

As to the particular Cases, wherein this Testimony proves singularly
refreshing and joyous, they are these, and the like, 1. In a Case of external
crosses, and troubles in the World; none of these much move a man, that has
this Testimony of his Conscience, it gives him sweet peace amidst them all; We
see what mighty troubles Paul, was under, Chap. 11. v. 25, 26, 27. Yet he can,
and does rejoice in the midst of them. 2. When external crosses and losses have
sad aggravations attending them, such as the contempt, and reproach of the men
of the World; when he is calumniously represented, as one that turns the world
up side down, and who is deservedly so dealt with, Conscience its Testimony in
that case gives him peace, quietness and joy; which is the very case wherein
the Apostle here rejoices on this account. A 3d. Case is, When inward
challenges, and temptations accompany outward afflictions, when these are
mustered up before, and make an assault on the poor afflicted man, and when
there are some fearful apprehensions of Gods displeasure born in upon him;
Then, O! then Consciences Testimony gives wonderful quietness; as we may see
it does to holy Job, who says, in this case, Chap. 27. v. 6. My heart shall
not reproach me so long as I live; So Chap. 31. throughout; and sure it must be
solid, and well-grounded quietness, rest* and repose of Soul, that calms a man
in this case. 4ly. When the person draws near unto death, and when this King of
Terrors formidably musters all his Forces, and when there is no escaping out
of his hand, and when all comforts fail, and stand by as so many muts, not
having one word to say, for the dying man's relief, or ease; this Testimony does
then readily come forth in its strength, toward the quieting, refreshing* and
rejoicing of his heart, and makes him boldly, and without (...) fear, encounter
death; as the experience of Hezekiah* and many others of the Saints recorded in
the Scriptures, makes clear.

2ly. Consider whence this joy comes, or the grounds and attendants of the joy
which this Testimony yields, which are Fourfold* 1. It has with it inward
quietness, strength and comfort; The well grounded approving Testimony of the
Conscience, calms the heart amidst all storms of outward troubles, or of inward
challenges, and tentations, and puts them all to silence, it does fortify the
heart to bear out in what ever trial; it proves not only comfortable in the
holding off challenges, but has a joy and refreshing, flowing immediately from
the very Testimony it self, even a singularly sweet joy, that floorishes, and
flows over and above these; and keeps the heart in a calm serenity; The peace
of God, (says the Apostle, Phil. 4. 7) shall guard your hearts and minds
through Christ Jesus; Consciences Testimony warrantably speaking peace, is like
a garrison planted about the heart, keeping it as an impregnable and invincible
strong Hold, or Fort; So that no troubles, nor temptations from without, nor
stirrings of Corruption or Challenges from within, do sooner (to say so) set
out their head, but it overmatcheth them, and preserves the heart quiet in
despyt of them all. 2ly. This does also accompany this Testimony, as a ground
of joy, even the clearing up of the persons interest in Christ, and the
evidencing of their sincerity, and the truth and reality of the work of Grace
in them; Which is very strengthening and comforting; when a man has put his way
to the trial in the court of Conscience, and found it to be squared according
to the Rule of the Word, and has Consciences Testimony therein for him; It
sweetly evidences to him his sincerity, and so the truth of his interest in
Christ, which is attended with unspeakable joy.

3ly. This Testimony gives boldness and access with confidence to God, to go
heartsomly and familiarly to him in prayer under the multitude of temptations,
crosses and reproaches; and is not this ground of great refreshing, and joy?
When a man may go to God, and pour out his very heart in his bosom, may not
only tell him what he needs, but also expect a gracious hearing, and return
from him, in whatsoever is needful; If our hearts (says John 1 Epistle Chap.
2. v. 22.) condemn us not, we have confidence toward God, and whatsoever we
ask* we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do these things
that are pleasant in his sight; Though the man be empty-handed for the time,
and has not in himself, whereupon he can be for the honor of God, either by
suffering or doing, he may with humble boldness, present his suit to God, and
expect from him whatsoever is good, and needful for the man himself, and what
ever may be for his own honor in him, and by him.

4ly. This Testimony of a good Conscience has attending it, a clearing, and
up-making, fresh and lively hope of eternal Life; and of a comfortable,
glorious, and satisfying out-gate, from all the difficulties, temptations, and
troubles that he is in at present, or may be in for the future; it will make
him, according to his measure say, as Paul does, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought
a good fight I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, Hence forth is
laid up for me a crown of righteousness, etc. And by thus clearing up the
Christians hope of eternal life; an entrance is ministered unto him abundantly,
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: as Peter
has it, 2. Ep. ch, 1. v. 11. And must it not be exceedingly, and even
unspeakably refreshing and joyful to the Christian, to have all these trysting
together in his Case, even while he is here sojourning in the earth? doubtless
it must.

The First Use of this Doctrine serves for exhorting, and beseeching you all to
study, and be in love with a good Conscience; its unknown, what solid sweet
peace and joy ye may have by it; O! Endeavor through Grace, to be so tender,
straight, and upright in your aim to have a good Conscience in all things, that
when ye reflect on your way, ye may have its good Testimony; There will most
certainly be more peace found in this, then in the greatest abundance of all
earthly comforts, though combined together at their very best; Can any of these
calm a man's mind in a storm of challenges for sin, and of the terrors of
death? Do they not often rather leave men in greater anxiety, and perplexity,
then if they had never enjoyed them? Yea, often in the very mean time of these
enjoyments, and in the midst of the carnal joy and laughter that results from
them, the heart is sad, through the want of the Testimony of a good Conscience.
Therefore we exhort you, in the Name of the Lord, as ye would have a pleasant
and cheerful life, and a comfortable and joyful death, labor to have a good
Conscience in all things, that when ye reflect on it, it may testify for, and
speak good of, and to you; This (as Solomon says) Is a continual feast in
Life, and a sovereign cordial against the terror of Death.

The 2d. Use serves. To let us see the rise, reason and cause of the great
anxiety, perplexity and vexation, that is among most men, so that they toil
night and day, and have no satisfaction; its even this, that they do not seek
after the peace and joy that are founded upon, and result from the Testimony of
a good Conscience; no wonder that such persons live, and die utter strangers to
all solid peace and joy, which only grow on this Root: This is a main cause
also of the little peace, and great heartlesnesse, that is among even Believers
themselves, that either they are not so seriously endeavoring to have the
Testimony of a good Conscience, or they are not so careful to draw their
rejoyceing from it, but are untender in their walk, or are as so many Bees
fleeing from this flower to the other of worldly enjoyments, seeking to suck
some sweetness, and satisfaction from them, and do not, as it becomes them,
reflect on Conscience; that they may have a Testimony of sincerity from it; and
that on that ground, they may be quiet, cheerful, and joyful.

The 3d. Use Serves, To discover to us, what mighty prejudice flows from, and
follows upon the neglect of a tender walk, which lays the ground of this
Testimony, and on the neglect of self-examination, a main piece of a tender
walk, which helps to draw forth this Testimony; and therefore, as ye would
have this Testimony, and the refreshing peace, and joy that flow from it in
Life and Death, and as ye would have a heart holily triumphing over all crosses
and difficulties, afflictions and tribulations, design and endeavor more
through grace, to have a tender walk, that ye may lay a ground for this
Testimony; and study to be more frequent in Self-examination, that thereby ye
may extract, and draw it forth clearly, and convincingly for your peace,
comfort and joy: Could many of you be but once prevailed with, to prove, and
make trial, what a comfortable thing it is, to have Conscience by this
Testimony smiling on you, ye would be more in love with it, and with the
serious exercise of godliness, and particularly with Self-examination, that
make way for it, However, we are persuaded that ere long, the day will come,
wherein many of youshall be made to know the truth of all this in your sad
experience, when death shall stair you grimly in the face, and when ye shall
neither be able to send nor to flee; O! of what excellent worth will the
Testimony of a good Conscience then be found to be, hearing witness to men,
concerning their honesty, sincerity, uprightness, and the tenderness of their
walk; many of you will find it, though ye believe it not now, when ye shall be
eternally deprived of such a Testimony; ye shall then be made to know to your
everlasting cost, that the rejoicing of heart flowing from this Testimony of a
good Conscience, is infinitely preferable to all the worldly enjoyments, and
delights of the sons of men: I would beseech such of you, as think your selves
to be wise in this world, to study to be wise in this great point of wisdom; If
ye want this Testimony, when it comes to the last reckoning, ye will be for
ever undone, and will never through all eternity once smile for joy, but weep
and gnash your teeth, for the gnawing pain, that the never dying worm of an
evil Conscience shall cause to you.

3ly. Observe, That a man that would be thoroughly acquainted with his way, and
clear in the Testimony of his Conscience concerning it, would be particular in
the examination thereof; or thus, he would not content himself with a general
confused trial of it, altogether at once, and in the bulk, but he would try it
by parts, and parcels; Thus it was with the Apostle here; when he says that he
had the testimony of his conscience, that his conversation was not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, in the world, he subjoyns, and more abundantly
to youwards; And so descends to the particular, that was in controversy
betwixt him, and these big talking Doctors, that made it their great business
in the Church of Corinth, to derogat from the just repute of his Person, and
Ministry, and tells them, that he had the Testimony of his Conscience
concerning his upright and faithful carriage, in preaching the Gospel to them
in particular: When I say, that persons would try their way by parts, or
pieces, I mean, that they would try their particular actions, and behavior in
such and such places, at such and such particular times of their Life; because
by this means, they come to a more distinct knowledge of their carriage and
way; and it is impossible other ways, when men take up their way together by
the lump (as it were) that they can win to distinctnes; which they must needs
be at, in some measure, ere they have a well grounded testimony of their
Conscience, from solid and (...) grounds: Again there are some things, wherein
a man cannot have a good Testimony from his Conscience* (...) when he reflects
under strong Temptations, on the (...) wise, and sovereign providence of God,
as if he ^ed not the world, and his people therein aright, as Abihu charge
Job some way to have done, when he say^ to him, Chap. 33. v. 12. Behold in this
thou (...) not just* though Job will not take with it, that he is a (...); yet
he is silent, as to this part of the charge, being, its like, convinced of the
truth of it: As also a man may have many things very blameworthy in his life,
and yet may be in one or more particulars, wherewith he is charged, clear and
innocent; as it was with David, who says, Psalm. 7. 3. If I have done this,
etc. He had many blemishes, yet in this particular, he had the Testimony of his
Conscience for him: Therefore men would try their way by pieces and parts, that
they may disallow of these things wherein they cannot have a good Testimony
from their Conscience, and may accept of its Testimony, in that wherein they
are right; that they may reject a challenge, when there is no ground for it,
and entertain it where there is ground: a confused general way of
Self-examination has Two bad effects, 1. It keeps persons indistinct in the
knowledge of their condition, wherein they have a confused fight of somewhat
right, and of somewhat wrong, but know not what it i^ in particular, because
they rest, and sit down upon that general confused look of their case and way,
and come not to condescend on particulars. 2ly. Persons readily, either absolve
themselves, as to the more general tract of their life; because they see some
things honest like therein, which keeps them from taking with just^ challenges;
or else they condemn the whole of their life, because they see somethings wrong
in it, which keep^ them from comforting themselves in the Testimony of their
Conscience, as to what is right; therefore we would be particular in trying our
way (as I said) by parts, that every thing may have its own place and weight
with u^.

4ly. Considering these words as spoken by Paul, who takes much pains to prove
and clear his condition, and speaks of this Testimony, as of a great matter he
had attained to, Observe, That it is not easy, but very difficult, even for a
man that has taken pains in searching himself, to obtain the Testimony of his
Conscience for him in a particular; Its not so small a matter, nor so easy a
business as many suppose it to be; its not only a great and difficult
business to follow the search rightly; but it is so likewayes to find things
right, and to win at the Testimony of Conscience, as to this, and that, and the
other particular: If it were not a great and difficult business, Paul would not
lay such weight on it, as he does. Now when I say its a great and difficult
business, I mean, ^. That it is a rare thing, and such as every one does not
attain to; nay every Believer has it not, as to every part and piece of his
carriage. 2ly. That it calls for much tenderness and sincerity, in the whole of
a man's practice, to reach it; It will not be a coarse, and ordinary walk and
frame of heart, that will give a man ground for this refreshing Testimony of
his Conscience, but it requires much seriousness and sincerity in the exercise
of godliness, as is clear here* 3ly. That beside much seriousness and
sincerity, in the universal exercise of godliness, and much circumspection in
the man's personal walk and conversation, much diligence is called for, in
searching to find out, and to come by this Testimony of his Conscience; for a
man may have matter, and ground for Conscience its Testimony, and yet through
the neglect of suitable, serious and narrow Selfexamination, he may be at a
great loss, as to its joyful Testimony for him; even as one may be guilty of
many sins, and yet be but very little, or not at all challenged for them,
through the neglect of Self-examination. 4ly. That it requires much singleness
in trying of Consciences Testimony, whether it be well grounded or not; for a
man that has his peace and joy to build on this Testimony, must not take every
show and appearance of such a Testimony, for the ground of his peace and joy,
but Conscience would be put to speak distinctly, and on good ground for it,
that* in this, and that, and the other thing, there was some sincerity; and
this must be put to the proof, and exactly tried by the word, whether it be so
or not; As we see here the Apostle did, he tries his way and conversation, and
finds it to have been (...) simplicity and godly sincerity, etc. From which
premises (to speak so) he draws the refreshing conclusion of his joy and
rejoicing: Now if we look to all these, or to any one of them, whether to the
rarity of it amongst most men, yea even amongst Believers, in some respect; or
to the exactness and tenderness of walk that is requisite to be the ground of
it; or to the great difficulty that a man will find in coming at a through
search of his way; or to the diligence and single^ that is called for in the
trial of Conscience its Testimony, we will find it to be a most clear and
certain truth, that it is not an ordinary, nor easy business, but very
difficult, to obtain the well grounded, good and joyful testimony of
Conscience, as to our more general and particular conversation.

If it be so (which is the ^se of the Doctrine) Is it not a wonder from whence
the peace that many pretend to, comes? Is it not a wonder, that the most part
of men and women can so easily affirm the Testimony of their Conscience to be
for them, when there is neither exactness of life, not tenderness of walk, nor
diligence in Self-searching, nor holy jealousy, nor impartial and single
trying whether it be well grounded or not? And yet they will at the very first
confidently pretend to Conscience its Testimony: If many of you were put to it,
can you give such evidences or grounds for its Testimony, as Paul does here? If
not, how comes it to pass, that ye are so ready confidently to lay claim to it?
And yet, ala^e! there is nothing more ordinary, in the generality of these that
are most carnal and secure, then boldly to assert that they have a good
Conscience, and an honest heart. Is not this very strange, wonderful, and even
(...), that under the clear Sunshine of Gospel light, Satan should get so
great advantage, as thus (...) harden the hearts, and blind the Consciences of
so many poor wretched creatures, and at this rate to de^ude and (...) them, as
to prevail with them confidently to assert and maintain, that which they call
their honesty, which yet is nothing else but rotten-hearted (...), and to (...)
their peace of Conscience, which is nothing but a Soul-murthe^ng, and damning
(...)*

For further clearing of the Doctrine, and enlarging of its ^se, and for
helping you to judge aright of Conscience its Testimony, in your searching
after it; We shall propose some Questions, from the requisite qualifications of
a well grounded, and refreshing Testimony of a man's (...) for him; which must
all be answered in some measure affirmatively, and these Answers solidly, and
well proved, and made ou^, before you can quietly and confidently rest on
Consciences Testimony, as to any part or piece of your way; whether it be in
reference to the Sanctification of the Sabbath, to conferring on a spiritual
subject, to prayer, to praise, to reading, to hearing, to eating, to drinking,
to buying, to selling, to building, to planting, etc. But we shall here
restrict the inquiry mostly at least, to Religious things, or actions that are
Religious in their own nature. First, then, Conscience must be satisfied in
this; Whether that which ye have done, be on the matter approven of God, or
not; It is certainly true, ye will say, that prayer in it self is approven, and
so it is; but was such and such an expression that ye uttered, and such a word
that ye spoke, and the arguments that ye made use of in prayer, right before
God? If the matter be not right, Conscience cannot speak for you; Though a man
should be as warry and circumspect as may be* in cheating, circumven ^ing, and
deceiving of his neighbor, its impossible for Conscience to give him a good
Testimony anent it, or any other such action; because its on the matter sinful;
ye must once then be sure and clear in this, that what ye speak, or do in
prayer, or any other thing is, as to its matter, according to the will of God.

2ly. Conscience must be satisfied in this, not only whether the thing be
lawful in it self; but also whether it be a thing lawful to you, at such a
time, and that to which ye are particularly called; For many things are lawful,
which are not expedient; And many things may be expedient at one time, which
will not be expedient at another; take it in the instance of prayer, wherein
Conscience will not approve us, though we be right in it on the matter, if it
be not rightly timed, or if we be not then called to it; This is to be taken
heed to, especially in things that are on the matter indifferent, and in the
timing of such commanded duties; to which God has not set and fixed a
particular precise time, but left them to Christian prudence to be gone about,
by persons at these times, which are most seasonable, and as they are called to
them.

3ly. When ye are thus clear, as to the matter, season and time, and as to Gods
calling you to such and such a duty, whether did you acknowledge God in your
undertaking of the duty? was he looked to for direction, and guiding in it, and
for his blessing on it, and depended on for throw-bearing? according to that
notable word, Prove. 3. 16. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy paths; In this also Conscience must have satisfaction.

4ly. What Motive did set you on to such and such a duty? and from what
principle did you do it? For a duty, or action may be right on the matter* and
ye may also be called to it, and yet* if ye be not sweyed to it from a right
motive and principle, it will mar your peace, and stand in the way of
Conscience testifying for you; that is, Though you should do a thing that is
right, if ye be not sweyed to it out of Conscience, from the awe of God, from
love to him, and from obedience to his command, it is faulty in so far, and ye
cannot in so far have peace, nor the approving Testimony of your Conscience
therein: But if a man endure grief, and suffer wrongfully, for conscience
toward God, it is thank worthy, ^aith the Apostle, 1 Peter 2. 19. Or if he
give a cup of cold water to ^ disciple, in the name of a disciple, he shall not
lose his reward. Matthew. 10* 42. Thus two persons come to Church to hear the
word, the one out of Conscience, in obedience to Gods command, and from love to
fellow ship with him, in his ordinances; and the other for the fashion, and
because its the custom, or that he may eschew from his own Conscience, the
construction, and accusation of his being a gr^sly pro^ane, and it religious
person, or on some such other sinister account; the one h^th in so far ground
of peace, and the refreshing Testimony of a good Conscience; the other not.

5ly. Conscience must be satisfied in this Question, in whose strength was the
duty undertaken? was it in the strength of Christ? and was he depended on for
assistance in the going about of it? for it is not enough, that the duty be
gone about, and he some way acknowledged in it, unless he be also believingly
depended on for strength, to enable to the suitable performance of it.

6ly. What was your end in undertaking and prosecuting of such a duty, or
action? whether was it some self-end, or the glory of God, and the edification
of others? as in your eating and drinking, do ye eat and drink to satisfy your
appetit only, or mainly, or to enable you to serve God, and to do good to
others, in your station and capacity? In your seeking such and such gifts from
God by prayer, whether is it that ye may bestow, or consume them on your lusts?
(as James says, some do, Chap. 4. 3.) Or is it that ye may be helped to adorn
the doctrine of God in all things? The proposing of a right end, is a main
ingredient in every action, and has great influence on your peace; We preach
not our selves (saves the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 5. b^t Christ Jesus the Lord; We
are (as if he had said) in our preaching not seeking our selves, but him; nor
our own praise, or applause to our selves, but his glory and exaltation; and
this had much influence on his peace and joy; Conscience must be also satisfied
in this by any means.

7ly. After what manner was the action, or duty gone about? was it in sincerity
and singleness in a spiritual way? was the inner and new man exercised in it?
suppose the duty for instance to be prayer, was it gone about in the Spirit?
was Grace acted in it? and were ye serious, lively, humble tender, reverend,
servent, etc. in it?

8ly. Was there nothing wrong in the action or duty? no mixture of corruption
with the actings of Grace? no selfinesse mixed with your singleness, or at the
best, was there not some mixture of other ends with the main end? Which, though
it do not simply make the action, or duty condemnable, and to be rejected,
especially when taken with, and mourned for, and Christ made use of for the
pardon of it; yet it will considerably weaken Conscience its Testimony, and the
joy resulting from it, in so far as these sinful mixtures a^e.

9ly. Were ye stretching your selves to the yondmost in the performance of such
an action or duty, to have it right, as to all the former requisits? Was there
nothing left undone, that might and should have been done? Was ye not only
aiming at the right end, but according to your light, endeavoring to take
every way, and make use of every approven mean, for the compassing and bringing
about of that end?

Now if we will all seriously reflect, and look about us, how few, how very few
are there to be found, who can answer these questions affirmatively, in any
acceptable measure? Who, alace! can say they have done all they should, or even
might have done, as to matter and manner, from right principles, and motives,
to a right end? That they have used all means, without omitting any, that they
have given all dillgence? That they have made use of Christ's strength, and been
single and sincere, etc. in their performances? And yet when all this is some
way done, ye must yet answer one or two Questions more, ere ye can have solid
peace and joy, from the good Testimony of your Conscience. 1. Whether were ye
proud and conceity in the performing of such and such duties? For, if that dead
Flee come in on the doing of the best duties, it will make all to stink: and
yet oft-times Christians spoil their duties, and very much deprive themselves
of the joyful Testimony of their Conscience, even when they have been right for
matter and manner; by their being vain, conceity and proud of them.

2ly. Whether have ye washen your best duties in the Blood of Christ? For if
this be wanting, it will greatly mar your peace and joy; Now I would again ask
you, if ye can say, that your duties have been conform to these requisits? If
not, how is it that ye are so secure, and can allege that ye have a good
Conscience? or how can you so confidently expect peace and joy from ^ts
Testimony? or think ye nothing to prostitute, and (as it were) to make a bachel
of this excellent thing, the Testimony of a good Conscience, as if ye could
take it up (in a manner) at your foot? Ah! is there nothing that can make a
crack in, or a breach upon your peace of Conscience? ye will possibly say, that
ye have all sinned; if so, how can ye have peace to ly down in sin? It is true,
the simple having of sin, when it suitably affects, should not quite mar and
bereave a person of the Testimony of a good Conscience, where Grace is in the
truth of it, and there is sincerity, and singleness, in endeavoring to be in
case affirmatively, in some measure to answer the questions before proposed;
but the utter neglect of these things, a conniving at them, and indifferency,
whether the requisits be or not, a not wrestling, and striving in the strength
of Christ against sin, and to get duties suitably performed, in the same
strength, a not seeking to have men's best duties washen, (as I said) in the
Blood of the Lamb; cannot but quite deprive of the Testimony of a good
Conscience, and altogether obstruct the peace, and joy that flow from it: A
Believer indeed not allowing himself in his shortcomings, in these things
called for, and making frequent application to Christ, for strength to do
better, and for pardon of what is wrong, and walking humbly in the sense of his
failings, and short comings, may have peace, even though in many things he
fail, and come short; and though there be some mixture of corruption going
along with his grace, and of hypocrisy with his sincerity, in his best duties;
As we may see in the Apostle Paul Who had a law in his members (which he most
sadly bemoans, Rom* ^) rebelling against the law of his mind; Even when he had
this Testimony of a good Conscience, and much peace and joy resulting from it:
But a secure (...) sinner can never have the Testimony of a good Conscience,
nor any the least measure of that solid joy, or peace that flows from it, for
(as the Prophet Isaiah says, Chap. 57. v. last) There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God.

SERMON V.
2 COR. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity, and godly sincerity, notwith fleshly wisdom but by the grace of
God, we have ha^ our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards.
THere are many duties, and pieces of Christianity whereof the world neither
knows the excellency, nor the difficulty; men are for the most part disposed to
think, that Religion is a thing of very little worth, and very easiely come by,
when they shall find it convenient for them, to look after somewhat of it;
because they never set themselves seriously and in good earnest to practice it,
nor to experience the choice and excellent advantages that come by it: And we
verily suppose, that there are not two things in Religion less known and
believed, then the difficulty of attaining to a well-grounded Testimony of a
good Conscience; and the unspeakable excellency of it, with the great advantage
that comes by it, when it is attained, and entertained.

We spoke before to you of the great refreshing, and joy which the
well*grounded Testimony of a good Conscience yields, and of the great
difficulty that there is to attain, and come by it, as being the result of much
diligence, labor, and pains in solid answering of many questions.

Before we proceed any further, there may arise here a Doubt or Objection,
which would be cleared, and answered, viz. If a particular search, and
examination, as to every action and duty be necessary, yea, if it be possible,
ere the Conscience can give a good Testimony? and if so, how a person can
possibly have peace, in reference to his bygone way, when, in seeking to review
it, and to reflect upon it, he finds it impossible to examine every action, and
the circumstances of it? We conceive it to be necessary, to answer this Doubt,
or Objection, though we confess, it is very difficult to do it, to full
satisfaction, there being especially, extremes upon both sides, some being
ready to take an undue liberty, and latitude to themselves, on the one hand,
when any allowed qualifications are offered; and others being in hazard to
faint, and be discouraged on the other hand, if the matter be kept in a
peremptory state, without due qualifications and cautions; And yet we are sure,
that the right preaching of the Gospel (if we could win at it) will neither
louse reins to lawless and sinsul liberty to carnal persons; nor make sad the
hearts of these that ate gracious and tender, nor put them on the rack, nor
involve them into a labyrinth of inextricable intricacies, and perplexities.
For answer then to the Doubt or Objection, 1. It is indeed expedient, so far as
a Believer can win in self-examination, to reach his particular actions, and
the particular steps, and circumstances of them, wherein Job, and others of the
Saints, have win a great length, and the expediency, if not necessity of it,
appears from this, because, by this means, Believers win to more distinctnesse,
and stayednesse in up-taking of their case. 2ly. We think that the distinct
examination of all particulars in a man's life, and of the several questions
that Conscience may propose concerning them, is not possible in it self; and
therefore not simply necessary as to the making of this duty practicable; for
if we could possibly (as we cannot) go through all our Actions, and all the
circumstances of them, through out our whole way, it would take up more of our
time to examine, then we have for practice: if we should be put to reflect
particularly on every thing that we have done, on what has been committed, and
on what has been omitted, and the several aggravations, and circumstances of
every one of these, and to go through every one of them, according to the exact
Rule, it would take us many days; yea, if the Conscience should give way to
scruplousness in this, there should always be an examination of our
examination (which yet may, and in some cases ought to be) and so on in
infinitum, that there should never be an end of this work, to the exclusion of
others, clearly called for, which cannot be: That is not then (we conceive) the
Lords end, in pressing on us this duty of Self-examination; whereby he designs
to extricat the Souls of his People, out of disquietnesse, and not to involve
them further in it. Yet 3ly. We say, that its necessary, as to Believers peace
in their duty, that they examine the series of their way, though they cannot
reach every particular action, or all its circumstances; and that they think no
duty to be so clear, nor any sin to be so little, as resolvedly to pass it,
without reflecting on it, so far as is possible: and in examining the series,
and tract of their way, They would consider, 1. The matter of their actions,
whether it was good and approven of God, or not. 2. The manner of them, Whether
they have endeavored to do things after the due order, and in the prescribed
manner. 3. What they proposed to themselves, as the general main end, and scope
of their actions, whether it was the glory of God, o^ not; we find much of the
Saints Testimony of their Conscience, to be founded upon this; as we may see
here, in Paul, We have had (says he) our conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you wards, not with fleshly wisdom, etc. And in David, who (...),
Psalm. 119* 59. I thought on my ways* and turned my f^et into thy testimony;
There is great difference betwixt a man's way, or path, and every particular
step of his way or path; David proposes to himself the series of his way to be
examined, and wherein he found himself faulty, he makes haste to go out of it,
and turns his feet into Gods testimonies; He was endeavoring to be watchful in
every step of his way while it was before him, to have it right; but when he
reflects, it being impossible (as we have said) to look on every step of his
way, and to examine it according to the Rule, he looks upon the series of it;
on the matter, manner, and end of his walk, in the tract of his life; and in
this respect, he says, Psalm. 18. 21. I have kept the ways of the Lord, and
have not wickedly departed from my God. As Job Chap. 23. also does, My soot
has held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined. 4ly. Believers
would not only look to their way; but there are some actions, and steps of
their way, at some special times, that they would be more particular in the
examination of, then at other times, and of every action, though they would not
designedly seclude any, as God in providence calls them to it, and points it
out to be their duty; but there are (I say) some particular actions, that they
are called to examine more then others: And for further clearing of this, I
shall instance it in a few things, As 1. There are some things or actions and
duties that more eminently concern a Believers peace, or disquietness; his
peace if rightly gone about, and his disquietness if otherwise; Some things
whereby God is in an especial manner honored, and the Believer himself
comforted, if he carry rightly; and God highly dishonored, and the Believers
Conscience greatly wounded, if he miscarry; we may instance it in these solemn
Ordinances of the Lords Supper, of times of Humillation with Fasting, of
public, or secret personal Covenanting with the Lord* and the like; as here
Paul reflects particularly on his Ministry among the Corinthians, and on his
way in it, as being of great moment, and says, that it was more abundantly to
them ward: thus it is in hearing the Word; in Prayer in our Families, and in
secret; in conferring to edification on Sermons, after we have heard them, or
to any spiritual purpose; in sanctifying the Lords Day, and such others; For in
these Duties the rule binds some, nay more strickly; God being in them in a
more especial manner honored or dishonored; and there is readier access to a
challenge, if the person be wrong; and to peace and comfort, if right in these.
2ly. There are some things that are more tickle and difficult in respect either
of the nature of them, or in respect of our particular inclination to miscarry
in them; as for instance, when a man in providence has been cast into a place
and company, where he was crowded with snares and strong temptations, he would
there examine more particularly, that nothing have stuck to him that may be
ground of challenge against him; so in public employments, wherein men are
exposed to many temptations and snares, especially when there is somewhat in
their own tempratur^, inclination, or humor that disposes to yield, comply,
and miscarry; they would there be the more particular in their examination;
thus David says, Ps. 18. That be had not wickedly departed from God; that he
was upright before him, and had kept himself from his iniquity; There were
some sins that he was not in such hazard of, as he was of others; and as he
hand guarded more against them, so he takes a more particular view of these
sins that his natural temper inclined him most to, and that he was most in
hazard of: which we would take notice of at all times, but especially in these
times wherein men hazard on many things, hand over head, and as it were by
guess: So when a man knows that his humor and temper disposes him to be rash
and precipitant, hasty and passionate; when he has been in company with
others, when he may have had more than ordinary occasions of provocation, he
would there more particularly look back and see what his way has been, or what
has escaped him in such company.

3ly. A man would especially try and examine himself in reference to such sins
as he has been formerly given to, and against which he has particularly
engaged himself; and as the more solemn the^ty and engagement has been, he
should watch the more against them, so also examine the more, if he has been
in^angled i^ them; so say the people of God, Ps. 44* 17* All this is come upon
us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither (...) we dealt falsely in thy
Covenant; there were many particular sailings in their way, which doubtless
they reflected on; but especially they try, how they had carried in their
engagements to God; because they knew that any more gross falling in these
would have much influence on Gods dishonor, and on the wounding ^f their own
peace: Whatever we reflect on in our way, we would not neglect, nor omit our
engagements to God, but would narrowly look back and examine, how these have
been observed.

4ly. Men would especially try and examine themselves in these things that
cause, or occasion Challenges to them; if there be a particular challenge for
any thing, that is sure a particular Call, narrowly to try that thing, whether
we have been right in i^ or not; I do not say b^t a challenge may be, where
there is no just ground for it (and we may be called to try, where we are not
to take with a Challenge, where there is no ground for it) but often we are
wise behind the hand, and precipitant; and when we have not adverted before
hand to prevent the ground of a challenge, the challenge then comes to put us
particularly to examine, and try what has been right or wrong in our carriage
in such a particular. 5ly. What may occasion, or probably bring on some cross,
should put a man to try* that when the cross comes he may have peace, in so f^r
that he has not medied with such a thing without a clear Calling* 6ly. That
which probably may be a cause, or at least ^n occasion of contending with, or
of reproach from, or of offense to others, would put us narrowly to examine;
because in all such things, a man's peace will be notably tried: and we take
this to be the reason, why the Apostle instanceth here so particularly in his
Ministry amongst the Corinthians, because his carriage in it was controverted
by the false Teachers there, as if he had not been faithful, zealous, and
single in it. Lastly, When we speak of Believers more particular trying of
their way, we mean not only as to these things that are more dark and unclear,
but also as to these that are most clear; for even in these, after exact
examination, we may find out ground of challenge for what is wrong in our end,
or in our manner of doing; and distinct ground of peace, for what is right;
that we may be able with some solid confidence to say, this was wrong, and I
have reason to be humbled for it; and this was right, and I may be quieted and
comforted in it.

5ly. Observe, That though it be a difficult thing to win to a well grounded
refreshing testimony of a good Conscience, yet by a tender Believer, it is
through grace attainable; Paul speaks of it here, not only as a thing that he
aimed at, but as that which he attained; the experience also of many of the
Saints does prove, that it has been win at; as we may see in Job, David,
Hezekiah, and others: It is moreover clear from the effects that have followed
on it in them, such as peace, joy, and rejoyceing; all which clearly hold forth
so much, that a Believer in his walk may win to a well grounded, and
heart-chearing testimony of Conscience for him; if he be tender and watchful in
his way to keep a good Conscience, and diligent in self-examination, and
sincere and impartial in putting things to a proof, whether they be right or
wrong.

The use of this Doctrine serves for instruction, to let us see, that to win at
such a Testimony of our Conscience is possible; and from the consideration of
the possibility of it, it serves also to encourage us to seek after it: If
Conscience be made of self-examination, it is not a heartless, hopeless, and
desperate business, as many take it to be, who think (and it may be they have
just ground for that thought, having so evil a Conscience) that it neither
will, nor can speak good to them; but it will certainly speak, when there is
ground for it.

6ly. Observe, That a Believer who has the testimony of a good Conscience,
would take with it, acknowledge it, and rejoice in it; Paul having, and finding
this restimony of his Conscience, ownes it, expresses, professes, and
avoucheth it. That which I mean here is this, that a Believer would no less
take with Conscience its testimony, when it speaks for him, then he takes with
a Challenge when it speaks against him; and would be as well comforted by the
one, as he is humbled under the other: the experience of the Saints clears and
confirms this, Hezekiah* David, Paul here, and others of the Godly have
comforted themselves from the testimony of a good Conscience: we will not, we
dare not say, that it is either the greatest or most ordinary fault; but we are
sure, it is a fault incident to Believers, that they do not (when studying to
have a good Conscience in all things) take more with, acknowledge, and comfort
themselves in the testimony of their Conscience; partly thinking that it is
presumption for them to own it, or to comfort themselves in it, partly thinking
that something else is more suitable for them; and that it becomes them rather
to be humbled, because of the many evils that they find themselves to be guilty
of, then to be thus comforted; thinking that they have never sufficient ground
for a testimony of Conscience for them; which were very hard for Believers to
conclude, for it were on the matter to deny that they have any thing of the
grace of God in truth; for as far as Grace is in exercise, they have ground for
this Testimony of their Conscience for them, and so good ground to be
comforted, and made joyful from it.

But for prosecuting and clearing of this; we shall give you some Rules or
Cautions, which may serve as so many Directions to walk by in this matter, for
preventing of mistakes; The First whereof is this, that the testimony of a good
Conscience to sojourning and militant Saints, does nor flow from perfection in
holiness; otherwise David, Paul, Hezekiah, and others, would never have had it:
but it flows from reflecting on the general tract of a man's way, and his
finding it to be in some measure straight before the Lord; as we see it did in
David, Ps. 18. 21, 22. and I^b 23. 11, 12. Though in particular steps they had
their own failings.

The 2d. is, That the testimony of a good Conscience may be, where there are
challenges for sin; there may be in one and the same Believer, a just challenge
for what is wrong, and a good Testimony for what is right; and as he should not
on the one hand refuse to take with the challenge, so he should not on the
other decline embracing the good testimony: as the Lord teaches plainly in his
way of dealing with the Churches of Asia, Revel. 2. and 3. Where, when he
reproves them for what is wrong, he also commends them for what is right;
teaching Believers thereby to distinguish well betwixt these two; and so to
take with a challenge from Conscience for that wherein they are wrong, as not
to refuse its testimony for them when they are right; for the Conscience will
always have somewhat to say to such in reference to both these* they that
resolve (as it were) to admit only of challenges, and of nothing but pure
challenges, suppose themselves to be lying still in their natural and unrenewed
state; and they that would be at an absolute and entire good testimony without
any challenges at all, must look for that only in Heaven; where all the godly
will most certainly have it to their joy unspeakable, and eminently full of
glory; and it is a very shrewd evidence of an unsound state; and of a persons
being under the power of delusion, to imagine, that he has only such a
testimony always, without any challenges for sin at all, while he has still a
corrupt nature within him, as all other mortals have.

The 3d. is* That in the self same action, a Christian may, and readily will
have both a challenge and a testimony; a challenge for something wrong and a
testimony for something right therein; according to that word of Nehemiah,
chap. 1. Hear the prayer of thy Servant, and of thy servants who desire to fear
thy name; He, no doubt wanted not challenges for short-comings, yet he had a
Testimony from his desire to fear Gods name; And Heb. 13. 18. The Apostle
says, we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live
honestly, and yet there was so much corruption remaining in the eminently holy
man, as to raise challenges on him, as we see, Romans 7. But he severs what is
right in his own condition, from what is wrong; we would not therefore think,
that we cannot have a good Testimony from our Conscience, except there be
absolut purity in the duty, or action; This were, as if a man should say, I
have no faith, because I have a mixture of unbelief with it; or I have no
sincerity, because I have a mixture of hypocrisy with it: we know that Saints
use to distinguish, and put a difference betwixt these, as that poor man did,
who says, Mark 9. I believe, Lord, help my unbelief; as another may say, I
have much hypocrisy, yet I have some (...) with it; as David does on the
matter, Psalm. 51.

The Fourth is, That there may be a good Testimony of the Conscience, in a
particular action, when as to the action, complexly considered, a Believer may
see ground to be humbled; there being two parts in him, the renewed, and
un-renewed part; sometimes the corrupt and un-renewed part may so restrain him,
that he cannot do that which he would; and yet he may have some peace here, in
as far as according to the renewed part, he allows not himself in that
prevailing of the corrupt and un* renewed part, but is afflicted with, and
protests against the same; so the Apostle says, Romans 7. 15, 16, 17. That which
I do, I allow not; ^or what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I;
if then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that it is good,
and it is no more I that do it* but sin that dwells in me, for to will is
present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not; He wants not
ground of challenge from the un renewed part; yet he has pea^e on this
account, that he can and does warrantably distinguish betwixt the law of his
mind and the law of his members; and he maintains the peace of a good
Conscience in some respect, not as to his being free from all guilt, in respect
of his un renewed, or corrupt part; but in respect of the opposition which the
renewed part made unto it; in respect of his corruption he looks at, and cries
out of himself, as a sinful miserable and wretched man; and yet in respect of
his grace, he looks at, and proclaims himself to be a happy man through Christ
Jesus, and on that account heartily thanks God: I grant that Believers have
need of much singleness, and selfdenyal here; yet they cannot have peace,
unless they thus distinguish; and by the way (which might be a distinct
doctrine) let me say, that a Believers not admitting of the Testimony of his
Conscience for him, when he has ground for it, is the cause of much
heartlesness, and a mighty obstruction of his peace, comfort and joy; when he
knows not, how to wail out the Testimony of a good Conscience, from a crowd,
and heap (as it were) of challenges for much guilt.

^ ly. Observe; That whoever would found peace and joy on the Testimony of his
Conscience, would be sure, that it be a well grounded Testimony; therefore Paul
in asserting the Testimony of his Conscience here, and his rejoicing on that
ground, proves, that he had suf^ ground, and warrant for his doing so; and
brings (...) proofs of it viz. That, in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom* but by the grace of God he h^d his conversation in the
world, and more aboundant^y to them ward; and indeed, if we consider, 1. of
wha^ ^ighty concernment it is, and how great and (...) a building is built on
it, we will find there is much need to have the ground well, and deeply laid.
2ly. If we consider what Rains, Floods and winds of Tentations, Troubles and
challenges may descend, bea^ and blow upon our building, and put it to the
tryal^ whether it be founded, and be built on the Rock, or on the Sand; we had
need to look well on what ground we build, and that it be solid, and durable;
we find, many that will have a sort of peace in health and prosperity, who,
when sickness, adversity and death come, have their peace to seek, having been
all the while but building (as it were) castles in the air. 3ly. If we
consider, how easy, and ordinary it is for people here to go wrong, to be
mistaken, and to think that all is well; when, alace! it is nothing so, but all
quite wrong, it says, we had need to be sicker; ^t cries aloud to us, to look
about us, and to make sure, solid, and sicker work.

For further prosecuting of this point, I shall, 1. show how persons may
suppose, that they have a good Testimony of their Conscience without a ground,
or upon seeming grounds, without any solidity, or reality. 2ly. I shall show
what grounds will not bear this Testimony of a good Conscience. 3ly. I shall
show what grounds may bear it, or what may be the characters of a warrantable
and well-grounded testimony of a good Conscience; most of all which we will
find to be in this Text; to our discourses on which we resolve at this time to
put an end.

For the First, viz. That people may suppose that they have the Testimony of a
good Conscience without a ground, or on but seeming grounds; which is incident
not only to natural men, but even sometimes to Believers themselves in some
respect; men may gather a conclusion of peace from unsound grounds, and speak
peace to themselves, when God has not spoken peace to them; There is a
generation, says Solomon, Prove. 30. v. 12. that are pure in their own eyes,
and yet are not washed from their filthiness; a generation that foolishly fancy
themselves to be right, when yet they are quite wrong: which we suppose comes
to pass ordinarily, in these Four cases, or from these Four grounds. 1. When
(...) haive holiness, and do a piece, or part of their duty and work, but go
not stitch-through with it, thinking they need not to be so full, so exact, and
so precise, as the command calls for (which it may be they secretly judge to be
too severe and rig^d) as it was with King Saul, who, when Samu^l came to him,
after the slaughter of the Am^lekites, 1 Samuel 15. goes out to meet him, and
says to him, Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have performed the commandment of
the Lord; and when Samuel answers him, what means then the bleating of the
sheep in min^ (...), and the ^owing of the oxen which I ^ear? Saul replies,
They have brought them from the Amalekites to be a sacrifice to the Lord; He
thought that he had ^ufficiently keept the commandment of the Lord, though he
had preserved an A^ag, and some ^ew of the best beasts, especially for such an
use: Thus often natural men, if they do (as it were) two parts, or half of
their duty, think they have done enough; and that they may have peace o^ that
ground. 2ly. When persons think that they mean well, and have an honest aim and
design; and will (it may be) be ready to disput on that ground, with any that
would find fault with them, and confidently assert that they have done well* as
Saul does with Samuel, in that same Chapter, who says, yea, I have obeyed the
voice of the Lord, and performed the commandment of the Lord; And that I have
reserved these few sheep and oxen, I meant well, it was not from any greed or
covetousness but to be a sacrifice for the Lora; what, says Samuel* has the
Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the
voice of the Lord? to obey is better then sacrifice, etc. That which many men
call a good mind, or meaning, ^s often the cutthroat of their peace, and
hardneth them against just challenges. 3ly. When men are ignorant of the Law of
God, it makes them to have peace, when they have no ground ^or it; such are
ready to think, that they have given o^edience to Gods commands, and that they
have the Testimony of a good Conscience, because they know not the extent, and
spiritual meaning of the Law of God; as we may see in that man spoken of,
Matthew. 19. who said, all these have I kept from my youth up; He did no^
grossly dissemble when he said so, but he was ignorant (as I said (...) now) of
the spiritual meaning and extent of the Law; he thought he was not covetous, if
he did no^ oppress, and knew not what it was to post-pone all things in the
world to God, and that he was bound in some cases, and as he called him to it,
to quite all, and to follow Christ; and therefore turns his back on Christ,
when he is put to the trial: how many will have a great deal of peace, such as
it is, after they have prayed, bee^ hearing a Sermon? resting on the (...)
performance, when in the mean time, they never discerned what it was to perform
these duties spiritually; they fancy that they are not guilty of breaking the
first (...), if they have not downright worshipped any other God but the true
God, and know no spiritual (...); that they are not guilty of murder, if they
shed no man^ blood, and know not, that rash anger is (...) breach of that
command, and murder before God; and so in other commands. 4ly. When providence
seems to countenance some particular in men's hand, and it goes with them; they
are ready to think in that case, they have the Testimony of their Conscience,
and so speak peace to themselves; as we see in Micah, when he has made his
Teraphim, Ephod, and mol^en image, and meets with a vagrant Levit coming along,
who (...) to stay with him; Now (says he) I know that the Lord will do me
good, s^ing I have a Levit to be my Priest; He looks on providence furnishing
him with a Priest, as Gods approving of his making these images: we will also
find in Rachel and Leah, two instances of this, Genesis 30. Rachel in her
barrenness gives Bilhah her maid to Jacob, and when she had brought forth a
Son, she says, God has judge^ me, and beard my voice; But Leah, when she has
given her maid to him, is more express, and clear, while she says, after
Zilpahs bringing forth a Son, God has gives me my hire, because I have given
my maid to my husband; It is very rare for people, when they seem to be
countenanced in such or such a particular, that they have a great mind for, so
to reflect on their way, as not sadly to mistake; there may be something of
this, even in Believers, in so far as they have unmortified corruption in them;
all which says, that we have great need, and are so much the more concerned to
study to be impartial, and single, in grounding the Testimony of our
Conscience, that we mistake it not; For providence coun^ us in a particular
will not, if there be no more, prove us to be right in it; God not having given
us that, as our Rule to walk by, but the law and testimony; by which the
Conscience being well informed, and giving its Testimony accordingly; that is
the alone Testimony which can yield solid peace and joy.

For the 2d. thing, viz. Some false grounds (even beside these) that men use to
rest upon; we shall name these four, that are very unsound, and unsicker, and
they are employed in the Text. The 1. is employed in Godly sincerity: for
clearing of which, ye would take notice, that there may be a moral sincerity in
men's practices that is not godly sincerity; which is opposite to more gross
counterfeiting and dissembling; This we find to have been in Abimelech, Genesis
20. who said to God, In the integrity of my heart have I done this; The man
said not one thing, when he intended another; this moral sincerity will not
prove a solid ground of the Testimony of a good Conscience; therefore we see
that God plagues A^imelech, notwithstanding his moral honesty and sincerity; it
is true, it may extenuat, and in some respect excuse a man's fault, as it does
Paul's persecution, who did it ignorantly, and out of unbelief, and the Jews
their zeal, which was not according to knowledge; but as the thing it self was
not warrantable, so no such thing can be a solid ground of peace; therefore the
Jews zeal does not warrant them in that they did; nor Paul's persecution to be
no sin, as neither the one nor the other, nor both of them together, warrant
these spoken of, 1 John 16. who, in killing the servants of Christ, thought
they did God good service; the matter must be right, otherwise there can never
be ground for a good Testimony of the Conscience; There is somewhat of this
kind of sincerity in many Merchants and Tradesmen, which makes them, if they be
any way morally honest in their dealings, to think, that they have Religion
enough, and sufficient ground for a good Testimony from their Conscience; but
alace, this will not do the business, nor obtain such a Testimony; it is not
sure for naught, that Paul puts in this word for a ground of his Testimony,
Godly Sincerity.

The 2d. False ground is employed in these words, not with fl^eshly wisdom;
wherein ye may take notice, 1. that there is a fleshly wisdom, providence, or
policy, whereby many men square their actions and ways so, as the mean they
pitch on may re^ch their end; and they may carry the matter so smoothly and
handsomely, as not openly to offend, though they make but little Conscience, in
the choice of means: but its not from a principle of Conscience, it is but
worldly wisdom, which will come to naught. 2ly. Ye may notice here, that though
this may keep a man sometimes from outward trouble, and in a sort of quietness
of mind, and may yield him some ground of expectation to gain his point; yet it
will not give him solid peace, nor be the ground of a good Testimony from his
Conscience: ^ndeed, where a tender well informed Conscience rules, and bears
sway, natural wisdom is a serviceable and useful hand- maid; but when a man
designs a good end to be compassed by fleshly wisdom, without consulting
Conscience in it; though he should succeed, it will never give him peace.
Therefore when Paul comes to Corinth to preach the Gospel, he declares that he
will not preach nor disput to make a show of his learning, or scholarcraft, nor
to draw peoples respect and applause to himself, as the false teachers did; but
with holy simplicity, he plainly i^structs them in the knowledge of the truth,
and reproves impartially their faults, and so commits the su^cess to God: Thus
a Minister may sinfully follow this rule or guide of fleshly wisdom, to come by
a good end, to wit, the keeping of people from casting at his Ministry; these
false teachers that were in Corinth, who did not (it may be) preach gross
errors, and might possibly think they had some good end, yet in their
preaching, through much fleshly wisdom, they ^ought themselves, and made it
their great work to gain the peoples respect and applause, by conniving at
their ^aults, rather than to profit them, and to gain their Souls: woe, woe to
such Ministers, who wink at the sins of their hearers, that they may infinua^
themselves on them, and court their favors: but closly to our point, we say,
that though men should have never so good an end, fleshly wisdom, and carnal
policy will never minister ground of a good Testimony from their Conscience
unto them.

A th^rd false ground is employed in these words, But by the grace of God, viz,
as the principle of his actions and walk; which insi^uats first, that there are
some good things which men may do, not from a principle of grace, but it may be
from a merely moral principle of pity, or a principle of natural courage, or
the like; wherein however beneficial and acceptable these things may be to
particular persons, or to humane societies, yet they can lay no solid ground of
peace. 2. It insinuates that the thing that makes a man acceptable, and
furnishes a good testimony to his Conscience, is, when he does things from a
principle of grace swaying and strengthening him; and where this principle is
not, Conscience can ^ever give a well grounded testimony to a man, suppose ^e
should Preach and Dispute for the Truth, and give his body to be burnt for it,
therefore Paul says, that it was by the grace of God that he had his
conversation in the world, and to them-ward.

A fourth false ground, that will not bear out a man is, when he only puts hand
to some things, or duties of Religion, without d^signing and endeavoring in
the whole strain and tract of his way to perfect holiness in the fear of God,
and to be pure as Christ is pure; and without allowing himself in any sin, or
in the neglect, or misper^ormance of any known Duty; and the reason of the
unsoundness of this ground is, that if a truly tender Conscience put a man to
one duty, it will put him to all duties; and if it put him to abstain from one
sin, it will put him to endeavor to abst^in from all sins; and Paul here
gathers not his testimony from one action or two* but from the tract of his
Conversation.

Now if we lay by ^ll these seeming and false grounds, it will be found that
many, yea most persons have but an empty and ^oom testimony, and a very ill
grounded and unwarrantable peace.

For the third thing we proposed to be spoke to, viz. The grounds of a good
testimony; we have them from the Text here in five or six steps, supposing the
matter to be right, as all along we have done; The first is, singleness in a
man's end, that he be not seeking himself, but Gods honor mainly; which is
employed in that word simplicity; a single end conduces much to a man's peace;
its a sine quo non to a joyful testimony of the Conscience, and the first step
to it here. The second is, godly sincerity, which is not only opposite to more
gross hypocri^ie, dissembling and coun^erfeiting, but contradistinguished also
from merely moral sincerity; its not only to be honest before men and (to say
so) before the Conscience, but also before God; I was also upright before him,
and in his eye sight, says David, Psalm. 18. See to this purpose, Luke 1 verse
6. and verse 75. and what the same Apostle says in the following Chapter,
verse last. But as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ; this godly
sincerity in a word is, when through grace a man walks so as he may be approven
and commended by God, and not by his own Conscience only, let be by men, by
whom to be judged either this or that way, is but a small thing as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 4 3. Sincerity puts a man to aim at holiness and a conformity to
God, and suffers him not to think it enough to have no challenge, but to try if
there be ground for it. A third ground (which is negative) is in the next
words, not with fleshly wisdom, but (as he said) with spiritual wisdom, with
that wisdom which is from above; for though ^leshly wisdom be decryed, yet so
is not spiritual wisdom; it being a great help to a circumspect Christian walk,
as we show from these words, Ephesians. 5. Walk circumspectly not as fools, but as
wise, redeeming the time; and it is nothing else but a spiritually watchful and
frugal catching hold of, and improving every opportunity of doing good, and of
appearing for God, and the promoting of his interest within us and without us,
as he calls us to it; wisely to observe, and watchfully to guard against
whatever may be a diversion to us from our main work, and to strick in with
what may further us in it, so that nothing may wound or mar our peace; Thus
holy Job has some peace from this, I was not (says he) in safety, neither
had I rest, neither was I quiet, yet trouble came; It is some ease to his mind,
to reflect on his spiritually wise, and thrifty improving of his time, when his
great trouble fell on him, That he was not secure, but praying, and offering
sacrifice for himself, and his family. A fourth ground is, the acting and
exercising of grace, by the grace of God, (says the Apostle) That is, I had
more then a natural principle exercised in my doing of duty; I did not things
in my own strength, but God was depended on, and acknowledged, and his help
sought and found: where we may take notice, that the right improving of grace,
is the main ground of the good Testimony of a good Conscience, and a no^able
help to attain it; not only the having of our nature renewed* but our having
grace in exercise; to be praying in the spirit, praising in the spirit, hearing
in Faith, and walking up and down in his name; not lippening to our selves, and
to our own strength, but to him and to the strength of his Grace. A fifth
ground is, That when all this is in some measure win at, a man be making
Conscience of examining, and searching himself, and reflecting on his way, that
he may know that it is so; for though Paul had his conversation by the grace of
God, in simplicity, not in fleshly wisdom etc. yet he had not this joyful
testimony of his Conscience till he put it to proof, and found it to be so
indeed; and if he had not done this, he had not had Consciences good Testimony.
A 6th and last ground is, when all this is done, that a man be denied to it,
and lay the weight of it only upon, and give the commendation of it altogether
to the grace of God; that he single himself out* and exclude himself from
having any praise of that which he has attained to; therefore the Apostle here
attributes all to grace; as he does in like manner. 1. Cor. 15. v. 10. I
labored, says ^e, more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of
God which was with me: and by the grace of God, I am what I am; he takes indeed
a large Testimony to himself, for the Corint^ians their edif^cation; but
attributes all to the grace of God: Now when we speak of acknowledging Gods
grace, we would not have it done complementingly, or for fostering of pride or
vanity, because of its being dispensed to us; but it would be done humbly and
soberly; for a little spiritual pride, conceit and vanity, in reflecting upon
what men have, or do this way, will be as a dead Flee, that will make this Box
of savoury and precious ointment to send forth a stinking smell; as we s^e in
the proud Pharisee, who vainly and vauntingly said, I thank thee that I am not
like this Publican; There is nothing more necessary for keeping the Testimony
of a good Conscience clear, then to be very humble under it, and much denied to
it.

SERMON I.
HEB. 13. v. 18. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all
things willing to live honestly.
IT is indeed a very exercising, and up-taking business to attain and come by a
good Conscience; but it has a most sweetly refreshing, and strongly com^orting
fruit growing out of (...), when it is attained; and who ever has through
grace attained it, have never found reason to think their lab^ur (...), or
their pains ill bestowed, or too great: The calmnes, composure and tranquillity
of Soul, with the ho^y and (...) confidence, and boldness to Godward, with the
(...), and joy that result and flow from this difficult ex^ super-abundantly
compense all the labor and pains bestowed on it: That we may be stirred up,
and provoked vigourously to endeavor, in the strength o^ Christ, the having
and maintaining a Con^cience, void of* offense toward God and Men, and somewhat
of the peace and joy that now from the well grounded assurance of its being
attained; we have made choice o^ these words to speak a little to them: Wherein
the Apostle, 1. asserts his attaining of this, with confidence and boldness; We
trust (says he) we have a good conscience. 2. He proves his assertion* ^y
giving an evidence o^ the truth of it; o^ by explicating that which he calls
a good Conscience, in all things (says he) willing to live ^onestly;
endeavoring in every thing to walk according to the rule, and to approve our
selves to God.

We shall in the first place, speak some what shortly to the explication, and
scope of the words; There are three expressions in his assertion, concerning
his Conscience, which hold forth a very high attainment, The 1. Is, a good
conscience; The word good signifies not only that which is ^ profitable good,
but also that which is a fair, pleasant and delectable good; insinuating, that
it is such a Conscience, as has some what in it commendable, beautiful, and
amiable, fitted to make others fall in love with it; so much the word
signifies. 2 Timothy 4. 7. and Matt. 26. 10. The 2. is, We trust, Holding out the
confidence whereby he asserts the having of a good Conscience; its not such
trust, as many of us have, which we use to call our good hope, Which is rather
a conjecturing, or* guessing, then any well-grounded confidence; but its such a
confidence, and persuasion, as is founded on good and solid grounds. The 3^.
is, in all things, holding forth the extent of it, as if he had said* in our
private walk, as Christians; and in our public employment, as Ministers of the
Gospel; in our suffering for Truth, and in our doing for it, even in all
things, we have a good Conscience* 2ly. There is the evidence, or exp^ication
of this, in the words following; because it might be thought strange, that he
should so confidently as^ert a good Conscience in all things, as if he had been
without sin; He explains his meaning in other three words, showing what he
takes to be a good Conscience; The 1. word is willing, which holds out his
kindly inclination, and the determinatness of his resolution anent the thing,
it was his desire, design, and delight, to be right in every thing; as Nehemias
was, to fear Gods name; and though he came so far short, as that the evil which
he would not, he did, and the good which he would fain have done, he could not
come at it; yet he delighted not, he approved not himself in the evil, neither
did he design it, but rather had it for his burden and affliction; as he gives
us an account, Romans 7. This then is the Apostles meaning in that high
assertion, viz. that it was his desire, design, endeavor and delight to have
it so. The ^ d word, is to live, which in the original, is to converse, and
looks to his whole conversation* It* was not only to be holy in such or such a
duty, as in praying* preaching and the like; but in all manner* of
conversation. The 3d word is ^onestly, Which is the adverb of the same word
called good before, and sign^fies to live pleasantly, desireably, worthily, or
honorably; even to live so as the Gospel might not suffer by any thing in his
walk; and so, as none of the seekers of God might be ashamed for his sake; and
so, as none might be fainted, disheartened, or discouraged to pray for him.

As for the scope of the words, You see they are subjoyned to, and connected
with the immediately preceding exhortation, to pray for him, and are given as
the reason why they should do so; Paul being made use of by the holy Ghost, as
his Penman, to write this Epistle, he does (as its ordinary for him in others
of his Epistles) commend himself to the prayers of the Saints, to whom he
writes: and because he was ill spoken of, and misrepresented, as an enemy to
the Law of Moses, and to the I^wish N^tion; least any thing of that should
s^ick with them, or stand in the way of their praying for him; He obv^ats their
objection (as it were) and says, ye may pray for us, for however we be
mis^aken, and mis-reported of by many, yet we have a good Conscience, willing,
designing, and endeavoring to live honestly, ^o as the Gospel of Christ may
suffer in nothing by us; but that rather the repute, and interest thereof, may
be furthered and advanced; And by this he binds on them (as ye shall God
willing hear) the exhortation to pray for him.

We intend to ^nsist on the latter part of the verse, yet because the
consideration of the scope may be of considerable use, we shall shortly, and
but in passing, touch on some observations from it; The first whereof (which is
(...)) is, That a man that endeavors sincerely, and seriously to keep a good
Conscience, may yet, notwithstanding be exceedingly mistaken, and
misrepresented in the world; Paul here found it needful to clear himself thus,
which he needed not to have done, if he had not been much mistaken, and
misrepresented.

2ly. Observe, That a man under many mistakes, misrepresentations, and
reproaches, may have a good Conscience; so that a man is not in reference
thereto obleidged to stand to others thoughts, and judgment of him; Thus it
was a small thing for this same Apostle, to be judged by man's judgment; As he
tells us, 1 Cor. 4. v. 3. Therefore ye would beware to lay weight on mistakes,
mis-representations, or false reports of men; since a good report, and a good
Conscience go not always together; Paul went through good report and ill
report, and digested all these things; so that his peace, and the Testimony of
a good Conscience were not thereby marred.

3ly. Observe, That clearness as to a good Conscience under mistakes and
reproaches, is a great and notable ground of con^idence and boldness, to such
as are so mistaken and reproached; many times men care but little for a good
Conscience; but when all the world (as it were) comes in a man's tops, the
confidence of a good Conscience is an excellent, and nonesuch friend and
companion; it has great weight with Paul here, and is a sufficient
counter-poise to all the reproaches and calumn^es they could load him with;
though he was looked on even as the filth of the world, and the off-scourings
of all things.

4ly. Observe, That when men meet with many reproaches, and walk in a way that
is attended with a multitude of snares, they need more then a guessing or a
conjectural un certainty, as to the Testimony of a good Conscience anent their
being right; even a-well-grounded certainty and persuasion; Paul does not say
here, we suppose or hope (as many of you understand hope) but we trust, or are
firmly persuaded; men would study always to be clear in what they do, but more
especially, when their way may be offended at, and they reproached on account
thereof; and most especially as to that part of their way, that is like to be
most offended at.

More particularly from these words considered as a reason of the foregoing
exhortation to pray for him. Observe, 1. That a man who has a good Conscience,
and is most clear in it; does ordinarily lay most weight on prayer, and is most
in love with that sweet exercise; so that he will not only pray for himself,
but will also desire others to pray for him; Its never a good Conscience in a
man, that makes him slight prayer himself, or the prayers of others for him.

2ly, Observe, That a man that has a good Conscience, will desire, and think
himself concerned to endeavor not to be mistaken by others; he will not boast
of his good Conscience, not caring what others think or say of him; but will
seek to remove any offense that may be taken at his way, or that may give any
the least ground to make his integrity to be called in question: as Paul does
here, and 2 Cor. 12. Where he says, v. 11. I am become a fool in glorying;
but adds v. 19. but we do all things (and so this amongst the rest) dearly
beloved for your edifying; And the reason is, because a man of a good
Conscience will not only study to be tender in his walk, so as himself may have
peace within; but will also have regard to the Conscience of others, that they
may not stumble and sin, nor the way of God suffer, when he may prevent it; and
its a sure evidence of an ^ntender Conscience, when men care not who stumble at
their way, or how others account and esteem of them.

3ly. Observe, (Which is of affinity with the former) That a man that
endeavors to have a good Conscience, and to be clear that it is so indeed,
will be very desirous to have a room in the prayers of others of Gods people;
Or such a man is one that will not lippen to, and lay weight upon his own
prayers only, but will also highly prize Christian fellowship, and desire to
have the benefit of the prayers of other Christians: Paul seldom misses this in
his Epistles; so Romans 15. Ephesians. 6. Col. 4. and Philip. 1. He is much in putting
and pressing them to pray, and to pray and strive for him together in prayer:
The reason is, because a man of a tender Conscience has a kindly sense of his
own infirmity, and a great desire to be forward in the way of holiness, and at
much enjoyment of God; and would therefore ^ain have a lift from every one that
can help him; such a man has a native exercise in pursuing, not only after
fellowship with God, but also with his people; Whereof this is a main part: And
though these may be looked at, but as little things, yet if we compare our
selves with the Rule, and with the practice of tender Christians; we will find
considerable defects, as to a good Conscience in them: There is a sort of
disdain, or shame in many, to seek the help of others prayers, as if it
supposed their being assaulted with some un*couth temptation; or the prevailing
of some gross corruption; or the lying on of some extraordinary, and un*heard
of Cross and affliction; but the single design of having a good Conscience, and
of getting it entertained, would put us, not only to pray our selves, but also
to desire the help of the prayers of others: always, this is a most certain
truth, that as a good Conscience is not attained without prayer; so its not
entertained, but by prayer: And its indeed a wonder how many can boast of a
good Conscience, and yet neglect prayer themselves, and undervalue the prayers
of others for them.

But it may be asked here, 1. What influence has a Christians good Conscience,
in laying on the duty of prayer on others for him? 2. What influence has a
good Conscience, to persuade others to the performance of this duty for the
person that has it, more then for others? Our speaking a little to these two,
will lead us in to the discovery of some notable advantages, that attend a good
Conscience.

As for the first, We say in general, that a good Co^ science has a notable
influence on prayer, and putting others to pray for us; or there is a strong
connection betwixt a good Conscience, and the advantage of prayer, 1. There is a
connection betwixt a good Conscience, and liberty and boldness in prayer, as it
is clear, 1 John 3. 21. If our hearts condemn us not, we have confidence
toward God: A man that has an evil Conscience, or an accusing and challenging
Conscience, has a sort of ^ing at, and at best much discouragement in prayer;
so that he cannot lift up his face without blushing and shame, but a good
Conscience on the contrary helps to boldness in prayer, and to the exercise of
Faith in God, as a Father, so that he can boldly say, our father. 2ly. A good
Conscience has influence on, or a connection with ou^ obtaining a hearing in
prayer, and on our being confident that we shall get a hearing; For we know
(says that poor man, John 9. v. 31.) that God hears not sinners, but if any
man do his will, ^e hears him; And David says, Psalm. 66. v. 18. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not ^ear me; And its said, 1 John 3. 22.
Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do
these things that are plea^ing in his sight: A good Conscience is not indeed a
meritorious cause of the hearing of prayer, yet God has established a
connection betwixt it, and his hearing of prayer, and it has influence on our
expecting a hearing, and on our knowing that we shall get a hearing, 3ly. And
more particularly, as to the Scripture now before us; a man that has a good
Conscience, may be confident to put others to pray for him, which another
cannot h^ve; and herein lies the weight of the Apostles argument, Pray for us,
for we have a good conscience; On this ground, he pleads for this privilege of
the communion of Saints; which he could not have so done, had he not had a good
Conscience. 4ly. A man that has a good Conscience may more confidently expect
the benefit of others prayers, as well as of his own; Whereas a man whose way
and Conscience is evil, though others prayers may sometimes have weight before
God to further his change; yet he himself can have no comfort in them while he
is such; Therefore while David is praying for his enemies, he says, his prayer
returned into his own bosom; but it did them little or no good: Thus we see
what advantage it is to have a good Conscience, it makes us capable of the
benefit, both of our own and others prayers; and the want of a good Conscience
on the contrary, excommunica^s (...) in a manner from the benefit of the
prayers of others.

The 2d. Question is, If this argument ought to have any more weight with
Christians, in praying for them then others? or if we should pray for them
only, that keep a good Conscience, and not for others? We answer 1. That
Christians would not limit their duty in prayer only to these; For we see,
Moses, David, and many others of the Saints, pray for such, as had no good
Conscience; so that we may warrantably pray for others though not having a good
Conscience, and may hope to be accepted therein; and that our praying for them
shall not be without fruit, and benefit to our selves at least. Yet 2ly. There
lies a greater ty, and obligation on us to pray for them that keep a good
Conscience then for others; even as there does, to do good especially to these
that are of the household of faith; The communion of Saints here binding and
linking (to say so) more straightly and strongly; So we are (I say)
proportionably more strictly tied to pray for sincere seekers of God; as the
Apos^les practice, Gal. 6. 16. shows, Where he prays thus, As many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them, and on the whole Israel of God; He
prays for peace to them, as being the most proper objects of the Saints
prayers, especially as to Gods peace; not having such ground for presenting
that, or other suchlike Petitions to God for (...)* Yea, 3ly. Not only does it
lay on a stronger obligation, but it gives greater ground of encouragement, and
confidence to deal with God on their behalf, and of hope and expectation to be
heard; Peace (says the Apostle) be upon them that (...) according to this
rule; He finds here firmer ground to stand on (to say so) in praying
confidently, and with hope of success, for such then for others. 4ly. Clearness
and persuasion (so far as is in this case attainable) that another is keeping a
good Conscience, makes a Christian more willing to pray, and more hearty in
prayer for such; a person will pray with the better will (to speak so) for
others, when he knows that they are tender; whereas any grossenes in a
professor will have influence on the cooling of his prayers for them, and he
will be in hazard of being tempted, at least, some way to ly by: We will not
say, but there may be often a fault in this; yet there is still a truth in the
connection, betwixt supposing a person to have a good Conscience, and our
bearing burden with him, and taking a more kindly lift of his condition in
prayer: And this is the reason why the Apostle makes use of this ground to
press and stir them up to pray for him, and to show that he expected the help
of their prayers; And indeed its no small encouragement in prayer to make
mention of a persons name particularly to God in prayer, when we know that it
is the name of one that is a friend of his, as Abraham is called.

All these serve to commend the great advantages that attend the having of a
good Conscience, and to lay a strong obligation on us to pursue after it; and
they may some way direct us how to walk, so as we may attain, and entertain a
good Conscience; and they may withal help to make some discovery to us, if we
be tender in our walk. But we come now to the Apostles assertion, We trust
(says he) we have a good conscience: from which we would observe a few
things, wherein we shall be more general, 1. Then Observe, That there is a very
great difference betwixt Consciences; some Consciences are good, some evil;
some are clear and pure, some are unclear, impure, and defiled; As the Apostle
shows, 2 Timothy: 1. 3. When he says* I thank God, whom I serve with a pure
conscience; and while he says, Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all things are pure,
but to them that are defiled, and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their
conscience is defiled; Every man has a Conscience, but not the like Conscience:
So that (I say) there is a great difference betwixt Consciences; even as great
as there is betwixt men: As sin has brought a long train of pollutions and
defilements with it, so that they reach the whole man, the very Conscience it
self not excepted; ^o special grace has a mighty powerful influence where it
comes; and reaches the whole man, and the Conscience in particular; though not
perfi^ely in this life: think no^ (...) that all men's Consciences are alike;
and as ye will not trust every man's word, so should ye not trust every man's
Conscience.

2ly. Observe, That there is such a thing attainable, as a good, or clear and
pleasant Conscience; otherwise, if it were simply un-attainable, there could
be ^o (...) no^ true ground for Paul's assertion here: This good Conscience, in
short, is come at thus; 1. There is an exercise, to have a conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward men, Whereof we spoke from Acts 24. v. 16. This
is the tender Christians design which he drives. 2ly. When a man has been thus
exercised, to have a good Conscience; he is in the nixt place exercised to know
the sense of his Conscience, and to have its approbative testimony; And this we
spoke to from these words, 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony
of our conscience: etc. 3ly. There is a clear and pleasan^ Conscience; which
flows from the former two; When a man has been exercised to have a good
Conscience, and to have the Testimony of his Conscience for him, and comes to
discern it; There results from these a clear calm, serene, smiling and pleasant
Conscience; which is a most heartsome and solacious thing to dwell with, (...)
very desirable, delightsome, refreshing, cheerful, and spiritualy jovial
companion.

The ^se serves to show you, that you should not look on a good Conscience as
an empty, or ai^y fancy, or notion, or as a thing that is not attainable, or as
a thing that was never attained by any; ye see the Saints have come a good
length in it: and next to the glory of God, this is the end, for attaining
whereof, they take all the pains to have a good Conscience; even that they may
win at this calmnes and tranquillity, at this peace, comfort and joy of Soul
resulting from a good Conscience; even as men labor, and take pains to win at
some thing in the world, that they may have a more convenient, commodious and
comfortable life in it: and comparing the words of this text with these of Acts
24. 16. Its very clear, that whoever are seriously, and suitably exercised to
have a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men, they may,
through Gods blessing, win at a clear, calm and pleasant Conscience: the one
was Paul's study there; the other is his attainment here: If we compare the
state of our Conscience with the strai^ of our former walk; it will very easily
be found, that the want of this calm and pleasant Conscience, flows from our
not being suitably exercised to godliness, and to the having a Conscience void
of offense toward God, and toward men: This, alace! This is it, that wounds
our peace, and (...) our spiritual mi^th, that makes us ^ow down, and walk
heavily (as it were) without the Sun; if there were more serious and hard
pressing after holiness, in all manner of conversation among us; we would not
readily be such strangers to the serene tranquillity, comfort, and refreshing
that flow from a good Conscience.

3ly. Observe, That a Believer who is tender in his walk, may win to be very
clear, and thoroughly persuaded, that he has a good Conscience; and may
according to his measure say, as Paul does here, We trust (or are confident)
that we have a good conscience; who is ^o very firmly persuaded, that he dare,
Romans 9. 1. (whence we spoke somewhat lately) take the Holy Ghost to be witness;
so a tender Christian may win to be so very clear and fully persuaded, that he
has a good Conscience, that he may boldly (...) it, and lippen to it, as that
which will abide the trial; yea, in some respect adventure, and hazard his very
Soul on it, that it is so of a truth.

But it may be asked, what is it that founds this persuasion, and makes it firm
and solid? Answer, The latter part of the text will give ground to speak to it
more fully; but for the time, and in the general, we say that these three do
^ound it, ere ever a man can be thus persuaded that he has a good Conscience;
he must needs take a serious look, and view of his bygone way, of his present
frame, and of his purpose, and resolution for the future, that he may see that
all these be in some measure right. 1. Then, for his bypast way, It supposes
that he has singly endeavored to have it tender, and conform to the rule,
even that he has been exercised to have a Conscience void of offense, and that
he has reflected, and searched, and found it in some measure to be so; the one
of these lays the ground for the Testimony of a good Conscience, and the other
draws forth the comfortable evidence of it. 2. As to the persons present frame,
there must be Spirituality, Singleness, and some measure of Tenderness;
otherwise it will much obstruct this persuading testimony; for its not enough,
that a man has been tender, if he be not in some measure so now; Paul says
here, We have (not only we had) a good conscience. 3ly. There must be some
deliberatness, and determinatness of his purpose, and resolution to walk with
God for the time to come; for if a man do not dedicat and devot himself to the
study of holiness for the future, though he be supposed to have had never so
much of it in his bygone life, this firm, and comfortable persuasion will be
much marred and obstructed: So then these three must here go together, viz.
Holiness in a man's bypast life; holiness in his present frame, and holiness in
his purpose for the future: We will find them all conjoined in the experience
of this same Apostle, Philp. 3. where, when he has spoken of his bygone
carriage, how he had counted these things to be loss for Christ, which he
sometimes accounted to be gain; and how he had suffered the loss of all things
for Christ; Yet he thinks not this enough, but adds as to his present frame,
Yea doubtless I count all things to be but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; And v. 12. Not as if I had already attained,
or were already perfyte: And v. 13* One thing I do, forgetting these things
that are behind, etc. He is as serious, and eager, as if he had just now begun;
and tells us that for the future, he is resolved to press hard toward the
mark, till he obtain the prize: Then he subjoyns, Let us then* as many as be
perfyte, be thus minded, This is not an absolute perfection in holiness, that
he speaks of, or a perfection of degrees, but a perfection of parts, or a
perfection of sincerity (though in a higher degree then many Christians win at)
as to his bypast life, as to his present frame, and as to his resolution for
the time to come: Religion must not be halved, but whosoever would have a clear
and calm Conscience, must study to be clear on all hands; no iniquity must be
regarded in his heart, no duty resolvedly ^alked, but holiness in all manner
of conversation, must sincerly and seriously, in the strength of grace be
followed after.

4ly Observe, That where there is a good Conscience in any one thing, there
will be a single and serious endeavor to have a good Conscience in all things;
or a good Conscience is of universal extent, as to every thing; We trust (says
the Apostle) we have a good Conscience in all things; The reason is, because if
a man be conscientious in any one thing, from the principle of a truly good
Conscience, that same principle will set him on to endeavor to be
conscientious in all things; for its the same Divine Authority that injoyns
obedience to all Gods Commands; and if Conscience put a man to lay weight on
any one thing as commanded, it will put him to lay weight on all things that
are commanded; a quatenus ad omne, etc. Therefore David says, Psalm. 18. 22.
All his judgments were before me, and I put not away his Statutes from me; and
Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have a respect unto all thy
Commandments; and of Zacharias and Elizabeth. Its said Luke 1. 6. That they
walked in all the Commandments of the Lord blameless: This Doctrine has two
Branches, The first is Negative, That there cannot be a good Conscience, but
where its universal; The second is Affirmative, That where a Conscience is
universal; its an evidence that its a good Conscience; Which we shall not now
in^ist to speak of; I shall only say, that if we compare the universality of
the Command, with our obedience thereto; and try if the one be as universal as
the other is; if there be a respect had to all the Com^nds; to these of the
first, as well as to these of the second Table of the Law; to these of the
Gospel, as well as to these of the Law; and if we take a view of our
Conversation in whole, and in the parts of it, in the Duties of Worship, and in
the Duties of our particular Callings, Stations, and Relations; If a good
Conscience has been singly aimed at in all these, at all times, Sabbath Day
and Weekday, in all conditions in prosperity and adversity; in all places, at
home and abroad, in the Shop and in the Family; in Journeys by Land, and
Voyages by Sea; (for Conscience comes in as concerned in all places, and in all
Companies, and will put the question, whether we be called to go to such a
place, and to be in such a Company or not, and will expect an answer as to all
these Things, Conditions, Times, Places and Companies) If (I say) we try
Conscience as to all these, we will find that a good Conscience is a very rare
thing; and that it is not so easily, either attained or entertained, as many
imagine it to be; and that withal its evident and undeniable hence, that the
Consciences of most men and women, are not so good as they are ready to aver
them to be; which they will one day find (if a gracious change prevent not) to
their unspeakable and irreparable loss and prejudice.

SERMON II.
HEB. 13. v. 18. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all
things willing to live honestly.
TRUE Religion and godliness consists not only in the illumination of the mind,
and in the conception and contemplation of the Truths concerning God and the
Gospel; but also and mainly in the practice of the known Duties thereof; and
very ordinarily there is more of the concern of Conscience, and of its solid
peace, in the practice of more common and well known Duties, that are even at
our hand, then in the speculation of, and painful search after things that are
more mysterious and obscure: We would decry none of these, nor diswade any from
a sober inquiry after them, who are more called to it than others; yet we would
give every one of them their own due place; and would by all means take heed
that we separate and divide not the power and practice of Religion from the
Theory thereof; and that we prefer not the search after some more cryptick and
dark things in Religion, to the serious practice of the more plain and obvious
Truths thereof: For the preventing whereof, as by other means, so we find the
Apostle very ordinarily in the close of his Epistles after more Doctrinal
Discourses, subjoyning some plain and familiar Directions, concerning the
practice of such Duties, that are generally known and acknowledged; amongst
which this is one, viz. Prayer for one another, and more particularly and
especially for the Ministers of the Gospel, pray for us (faith he) in the first
part of this Verse: We would then learn conscienciously to improve our Light
and Knowledge toward the practice of the Duties of Religion, and most, of
these that are most necessary; And particularly we would learn to lay due
weight on the practice of this Duty; Ministers would neither disdain, nor think
shame to call for the help of the peoples Prayers; Neither would people
neglect, nor think it needless, or a burden to them, to take a serious lift of
their Ministers, in their prayers to God: When we press obedience in all
things, as the evidence of a good Conscience, we would press obedience to this
amongst the rest, which whoever neglect, will in so far mar the peace of their
Conscience before God; For they cannot have a good Conscience in all things, if
they neglect or flight this piece of their Duty: Therefore without further
insisting in it, we exhort you in the Name of the Lord, Pray for us.

The other thing in the Verse, whereof we began to speak the last day, is the
Reason or Motive whereby Paul presses them to this Duty; by which an Objection
is obviated; They might be-like say, at least think, that he was an aspersed,
reproached, and ill-spoken of man; and that therefore they had but small ground
of encouragement to pray for him; No, says he, notwithstanding these
aspersions (which are false and groundless) pray for us; for we trust we have a
good Conscience in all things: And because this assertion might look bigg, he
qualifies it in the words following, wherein he clears what he means, and
proves that he spoke not at random, We have a good Conscience, willing in all
things (says he) to live honestly: We may, and do fail and come short, as to
the length we should be (...) but its beside our purpose; our desire, design,
and endeavor is faithfully to approve our selves to God in all things.

Observe 1. Here, that an honest and good Life, or Walk, and an honest and good
Conscience go together; There is always a suitableness betwixt the testimony
of a persons Conscience within, and the ordering of his Walk and Conversation
without; Or thus, as a man's life is, so is his Conscience: If the Life and
Conversation be honest, then a man may have, and has an honest, and good
Conscience; but if his Life and Conversation be untender, dishonest, profane
and louse, he cannot possibly have a good Conscience, as the Apostle plainly
affirms, Titus 1. 15. And the reason of it is clear, because Consciences well
grounded Testimony must be according to Truth, and speak out the thing as
indeed it is; and as when the thing is ill and wrong, it cannot speak peace and
good; so when the thing is right, it will not speak ill.

For Use of it, do not separat these things which God has conjoined; Think
never to have a good Conscience, when ye have not an honest Conversation: It
may be found without the accomplishment of a very diligent search, that many do
presumptuously and groundlesly speak and boast of a good Conscience, when there
is nothing in their Conversation that looks like it, let be warrands it; but if
ye would certainly know the companion of a good Conscience, take it from Paul,
it is even a living honestly: I would only here have you to take this Caveat in
the by, when we say that a good Conscience, and an honest life or walk go
together, we would not have you to look to the connection of these two, so
severly and rigidly, as if there could not be a good Conscience, but where
there is an honest walk in its perfection, without all slips or failings; for
we are now speaking of a deliberat, fixed, and settled purpose, and sincere
endeavor to live and walk honestly; which may consist with slips and fallings
of infirmity; This willingness to live honestly can never be separate from a
good Conscience: Neither would we have you thinking, when a Christian
miscarr^es in his Conversation, that he can never recover a good Conseience:
There are two ways whereby a Believer may come to quietness in his Conicience.
1. By the exercise of Sanctification which prevents a Challenge; and that is it
which the Apostle speaks of here, and Acts 24. 16. and it is that which we mean
in the Doctrine. 2. When he fails and miscaries, there is a recovering of
quietness, and of the Testimony of Conscience, by the exercise of ^epentance
and Faith, sprinkling the Conscience with the blood of Jesus; Which flows not
so much indeed from the man's holiness and tenderness, for preventing of a
Challenge, as from Justification, and the right that the Soul gets to pardon of
Sin thereby, wherein the Blood of Christ removes the Challenge and quiets the
Conscience; and a Soul may have the one of these, when to its sense it wants
the other; or has indeed but little of it; It may have some comfortable
clearness of interest, or at least the faith of it, when it has in some respect
an ill Conscience; as we may see David had Psalm. 51. So upon the other hand, we
conceive it is not impossible for a Believer to have some tenderness, and a
testimony thereof from his Conscience, when he is much in the dark, as to his
interest in God.

2ly, From Paul's knitting of these two together, viz. A good Conscience and the
qualification of it, an honest walk. Observe, That such as would confidently
assert, and assume to themselves this Testimony, that they have a good
Conscience, would do it on well qualified grounds and evidences; therefore the
Apostle here does not content himself simply to assert it; and generally,
wherever he asserts this, he holds out something of his practice, showing
thereby, that he was not mistaken, nor presumptuous in his asserting of it: If
we consider the extremities that men are disposed to run into, in this matter,
some too soon, and too easily assuming to themselves this Testimony of a good
Conscience; others again in a manner shu^ing, and shifting all things that may
give them clearness, as if it were impossible to be win at; We will find that
there is good reason to qualify it thus, so as the golden mediocrity, or raids
betwixt these-extreams, may be duly observed.

More particularly, It may be asked here, what is the qualification, or
evidence, whereby a person may clear, and prove that upon good and solid
ground, he assums to himself this Testimony of a good Conscience, and may not
scrupulously reject it? The Apostle holds it out in these words, willing to
live honestly; and ye may take it in this Observation, That a firm and settled
serious purpose of universal holiness, and honesty in our life, and walk, has
great influence on the peace and tranquillity of our Conscience; and is a good
evidence of a good Conscience; and withal a choice companion, that waits
continually on it: I put these three together, as included in the words, in all
things Willing to live honestly; The latter words respect the former, the
design being as broad as the effect; and the former prove the latter, the study
of universal holiness, a willingness to live honestly. 1, then we say, That
this universal honest design is the companion of a good Conscience, it waits
always on it; or a good Conscience and this go together, he that has a good
Conscience is honest in his walk, and he that is honest in his walk has a good
Conscience. 2ly. We say, that it is an evidence of a good Conscience; for, if
they only have this good Conscience, who are honest in their walk, then where
this honest walk is, there must be a good Conscience. 3ly. We say, that it has
much influence on a good Conscience, its in some sort a procurer of it, in
which sense, a good Conscience is an efect of an honest walk; so that the more
honest a man be in his walk, the more quietness will he have in his Conscience.

Because the Doctrine is very broad, and affords much profitable Use; I shall
first clear it, Then 2ly confirm it, and 3ly. make some use of it, and remove
some practical doubts that may arise from it.

1. Then for clearing the Doctrine by parts; in it we take in these
threeingredients, to make up the evidence of a good Conscience. 1. That a man's
walk be honest 2ly. That it be an universal honesty in all things. 3ly. That
there be an willingness, or hearty purpose toward universal honesty, whereon
the great stress of the quietness of a persons Conscience lies, viz. The
sincerity of the purpose, or a heart-willingness: And we may consider all
these, either negati^ely, so that without this evidence there cannot be a good
Conscience; or positively, so that where this evidence is, there is a good
Conscience.

For the First, What is an ho^est walk? 1. We conceive it is not that which
most men count honesty, viz. For a man only to think, or fan^y himself to be
honest; a man's own apprehension is not the rule of his trial, but that which
will abide the trial before God. 2ly Honesty here, looks not to absolute
perfection, and such as has no defect; it is a thing that is not ruled, and
measured by our will, but by Gods will revealed in his word, though it come not
up the full length of that which his revealed will calls for: And we conceive
that it does more particularly consist in these four, 1. That on the matter, it
be in things allowed and approven of God; For there neither is, nor can be any
honest living, except our supposed duties, and our practices be allowed and
commanded of God; and here a good intention, or an honest mind, if the thing
thwart the word of God; will not prove honesty, because, as to the matter it is
not right, as Paul shows, Romans 10. Speaking of the Jews their zeal. 2ly. That
there be an honest end, else though the action be good on the matter, if our
end be sinister or selfie, it will mar the honesty of the action; Thus Christ
says, Matthew. 26. 10. of that good woman, She has wrought a good, or an honest
work on me; which he clears to be so, from her end, in that she poured this
ointment on my body, she did it for my burial. It was not out of vanity and
o^tentation, but from an inward h^art-respect to me; and at least in Gods
design, she has been fore-signifying my burial. 3ly. Honesty takes in
rectitude, or straightness in the manner of our going about the duty; For if
the manner be not right, as well as the matter, the action will not be honest;
The word honestly (as we show) signifies honorably, pleasantly, desirably,
worthi^y; as that word, Matthew. 26. 10. does; Now a thing cannot be commondable
and worthy, if it be not right for the manner, its but hypocritical; Therefore
its said of the woman that brake the B^x of Ointment on the Lord, That she did
wash his feet with tears, and ^ipe them with her hair out of love, she was
tenderly aff^ctionat, and very real in her going about that work: This will
seclude many good works on the matter, which are called in this same epistle,
dead works, because not done in the loving, lively, spiritual manner, that God
requires. 4ly. An honest walk must be from an honest principle; though it were
possible, that a man could do all things called for, never so well for the
manner, if they be not done from a right principle, he is not honest in his
walk; and its on this ground, that all the duties of natural men, of merely
moral men are rejected, as having no honesty in them (as being but the fruit of
corrup^ trees, which can bring forth no good fruit, as the Lord expressly
affirms) and therefore can have no influence on a good Conscience, because,
from a corrupt principle: We need not stand here particularly to prove the
branches; they being obvious, To live honestly, takes in all these four,
without which a man cannot have a good Conscience; as we suppose will be
granted, at least in word, by all.

The next thing to be cleared, is, the universality of this honesty; how it is,
that a man in this honest walk, must be universal; A good Conscience must have
this property, and he that would have it, must needs study to live honestly in
all things; In things of the first Table of the Law, and in things of the
Second; in things that concern the Law, and in things that concern the Gospel;
Though a man should (...) never so much external holiness, if he neglect the
exercise of Repentance, of Faith, of Mortification, and of other inward
Gospel-duties, or Graces, he is very defective, and pursues not an honest walk,
in the just ex^ent and latitude of it: So then, a man that would live honestly,
must study to be honest in all, not only in duties of Religious worship, but
al^o in the duties of his calling, station, and relation, even in every thing;
whereof we had occasion to speak more particularly and fully in the close of
our last Sermon.

For further clearing of this universality, Take these qualifications of it;
first, this universality must be designed and endeavored, in respect of men's
light and judgment, to which their walk must be answerable: A man that would
walk honestly, must endeavor to know what is commanded, and the meaning of the
command; if the eye (in this respect) be not single, the whole body will be
full of darkness: the want of this qualification has made many Legalists,
think themselves to be far advanced in holiness, because they were ignorant of
the spiritual meaning of the Law; as we see in that man spoken of, Matthew. 19.
who said to the Lord, pressing on him obedience to ^uch and such commands, all
these things have have I kept from my youth up; and its like he thought as he
said, not knowing the spirituality and extent of the Law; Therefore men's
apprehensions and thoughts of their universalness in the study of holiness,
cannot be a good and sufficient ground of peace, when they are ignorant of the
rule of holiness. 2ly. This universality must be in respect of affection, and
estimation; men would not only know their duty, as it is commanded of God, but
they would esteem and love every commanded duty; people may know many duties,
and yet have but very little, or no love at all to them or esteem of them;
which speaks their obedience not to beuniversal, and so not sound: I will not
say but a Believer i^ Christ may find some singular Sweetness, and
Soul-refreshing, in some duties of Religion, beyond what he does in some
others; whereby they may be the more endeared, and made the more delightsome to
him; yet in respect of the same divine authority, injoyning obedience to all
the commands, he has an equal respect and estimation to and of them all; I
esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 119. v. 128. O! what an estimation puts he on every precept of God; and
as if it were not enough for him to say, that he esteemed all his commandments
to be right; He adds, concerning all things; and in the preceding verse he
says, I love thy commandments above gold, yea above fine gold; These words
hold forth his affection to, and esteem of them; and the universality thereof,
is expressed in the following words; many times men are dragged (as it ^were)
by the heels, or by the hair to the obedience of a command, who yet have
little, or no love to it, or esteem of it; much therefore of our sincerity may
be gathered from our affection to, and esteem of duty; when we are drawn to it,
not so much from fear of the punishment that may follow on disobedience to the
Command, as from love to and esteem of the thing commanded; which does not so
much force and compel, as it does sweetly incline and move us to it. 2ly. This
universality must be in respect of men's design* and deliberat purpose, to
practice all commanded duties, without allowed balking any one of them; which
is, when in the prosecuting of holiness, they lay all Gods Commandments before
them, as David said he did, Psalm. 18. 22. All his judgments were before me,
and I did not put away his statutes from me. 4ly This universality must be in
respect of our endeavor to prosecute, and use all the midses and means that
may further us toward the suitable discharge of all called for duties, and
toward the promoving of holiness in all manner of conversation; and
endeavoring to carry a long all the circumstances that are requisite, to the
making of our ^ctions truly Godly: A man that would have a good Conscience, as
to the honesty of his walk, would omit nothing appointed by God, that may
promove him in the way of holiness: And, O! how vastly comprehensive this is;
it takes in endeavour^ to prevent and eschew all temptations, snares and
impediments, of what ever sort that may mar and let him in, following forth
his course of holiness; and in his exercising of Faith in God, through Christ,
and dependence on him, to be with speed brought forward to the end thereof;
that he may in some measure be in case to say with the Apostle, I have finished
my course: These words of the wise man, Prove: 3. 5, 6. are to this purpose
observable, in all thy ways acknowledge thou him, and he shall direct thy
paths; Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding; There would not only be an acknowledging of God in this, and
that particular action, but in all our ways; as we would be careful to make
use of him, and to trust him, so we would eschew leaning to our own
understanding. This universal extent of our endeavor is so necessary, that
without it we cannot have peace; for true peace is the result of a man's
designed, and in some measure seriously endeavored conformity to all Gods
commands; and the breach of any one command will some way mar his peace; There
must be then an universal design, and endeavor to keep touches with God, we
can never else have solid peace: But where this is, there is fair and ready
access to peace, and a good evidence of a good Conscience; according to that
notable word, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to
all thy commandments. Its only this universal respect to Gods commands that
prevents shame, and gives the Believer boldness; and therefore it must needs be
a good evidence of, and have a great st^oak and influence upon a good
Conscience.

The 3d. thing in the Doctrine to be cleared is, what is meant by willingness,
and a hearty purpose to be univerial, in the practice of holiness, or of an
honest life and walk? whereupon, as on its base, we said, the great stress of
the evidence lies, and therefore we would clear it the more fully; and that we
may do so, we shall, ^. premit some distinctions of willingness, that we may
know of what willingness it is, that the Apostle means. 2ly. We shall confirm
both parts of the Doctrine after some few things permitted. 3ly. We shall show
wherein this willingness consists, and what are its characters.

For the First, we would have you to distinguish, 1. Betwixt a willingness in
reference to the end or benefit it self, and a willingness in reference to the
mids whereby that end, or benefit is attained; betwixt willingness to have a
quiet Conscience as to the end, and willingness to live honestly as the mids;
There is nothing more common among people, then to think that they are willing
to have heaven, and to have Christ, that they may get heaven: they think they
are very sure, that they are very willing, and love well to be in heaven, when
they die, and leave this present world; and yet if this be put to a narrow and
just trial, it will rather be found to be a willingness to have some benefit,
then to be at the mids that leads to it, they would have Christ, peace with
God, and Heaven, because they are good, and men naturally have an appe^e and
desire after good; but a desire toward the mids, that leads to the end, is a
willingness to be at the practice of holiness, by which we come to a good
Conscience, a willingness to deny our own righteousness, and by faith to betake
our selves to Christ for peace with God, and for the pardon of sin, and a
willingness to have grace to make us fruitful in every good work: many men and
women have the first sort of willingness, who have not the second; therefore so
soon as it comes to the use of such means, as may help to further holiness, and
to attain a good Conscience they are at a stand; as it was with that man
mentioned, Mat. 19. who questionless would have been at heaven, but when Christ
tells him, If he would be persyte, he must sell all that he has, and give to
the poor, and come and follow him; And so puts him to a proof of his
willingness, by putting him to will the mids, as ever he would come by the end;
It Is said, He went away sorrowful for he had great possessions; He was loath
and unwilling to want heaven, and he was as unwilling and loath to forgo his
riches; and at length, in this debate and strugle, his wealth prevailed, and
carried him quite off from Christ; alace! There are many such hearers of the
Gospel: however a desire to the mids, as well as to the end, must be in right
willingness to live honestly; which is the first thing wherein this
willingness consists. 2ly. We would distinguish, and put difference betwixt
willingness to the mids abstractedly (to speak so) considered, and a
willingness to the mids considered complexly with other things, and ways that
ly cross to it, which yet the man loves: Thus when a man is convinced, that
such a thing is good and desirable, he will have a sort of desire after it; (as
that ^an spoken of, Matthew. 19. had after heaven, and salvation) but when he
comes to to look at the thing complexly, as it may be thwarting with some other
thing, that he loves better; he does not actually will it; because he sees that
for the attaining of it, he must part with, and forgo that other thing, which
he prefers to it; in this respect, many men may love holiness as good and
desirable, and they will readily say, O! to be holy, as that wretch Balaam
wished to die the death of the righteous; but when it comes to particulars,
that thwart and cross their lusts, and corrupt inclinations, as when they are
told, that they must forgive such wrongs, restore such things as they have
unjustly taken, and detained, that they must deny themselves, etc. they are at
a stand: Hence some will give very fair and pertinent advices and directions to
others, in reference to the study of holiness; and even some very profane men
will sometimes commend the fear of God to their children, while yet in their
own practice, they lay no weight on it, no^ regard it; because they consider it
not in it self, but as it is complicated with the apparent necessity, of
parting with, and closing of such and such particular things, that they have no
will to forgo. 3ly. We would distinguish betwixt a willingness, that is, by
fits, and is but some accidental motion (to speak so,) and a willingness that
is deliberat, resolute, fixed and habitual; The former may be under
convictions, challenges, and fears, as appears in many of these spoken of,
Exodus 19. and Deuteronomy. 5. 27. Who readily say, under a fit of conviction and of
fear, all that the Lord ^as commanded us we will do; And in many persons in
their afflictions, and on their sick-beds, who will say, if they had their
health again, and were delivered from such and such a trouble and distress,
they would study to be better men; But so soon as they recover health, and such
a tempest of trouble is over, they return with the dog to the vomit, their
goodness is like the morning cloud and early dew that goes away; as it is,
Hos. 6. 4. Its not this willingness that we speak of, but its an habitual fixed
willingness, a settled design as to such a thing; as these words, Acts 24. 16.
hold forth, H^rein do I exercise my self, always to have a conscience void of
offense; Its not to have a willingness this or that day or hour, and then to
lay it quite by; but its in all our conversation to be willing to live
honestly, as the Apostle has it, Romans 7. To will is present with me; This
willingness is always in some measure present with serious Christians, it
waits still on them; its a constant habitual inclination and propension to such
a thing. 4. We would distinguish betwixt a crooked willingness to holiness, out
of some by-respect; and an outright and straight willingness, when holiness is
willed and loved on an honest account, o^ for a straight end: The crooked
willingness is a servile and mercenary desire of holines^, to p^ure by it
freedom from Hell, and coming to Heaven at best, and often to have respect from
men, especially in a time, when holiness is in any request and respect, as the
Pharisees had in their giving of alms, and making long prayers; and whereof the
Lord seems to mean, when he says, Hos. 10. Ephraim is an empty vine, he brings
forth fruit to himself; all holiness that is designed or pursued for this* end,
for any predominantly selfy-end is nothing before God, but an unstraight or
crooked willingness: or ye may look at a single willingness to holiness, as
that whieh is out of respect to holiness for it self; and when we love
holiness, and an universality in it, because God loves it, and because its like
him, and beautifully conforms to his Image; Thus David sweetly expresses
himself, Psalm. 119. 127. I love thy commandments above gold, yea fine gold;
when there is a worth, amiableness and excellency seen in the Commands, and the
things commanded; when they are prized, and a dear respect is had to them all
for themselves. ^. 5. We would distinguish betwixt a sluggish willingness, or
desire after holiness, and an effectual willingness; There is a sort of
willingness that suffers men to ly still with the sluggard; such would fain
have knowledge, but they dow not take pains to read, if it were but the
Catechism, that they may come by it; they would ^ain have lusts mortified, but
they dow not fast and pray, that such Devils may be made to go out; they would
be at holiness, but they dow not use the means appointed by God, to win at it;
there is such a desire spoken of, Prove. 13. 4. The soul of the sluggard desires
and has not, because his hands refuse to work; he rests contentedly in his
desire, and takes no pains to prosecute it, to the obtaining of that which he
desires; even as many lazy bodies would fain be rich, but dow not take pains
and labor to come at riches; even as it is storied of the Roman young
Gentleman, who laid himself down on the grass, and rolled and tumbled there a
while, and said, utinam ^oc esset laborare, O! if this were to labor and work:
even so it may be in spiritu^l things; there may be a sluggish desire to be
holy, and yet great negligence as to any suitable pains to come by it: But
effectual willingness is that which yoaks the man in good earnest to the use of
all appointed means, whereby he may obtain his desired end; as he desires to be
holy* so he presses to be at it through all obstructions and difficulties; and
though he win not up to perfection, in respect of degrees; yet he dispenses not
with himself in his short-coming, nor in the allowed neglect of any mean that
may help him forward; Not as if I were already perfete (says the Apostle,
Phil. 13. 14. meaning as to the degree) But one thing I do, forgetting these
things that are behind, and reaching forth unto these things that are before, I
press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus: and verse. 16. he says, Let as many as are perfect be thus minded; where
he speaks of a perfection attainable even here, and implys, that those who are
not thus minded, endeavoring through grace to reach forward, to press toward
the mark, making it their one thing to attain to perfection in holiness, cannot
lay claim to this willingness, which is an evidence of perfection in the sense
the Apostle speaks of: Now from all these distinctions put together, we may
find a clear answer to what natural and carnal hearts will readlly object here,
and make discovery of the unwarrantableness, nay of the rottenness of the
grounds whereon they found their peace; for since this willingness has such
influence on men's solid peace and tranquillity of Conscience; it is not sure,
every willingness that will be a certain evidence of it, nor a solid ground to
build it upon.

SERMON III.
HEB. 13. v. 18. Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all
things willing to live honestly.
THough a good Conscience be the thing in all the World, in reference to which,
men ought to carry most tenderly; yet if we shall take a v^ew of the way of the
generality of people, even living under, and making profession of the Gospel of
Christ, we will find that there is nothing that they deal more untenderly in;
some on the one hand accounting that to be a good Conscience, which is nothing
so, and so, basely prostituting and abusing this excellent thing; others on the
other hand looking on a good Conscience, (...) but an airy notion and fancy,
never knowing, nor studying to know what the benefit and advantage of it is,
they make it useless and comfortless to themselves, and so are utterly deprived
of that sweetlyserene tranquillity, which is Gods gracious allowance on them,
that make it their business to have a tender and truly good Conscience.

The Doctrine that we proposed last, was for directing us how to keep a just
mids betwixt those two extremes; and its this, That where there is a sincere
willingness to be universally honest in the whole of our Conversation, It has
great influence on the peace of our Conscience, Is a notable evidence of a good
Conscience, and a choice companion that waits continually on it: Paul here
asserts his tranquillity of Conscience on this ground; and withal explains and
qualifies the same, by telling us that in all things he had a willingness to
live honestly: Now because this Doctrine is of great concernment to Believers
in Christ, as to their solid peace and comfort; and deals with several sorts of
men; some of whom, as Antinomians rejecting any such evidence, and disputing
against the possibility of universal sincerity; so that according to them there
can be no solid conclusion drawn hence for the comfort of Believers: Others,
such as Hypocrites, snatching at this consolation, when they have no honesty in
their walk; and a third sort (better disposed) who from seen defects and
failings in their walk, refusing all the consolations that flow from this
ground; say on the matter to the weakening of their own hands, and to the
fainting and discouraging of their own hearts, that they have nothing of this
honesty, nothing of this willingness to live honest by; We insisted the more on
the clearing of these three in the Doctrine: 1. What is meant by an honest
Walk. 2. What is meant by universal sincerity, or honesty in our Walk. 3. What
is meant by this willingness to live honestly, which is the base on which the
testimony of a good Conscience does mainly lean, and the very hinge on which it
is mainly turned, as being the greatest evidence of sincerity: We shall yet
premit some things further for clearing of the Doctrine, and then we shall
confirm it, which is in substance, and in short this, That a man who has an
universal willingness to live honestly, may have Calmness and tranquillity of
Conscience, though there be many things in his life, for which he may very
justly censure himself.

First. Then* let it be premitted, that when we speak of this calmness of
Conscience flowing from the universal honesty of a persons Life and Walk; We
mean nor, 1. Such a perfection of calmness and tranquillity as may stand before
Gods Judgment Seat; for though we were in case to say with the Apostle, 1 Cor.
4. 4. That we know nothing by our selves; yet are we not thereby justified, but
be that judges us is the Lord; who is greater than our Conscience, and sees
many things in us, that we see not selves: Who ever therefore supposes such a
perfection, can never have calmness of Conscience while he lives in the World.
2ly. Nor is this such a calmness as prevents all challenges; a man may have
challenges of Conscience and yet have a good Conscience. Neither 3ly. Is it
such a calmness, as under it Believers have no ground for, nor use of
Repentance and Humiliation; nay Repenis not only consistent with this calmness,
but it is a notable mean of it, and a main ingredient in it; its a thing
whereby in part it is both attained and entertained; The kindly Gospel-exercise
of Repentance for sin will not break our peace, but very readily vacation from
this exercise will do it to purpose: And therefore we would carefully
distinguish betwixt Repentance, Humiliation and Self-loathing for sin, and the
marring of the peace of our Conscience; Yea there may be much exercise
wrestling and fighting inwardly in the Spirit of a Christian, and yet
considerable calmness of Conscience in that same condition: for that which
gives peace, is not so much the want of all exercise of mind, as a suitable
behavior under that exercise; As we may see in the Apostle Paul, who though he
was deeply exercised, and sorely combatted with the remainder of a body of
Death within him, as he gives a lamenting account. Romans 7. Yet he is the man
here who has this calmness of a good Conscience.

2ly We premit, that this peace and calmness consisting with Challenges and
Repentance, and with deep inward exercise, may be, first, where there is no
absolute perfection of holiness; though I grant there must be no lower, nor
less design, then perfection* Because this peace and calmness in sojourning
Saints (of whom we mean all along) is mostly founded on sincere and serious
endeavors to attain it, as the Apostle speaks Phil. 3. 12, 13. Not as though I
had already attained, or were already perfect, viz. In holiness* But I follow
after, etc. and yet verse. 15. He asserts a perfection; There is not an
attaining of perfection as to degrees, and yet there is a perfection in respect
of parts, and in respect of sincere endeavor, and pressing to be at
perfection. 2. This peace and calmness that we speak of* may consist with the
indwelling of corruption, though not with the reign and dominion of it; I say
with the indwelling of corruption, where the stirrings and actings of it are
(as it were) protested against, groaned under, and opposed; as it was with this
Apostle, Romans 7. Who notwithstanding the law of his members rebelling against
the law of his mind, yet maintains his peace; because this peace is grounded,
not so much on the entire and absolute Victory over Corruption, as on a real
hatred of, a real enmity at, and a real fighting against it. 3. This peace and
calmness may consist, not only with corruption indwelling, but sometimes with
the prevailing and captivating power of corruption; which is also clear from
Romans 7* Where the law that is in the Apostles members prevails so far against
the law of his mind, that it leads him captive to the law of sin that is in his
members; and yet he has peace; the reason is, because this peace does not only
flow from the event of the wrestling or fight, but also from the Christians not
yielding in the fight, though he be captivat, and from his entering as it were a
dissent from, and protestation against the captivating power of corruption;
Therefore (says he) The thing I do, I allow not and its no more I that does
it, but sin that dwells in me) Not, but it was he that sinned, but he allowed
it not; Nay (as I said) he protested against the prevailling of sin in himself;
Therefore the words in the Original are, The thing I do, I know not, that is, I
will not in some respect own it for my deed; and on this ground he maintains
his peace, and from it draws his consolation, Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now
^o condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh
but after the spirit: for though sometimes the flesh may prevail, yet (says
he) we walk not according to the principles of flesh, but we endeavor, though
we* come not up to perfection, to walk according to the Rule, Principles, and
dictats of the Spirit.

3ly, We premit, that this peace and calmness of Conscience, may consist with
many defects, infirmities, and sailings; yet we would beware of, and watchfully
guard against two sorts of sins, that are inconsistent with it; 1. Conscence*
wasting-sins, that raise a storm and tempest in the Conscience, such as were
David's Adultery and Murder, Peter's denial of his Master, and the like; Which
though they may consist with an interest in God, standing still inviolated and
not nulled; and though peace may be recovered by the renewed exercise of
repentance toward God, and of faith toward the Lord Jesus; yet for the time of
the prevailing of such sins, and before such exercise of ^aith and Repentance,
they are to the* Believers Conscience as boisterous Winds are to the Sea; we do
not therefore admit of all sorts of sins to be consistent with this Peace and
Tranquillity of Conscience; but such only as are sins of more ordinary
infirmity against the Souls actual dissent and protestation to the contrary. 2.
We would beware of such Aggravations of sin, that make little sins (little I
mean comparatively) to become great sins; a man may be captivat by some sins*
and yet retain peace; and yet these same sins in another person, by reason of
some grievously aggravating circumstances, as if they be committed deliberatly,
and out over the belly of Light, and of Checks and Challenges, may much waste
his Conscience, and greatly wound and mar his peace: In this respect (I say)
though the sin in its own nature may be lesser, yet it is greatned by these and
such other Aggravations: They are strictly and properly sins of infirmity, that
the Believer does not consent to, wherewith he is surprised, against which he
fights and wrestles, seeking after, and longing for Victory over them, and with
which he admits of no truce, even when they prevail; as for other ^ins they
will very readily mar the Believers Peace and Tranquillity.

The Doctrine being thus qualified and guarded on all hands, we shall now at
length proceed to the Confirmation of it, which is, that wherever there is a
sincere willingness to be universally honest in our Life and Conversation,
there is good ground for peace and calmness of Conscience; or it is an evidence
of a good Conscience and a companion of it.

It may be confirmed from these grounds; 1. Either we must say that no Believer
has ever had Tranquillity and calmness of Conscience, which were absurd; or we
must say that these who had it, did attain to perfect holiness, and needed no
Repentance, which the forenamed Instances of most eminent Saints, as of David
and Peter will confute; or if we can say none of these two, we must needs
assert the third, viz. That a Believer on his sincere design to live honestly
in all things, though he come not up the full length he should be at, may have
Peace. 2. That which has quieted many Believers before us, may be a ground of
calmness and quietness to us; for as the ground and cause is common, the effect
must also be common; But on this ground many Believers have been quieted before
us, Therefore we may likewise on it quiet our selves: If we look through the
Scriptures, we will find the Saints thus quieting and comforting themselves;
What is the ground that David comforts himself on* Psalm. 18. 21, 22, 23. Is it
not on this? I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed
from my God; This sure is not absolute perfection that he means of, for we know
he had many defects and failings, but sincerity; for, says he, All his
Judgments were before me; he had honestly designed the keeping of them all; I
did not put away his Statutes from me; he balked none of Gods Statutes; I was
also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity; The strain of
his way was honest, and his slips* and failings were (hitherto its like) of
infirmity, and therefore he has Peace: We may see that it was thus also with
Hezekiah, Isa. 38. with Job chap. 31. and with Paul Phil. 3. Who was not
perfect already, but pressing hard toward it. A 3. ground of Confirmation is
drawn from the Scriptures giving such Characters and Descriptions of Believers,
and affirming such qualifications of them; on account of which they have a
testimony from God, and ground of holy boldness in their pleadings with him;
all which look to their honest willingness and sincere endeavor after
perfection, and not to their attainment of it; as we see in Nehemiah who thus
speaks to God, chap. 1. Let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy
Servant, and of thy Servants who desire to fear thy Name; Where we have the
asserting of an interest in God* and of a kindly relation to him with holy
boldness; And yet they plead not a perfection in the fear of God; but a desire
to fear him; Their desire, design, resolution and endeavor, was to fear him;
So Matthew 5. verse. 6. They are pronounced by the Lord to be blessed who hunger
and thirst after righteousness; Which speaks plainly no absolute perfection;
And say they, Psalm. 44. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forsaken
thee, nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant; Though they had many infirmities and
failings, which they did not deny but take with; yet they humbly avouch
adherence to God and to his Covenant, so as they did not forsake him, nor deal
treacherously in it; they assert their sincerity in cleaving to him,
notwithstanding of all that came upon them: This ground is frequently made use
of, Psalm. 119. and particularly verse. 6. Where the Psalmist says, Then shall I
not be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy Commandments; as if he had
said, my Conscience shall not blush, nor be confounded, but have confidence and
quietness, though there be not a perfect up* coming in obedience to all things
commanded, if I have a respect to all, and an honest design and purpose to be
at all. 4. it cannot be otherwise, if we consider, that Conscience will, and
must be calm and quiet, when God accepts of a man's way* Now though there be not
absolute perfection, yet if there be reality and sincerity, and no short-coming
allow, approven, nor consented to, but wrestled against and opposed; God will
accept of our way: Its said, 2 Cor. 8. verse. 9, 10. That God accepts of a
willing mind, according to that which a man has, and not according to that
which he has not; If a man improve well, seriously and sincerely the outward
things given him, though there be some providential obstruction to the
performance, yet on account of his honestly willing mind, he is graciously
accepted; Which holds proportionably in other points and parts of obedience;
Thus the Lord says, Mal. 3. 17. I will spare them as a man spares his Son that
serves him; and Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so does
the Lord these that fear him; The force of the comparison shows that things are
not at perfection in them, for then there were no need of sparing or pity; but
as there is such compassion in a Father, that though his Son cannot perform
things commanded him exactly and perfectly; yet if he be readily and honestly
doing what he dow, he will spare and pity him, and he would be an unnatural
Father that should do otherwise; So will I do says the Lord with my Sons that
serve me: and in this respect the ground of a man's peace and calmness, is not
any absolute perfection in himself, but Gods Covenant and free grace, and his
way of dealing with his own Children, who will in some cases say nothing
against them, and Conscience is not allowed to say any thing, where he says
nothing.

Now if it be Asked how this comes to pass? We Answer* that there are three
things that accompany real willingness* that contribute to, and give ground of
peace* even though there be failings, 1. A real hatred and abhorrence of the
sin. Psalm. 119. 128. I hate every false way. There is a keeping at a distance
with Conscience* wasting sins, so that the man not only abstains from acting
them, but out of Conscience toward God, from Filial aw and reverence, from
love and respect to him, hates that which he hates; Do not not I (says Davia)
Psalm. 139.) hate them that hate thee; I hate them with a perfect hatred. 2ly.
Real willingness keeps off Conscience wasting-aggravations, so that Believers
fall not in sins of infirmity with full deliberation; Neither do they allow or
suffer themselves to ly still in them; Now its such as these that especially
wound the Conscience and raise the storm and tempest of a contraversie there,
which greatly marrs peace. 3ly. Where this real willingness is in exercise,
though sin prevail, yet (as I oftener then once said) it puts the Christian to
enter his dissent from, and protestation against it, which in some respect
exoners him; even as in a humane ju^lcatory, where a thing is carried by the
^peat of the plurality of voices, any Member thereof that protests is exonered
by that his protestation; just ^o its here, when the soul is surprised, taken
unawares, and hurried by the violence of temptation; and though it do not
simply and altogether free and excuse him as to the sin, as it may do a man in
the other case; Yet it keeps (as it were) a legal right to him, whereupon he
may humbly plead with God against his unrenewed part, complain of it, and come
to him, and say, It is no more I, but sin that dwells in me: And therefore,
from all we may very confidently conclude, that it is not absolute perfection
that is the ground of the Conscience its good Testimony, and of the peace that
results therefrom, but sincerity, or real willingness to live honestly.

The 1. Use of the Doctrine, serves to show us, That it is a tenet contrary to
Scripture, cross to Believers consolation, and to the nature of hollness, and
that withal makes way for lousness, to say that there is nothing in in
sincerity, and willingness to live honestly, that can give a Believer
quietness, and calmness of Conscience; which Antinomians (on the matter at
least) to skar, and fright Believers, not from peace of Conscience, but from
the study of holiness, maintain and press; whereby they labou^ to ruin, and
raze this most comfortable Doctrine two ways; both which are removed, and
refuted by these forgoing caveats, which we gave. 1. They say, that none at all
wins to this universal willingness or sincerity: But for answer (as we said
before) we speak not of universal perfyt willingness, but of sincere real
willingness; There is a great difference betwixt universal honesty up at
perfection, and an endeavor after universality of honesty; and its the last
that that we say, a Believer may have, and has (when in case) in its more
lively exercise. 2ly. (Which overthrows the former) They say, That a natural
man may have this willingness, and so it can be no ground of peace to the
Believer: But for answer, we speak not of what a natural man may think he has,
but if the qualifications of this willingness (whereof we spoke the last day)
be remembered, and well considered, it will be found, that no natural man has
it, neither can have it while he is such; We speak not of what a demented
person may fancy he has, but of what a sober and composed Christian has.

The 2d. use serves to discover the great unsoundness, and strong delusion,
that is in the conclusion, that hypocrites (the second sort of persons whom
this Doctrine deals with) are disposed to draw from it; who are ready to bless
themselves, and to think and say, Well's us that there is such a truth as this;
for though we fail and come short in many things, yet we have a good mind, and
meaning; and under this specious, and plausible-like pretext, they shrewd, (and
as it were) hide all their voluntary neglects, and ommissions of these things
which they are called to, in the practice of Religion, and in living honestly,
in order to winning at this solid peace and tranquillity of a good Conscience;
But let me ask such, have ye the qualifications which we assigned of this
willingness? Is it a willingness that carries you forth toward coming at the
mids, to will holiness, as well as at the end to will happiness? and that
carries you toward the mids, viz. Holiness for it self, and not for heaven or
happiness only? is it an habitual willingness, and not by fits and starts? is
it single, and not mercenary, nor crooked? And is it effectual, and not
sluggish? Though God will graciously accept of willingness, where persons are
honest and sincere in their aim and endeavor, notwithstanding of much failing
and short-coming; yet where men allow themselves in their short-comings, he
will not there accept of willingness: Therefore that word opportunity, is ^o
put in by the Apostle, Gal. 6. 10. As we have opportunity, let us do good to
all men, especially to them that are of the household of faith; and Philip. 4.
Ye were careful, but ye lacked opportunity; If there be not an opportunity, God
will accept of a willing mind, as he did from the Thief on the Cross; Or, if a
man be poor, and have not to give out toward the supply of others, but yet if
he have, and yet by shutting of his purse, he shut up his bowels from his poor
Brother; Yea, if a man through his own culpable accesion has disabled himself
from that charitable duty, if it be not sincerely repented of, ( For he should
work with his hands, that he may give to them that want) his willingness will
not be accepted: Therefore let none think, that this willingness loses any,
the least latchet or buckle to looseness and sinful liberty; Woe be to them that
resolvedly make so cursed an use of such comfortable Doctrine and that suck
such poison out of so sweet and strong a cordial, for fainting Saints, under
the deep sense of their short-comings, in that which they would as fain be at,
as ever they would be saved, and be in heaven: God will not certainly take that
for willingness, nor will it be a ground of peace to the Conscience, that is
not waited with designs, and endeavors through grace to improve and make use
of present opportunities of doing duty, and with some measure of serious
pressing toward the mark.

But it may be Asked, Wherein consists this willingness, or what is employed in
it? For answer, I would say there are (beside what is held forth in the
distinctions that we offered the other day); These five things in it, 1. An
high esteem* an^ pryzing of all the steps of Holiness (as was said before) I
esteem, (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 119. v. 128.) all thy precepts concerning
all things to be right; There is no piece of holiness, but the man that is thus
willing loves it, and esteems it, were it to give all his goods to the poor,
and his body to be ^urned, when he is called to it, to be reproached, de^med,
and ill spoken of, for Christ's and the Gospels sake, as well as to pray, hear
the word read, and sanctify the Sabbath, o^ do any thing that may gain respect
to him from men; and that not only from the awe of God, that is on his Spirit,
but out of love to the thing; he would not wish o^e command to be changed, or
al^ered* even the most sublimely spiritual, and most difficultly practicable,
letbe dashed out of the book of God: Whereas the hypo^rire. ^f he try narrowly,
will find that he does on the matter, at least wish, that such and such a sin
had been allowed, not forbidden at least; and that such and such a duty had not
been commanded; as the young man, who was bidden sell all that he had, and give
to the poor, could not digest that command, but declared by his practice, and
refusing to obey i^, that he thought it not to be right, and that he esteemed
it not as such and ^o on the matter wished, there had ^ever been such a command.

2ly. It has a desire to be at the thing, the^ man's hearts desire is to be at
holiness; his great wish is that of the Ps^lmist, Psalm. 119. 7. O that my ways
were directed to (...) thy precepts The desire of his Soul is toward the
remembrance of him, and of his Name; as it is Isai. 26. 8. ^d with Nehemiah, he
desires to fear Gods name; He not only desires Peace with God and Heaven, but
also holi^ and honesty in his Walk; He breaths after that as after Heaven; And
he cannot be satisfied with the hope o^ Heaven, some few years hence, if he
want holiness for the time, that want makes his very heart sick. 3ly, It has
an exceeding great delight in holiness; Nothing is more refreshing to him,
thousands of Gold and Silver, a Crown and a Kingdom will not satisfy him so
much as holiness; I delight in the law of God (says the Apostle Romans 7.) After
the inner man; The Word of God is sweeter to him then the honey* and the honey
Comb; Its the joy and rejoicing of his heart; And when he finds any sin
prevented, or stricken at the root of it, its refreshing, delightsome, and
satisfying to his very Soul. 4. It has a pressing endeavor after the use of
all Means whereby he may win to that pitch of Holiness which he would be at; He
would ^ain be spontaneous, willing of his own accord in following his duty; as
its sai^ o^ Jacob, that he thought his seven years service for Rachel, to be
but as a few days, for the love he had to her; so this willingness makes the
Sabbath seem short, and many years in the painful Service of God* when it goes
with him, to seem but as a few days; because of the love that he has to him,
and the delight that he has in the Service of so sweet a Master; It puts him
to press hard toward the mark, as a man on the Spur running a Race out over
all Rubs in his Way, he pursues as earnestly and eagerly after holiness, as if
his Justification before God depended on it. 5. It has all these deliberatly,
and some way constantly, and not by guess, as it were, and by fits and starts,
or by evanishing little flashes at a Communion, under sickness, or some great
fear; out it is (as I just now said) a deliberat and continued willingness, as
to the series and strain of it, though it has its own failings intermixed and
partial interruptions; its with him as it was with him who said, Psalm. 119.
ver. 57. I have said that I would keep thy words; It is his deliberat choice,
as when a man chooses such a thing, his willingness to it is the result of his
deliberation and choice; so this man's heart wills holiness as his deliberatly
resolved and determined choice: All ye then that lay any claim to this
willingness to live honestly, see well that it be thus qualified; And I do in
the Name of the Lord solemnly Charge such of you whose hearts were never
toward holiness, that ye presume not to meddle with the Consolation that waits
on this honest willingness, or this willingness to live honestly; and if any
such shall offer to drink it, God shall make you with pain, even to renting (as
it were) of your very Bowels, vomit it up again, and your confidence shall be
utterly rejected, and root you out of your Tabernacle.

The 3, Use serves to clear, ease and comfort, these that design and endeavor
to be tender in their Walk (the third sort of persons, with whom we said this
Doctrine deals) who will be ready to object, alace we have much corruption, and
many failings and breakings forth of that corruption: We shall not deny but
take for-granted what ye say; yet your great corruption, and many sins should
put you to the serious exercise of Repentance, and self-loathing, but should
not where this willingness is, break your peace; because Conscience should pity
where God pities, who pities his honestly willing people as a Father pitieth
his Children. But such will further object, Ah! our sins have sad aggravations,
we know we are wrong, and in ill case, and yet we some way ly still, at least
do not effectually bestir our selves to win out of it: For Answer, I would
enquire, do you allow your selves in that? There is great difference betwixt
your knowing that ye sin, and your sinning willingly; Paul sees a law in his
members rebelling against the law of his mind, and yet says, what I do, I allow
not; for to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I
know not: I shall readily grant that there would be much honesty, singleness
and humility here: Yet God allows peace on a poor captive sinner, who knowing
the thing that he does to be ill, yet approves it not, nor himself in it* But
such will yet again object, How can we have peace, so long as we have sin in
us? For answer, I would say, That its one thing to have peace with corruption,
and another thing to have peace with Conscience; Corruption and Conscience are
as two contrary parties; a man may be in league with the one party, when he is
pursuing the War with the other; yea, except a man have War with corruption, he
cannot have peace with his Conscience; And though when two parties are in
confederacy, a third may come and beat the one of the two off the Field, yet
that will not dissolve or break the League, except there be a willing yielding
toward compliance with the contrary party; yea, fighting still, and refusing to
yield when the beaten party is weak, is the greater evidence of honesty; so is
it when Conscience and we are in League together, though corruption beat us, if
we yield not, it will not break peace; as it was with holy Ioh, chap. 31. who
will do nothing that may wrong his Conscience; and though corruption should
sometimes prevail over him, who has made a League with Conscience, yet he will
not submit to it as his Lord* and lawful Sovereign; and so long as it is thus,
it will not break the peace; yea, there may be a good testimony of Conscience
under such a sad and wrestling exercise: And though we would not have every
Traitor, base complyant, or runaway, to meddle with this Consolation; Yet
sincerely-willing Souls, that are doing their outmost to maintain the fight,
and to keep the field, and yet fall under a surprisal, and get some defeat, may
warrantably lay claim to it, though with much repentance and self-loathing; and
may have some peace and calmness in this, that they had not a voluntary hand in
their own defeat; Whereas he that is not serious in the fight, can have no such
ground of peace, because he has been complying with, or conniving at
Corruption, or not seriously striving, nor protesting against it; but where
there is a testimony that none of these things are, the League and Covenant
that is betwixt the man and his Conscience may stand, and he may have, and
ought to maintain his peace.

That we may come to a close of this Discourse and Text, take some Characters
of this willingness to live honestly, where its sincere: And 1. Where it is,
the more that Corruption get victory, the more it is hated, and the more holy
coffeehouse follows upon it; The prevailing of corruption stirrs, awaks and
provocks the Christians indignation the more against it; he was angry at it
before; but when at any time it makes him founder, or fall before it, his anger
increases and rises to a holy rage against it; Yea when he is wrestling with
his own corruption, and cannot get it mastered, and brought down as he would,
he is the more set against it; and in his complaining of it, he will readily
have the more weighty and aggravating Expressions of it; as the Apostle has
it, Romans 7. when he cries* O wretched man that I am ^ and as Asaph has, Psalm.
73. When he says, So foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee:
Which is a real proof that he connives not at Corruption, even when it it
prevailing over him; he has not only a hatred of the evil, but even then when
it prevails, and the more it seems to prevail, the more he hates it. 2.
Where this willingness is, there is much prayer to God, and wrestling with him
therein, to attain more and more holiness; as we may see in the Psalmist, who
says to God, Psalm. 119. verse, 5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy
Statutes; and verse 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee, O let me not
wander from thy Commandments; and verse 27. Make me to understand the way of
thy precepts; and verse 35. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for
therein do I delight, etc. We know not if there be many that are much in prayer
to God for holiness as a choice and desirable mercy, and that are striving to
maintain and keep up the fight against their corruption; but surely if this be
not, men cannot have peace on this ground of willingness to live honestly. 3ly.
Where this willingness is, there will be nothing a greater burden and
affliction to a person, then when corruption prevails; as we use to say, there
is nothing that troubles a man more then not to get his will, or to have his
will thw^rted and crossed; even so there is nothing that troubles the sincere
man more then when hypocrisy steals (...) upon him, and his corruption
prevails over him, so that he cannot get his will of it: Here we would
distinguish betwixt thwarting of the mind, and interrupting the calmnes of the
Conscience; The mind may be thwa^ted and crossed by the prevailing of sin, when
there is still ground of peace, and calmness of Conscience; its one thing to
have disquietness of mind, and another thing to have peace of Conscience
broken, the least stirring of corruption may and should, yea, very readily will
cross and afflict the sincere Christians mind, when he cannot get his will of
it, but holiness being his honest design and purpose, it ought not to break his
peace, though I grant it often does so; However sincere willingness makes the
man to look on the prevailling of corruption, as his greatest burden, to lament
heavily over the body of death, and to cry o^ because of it, O miserable man
that I am, who shall deliver* me from it? Alace, I cannot get my will of it,
nor because of it, to be so holy as I would; It is not unworthy the remarking,
that all the outward afflictions, and persecutions that the Apostle met with,
never drew such an expression from him, as the indwelling and stirring of the
body of death did, O miserable man tha^ I am! He could and did rejoice in the
midst of these other tribulations; which plainly says* that he looked at this,
as his greatest cross and affliction; and the thing in all the world that made
him account himself most miserable: They who under the pretext of willingness
to li^e honestly, are not troubled with the stirrings and prevaillings of their
corruption, nor know what it is to groan under them, as their burden, who
slight challenges, and neglect repentance, neither have, nor can have the solid
peace and calmness of Conscience that flow from it. 4ly* A man that is
seriously willing to be at holiness, and to live honestly, is a man who is
often viewing the inward sinfulness, and corruption of his nature, who is well
acquainted with it, and who loathes it, and himself because of it, he can (to
say so) tell two ill tales of himself, when another, it may be, has not one to
tell of him; O! (says he) its at my heart that ails me; none could speak of
the sin that was in Paul, at the rate that himself does, though he had less of
it dwelling in him, then most of Christians living have: O! but a man that is
seriously aiming at holiness, is well acquainted with the frowardness and
rebellion of his own heart, and large in the expressions of the deceit, and
wickedness that is in it; he will be far from coming to God, as the Pharisee
did, in the ruff of his spiritual pride. with Lord, I thank thee. I am not as
other men, nor like this Publican; And as many carnal gospellers do, with, we
thank God, we have an honest mind, while in the mean time they take liberty to
sin, and are at no pains to mortify it, nor to live to God; Nay, but his
complaint will sadly be, ah! I have a heart that is like the raging Sea, my
corruption leads me captive, all the thoughts and imaginations of my heart,
naturally are wicked and ill, only, and continually ill; and yet he rests not
on his complaints, but seeks to win above the grounds of them; the reason is,
his great desire to live honestly, makes what is contrary to it, to be so much
the more hated, wearied of, and even despyted; he likes his corruption worst,
and abhors it most; when it prevails over him; he loves to have sin discovered,
but he hates that which is discovered. 5ly. The sincerly willing man makes no
great account of his own honesty, he is far from thinking that he has any
thing to boast, or to be proud of, he loves holiness so very well, that he
thinks not much of what he has attained, so as to make him halt and sit down
there as if he needed go no further; he forgets all that is behind, in that
respect, and says with the Apostle, Phil. 3. according to his measure, Not as
if I had attained, or were already perfyt, one thing I do, forgetting these
things that are ^ehind, and reaching forth unto these things that are before, I
press toward the mark, for the (...); He is so taken up with pressing desires,
and endeavou^ to be forward, that any thing he has attained, he is not much
taken, and far less vainly tickled with it, as these proud Pharisees were with
their giving of alms: The attainment that many offer, as an evidence of their
honest willingness, and their pleading for it with their proud boasting of it,
is a shrewd evidence of their real unwillingness, in so far as they sit down
conten^dly with what they have attained, and press not at (...) to be forward,
as it becomes those to do, that are far behind; The truly willing honest man
sees so great a deal of his way before him, that he scarce endures to look back
on what of it is past; he is ready to think and ^ay, I have so many things to
do for God, that I someway forget all the good turns that I have done, as to
sitting down with them, or boasting of them. 6ly. The seriously willing man can
never be fully satisfied with any victory he has obtained over his corruption,
or out-gate from it, nor dare he rest on it; Neither has he peace, till he
come to look to God in Christ, and to the hope of outgate through him, I thank
God (says the Apostle, Romans 7.) through Jesus Christ our Lord; and then
follows the conclusion, so then with my mind I my self serve the law of God,
but with the flesh the law of sin; And Chap. 8. 1. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit: This character has three branches, 1. The man that is
wrestling with, and groaning under the body of death, loves well and dearly the
hope of an outgate, and now and then longs to have the pins of his tabernacle
loosed, and to be fred from that evil neighbor, and troublesome guest of
indwelling corruption; and it is unexpressibly sweet and refreshing to him, to
look to that desirable day, when he and it shall finally part company. 2ly. He
has never the settled hope of an outgate, but when he looks to God, through
Christ; he looks to God, and thinks himself eternally oblidged to him, for his
giving Christ to deliver him; and he looks to Christ for strength to stand it
out in the battle. and for obtaining a full and final out-gate in the close,
and at last. And 3ly. A man that has this willingness, It highly commends the
free grace of God to him, it makes Christ very lovely to him, and withal it
makes sin to be exceeding sinful in his own eyes; he loves Christ well, because
he has the hope of an out-gate through him; and he loves grace well, because
the poor man, who is wrestling and warring with his corruption, and often
plunged in the puddle, and mire by it, has through grace the hope of a final
out-gate from it; and it makes sin to become out of measure loathsome to him;
and the higher Christ Jesus and his grace are exalted, the more vile and
abominable is sin in his ^ight, O! but it be safe for the Soul to ride at
anchor betwixt these two.

We shall only add, That this sincerely, and honestly willing man, is one that
has two parts in him; and as he has two parts, so he labors to give every
part its own due; and unless this be done, there is no keeping of peace and
calmness in the Conscience; if a man should look on himself, as wholly renewed,
it were rank presumption, having still a remainder of corruption in him; And if
(being a sound Believer in Christ) he should look on himself, as wholly
unrenewed, It were gross unbelief: Therefore he attributs to corruption its
due, and is humbled for it before the Lord; and he acknowledges the grace of
God in him, and any honest protest against ^in, attributing it to grace; and
gives God the praise of his grace, after Paul's example, who says, Romans 7. I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; so then with my mind, I my self serve
the Law of God, and with my flesh the law of sen; He takes with it, that with
his unrenewed p^t, he serves the law of sin, so that he was not come at
perfection in holiness; and yet asserts, that in his mind he serves the law of
God, yet so that he served not the Law of God, as of himself, or in his own
strength, but as renewed and assisted by grace; For 2 Cor. 3. 5. He says, Not
that we are sufficient of our selves, as of our selves to think any thing, but
our sufficiency is of God; He acknowledges that of himself, as of himself he
sinned, and could not so much as think a good thought, but as renewed, and that
not as of himself, but a^ of God, he served God; his sufficiency being
allenarlly of him, who enabled him to any thing that was good; and as it is, 1
Cor. 15. Not I, but the grace of God in me: the same man that says, he cannot
so much as think what is good as of himself, that he can do nothing, yet says,
I can do all things through Christ strengthening me, Philp. 4. 10. O strange!
This way of distinguishing is both a notable evidence of a man that aims
honesty at peace, and is the way to peace of Conscience; and otherwise, if it
be neglected, whilst Christians have corruption in them, they can never have
solid peace.

SERMON I.
Heb. 9. v. 13. 14. For if the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of
an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh:
14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to
serve the living God?
IT is the great business of Christians to walk so, as they may be in good
terms with their Conscience, that from no untenderness in their way, there may
be any just ground of challenge, at least none such as may wound the
Conscience, and break or mar the peace and tranquillity of it, before God, or
disturb, or interupt that sweet serenity, and distinct calmness of a spiritual
frame of soul, that he allows on believers in him, who are exercising
themselves to have always a good Conscience: But alace! its not all professors
of Religion; Its not all gracious Christians that win at this; who (I mean
serious Christians) partly throw the unmortified rem^nder of corruption still
dwelling in them, and partly through their own unwatchfulness, fall often into
such sins as defile the Conscience, and obstruct the clear light, and serene
tranquillity thereof, when in any measure attained: and therefore it is no less
necessary to know how a defiled Conscience may be purged, and how we may
recover losed calmness and peace, then it is to know how a good Conscience may
be win at; for indeed if all our peace, and tranquillity of Conscience depended
on our own holy walk only; it would be but a heartless and comfortless work to
speak of a good and calm Conscience on that ground; but this is the great, the
very great advantage that we have by the Gospel of Grace; which, as it shows
the way how to prevent a quarrel from* and so a wound unto the Conscience; so
it shows the way how a quarrel and controversy drawn on, may be removed; and
this is the thing that now we would speak a little to, from these words;
wherein the Apostles scope is, to hold out to the Jews the weakness of their
ceremonial worship, sacrifices and washings; and the sufficiency of Christ's
sacrifice to do their business; and to bring them from resting on that
ceremonial worship, to rest upon Jesus Christ alone; and one of the arguments
that he makes use of for this end is, That no legal or ceremonial worship, or
service, could make him that did the service perfyt, as pertaining to the
conscience, as he says, v. 9. None of these things could give a man peace
before God, and his own Conscience; but that on the contrary the blood of Jesus
Christ, is able to purge the conscience from dead works; And to bring a man
that is in a state of peace and freindship with God, after he has sinned, and
thereby defiled and wounded his Conscience, back to that same peace and
calmness that he had before he sinned, and make him in some respect as quiet
and calm, as i^ he had not sinned: And therefore the blood of Christ must be
infi^ly preferable to all these ceremonial sacrifices, pu^gings, and washings;
which probably they inclined to join with him.

In the words read, the Apostle illustra^s, and confirms the efficacy of
Christ's blood, by comparing it with the ceremonies of the Law, obviating an
Objection, which is this; The ceremonies of the Law had a good use, and why
then will ye cry them down? He Answers, they had an use as they respected
Christ's Sacrifice, that was in due time to be actually offered, and as they ^ed
it; and also as to a ceremonial cleansing, or holiness; but they could not, as
pertaining to the Consci^nce make a man perfy^; And (says he) if these
ceremonies had an efficacy, as to the outward man, and making ceremonially and
externally clean or holy; how much more shall the blood of Christ be
efficacious to the cleansing of the Soul, and inner man? If the ceremonies of
the Law had an efficacy toward the admitting of a man to external ordinances;
how much more shall the blood of Christ have an efficacy to purge the
Conscience from dead works, and to take away the sting and guilt, and the
defilement also of sin, and to make it quiet, and so to capacitat the man to be
ad^tted to real fellowship with him in his ordinances? That the comparison may
be the more clear, he uses ^ere a threefold distinction 1. Of a twofold
uncleanness* one of the flesh* or outward man; another of a man's S^ate, and
Conscience before God; The first related to the man's practice, and made him
that was ceremonially unclean, to be thurst without the camp, and to continue
so, till he was legally clean^ed; The second marred the man's peace before God.
The 2d. distinction is* of a twofold Court* wherein this uncleanness is charged
upon the man, The one is a Court wherein the man's flesh i^ (as it were) judged,
and that is by men, according to his external prosession; the other is a Court
wherein his spiritual (...) is judged, and that is his Conscience: In the first
Court, if the moral Law charged him not with guilt, it was not asked, whether
his Conscience was guilty or not, but he was on his outward cleansing, admitted
to Church privileges; but the second Court, which is called the Court of
conscience; looks not a^ things as they appear before men, but as they are
before God; and therefore will challenge when men do not challenge. The 3d.
distinction is, of a twofold Sanctification, The first is, that of the flesh,
spoken of v. 13. And that is, when a man is made externally clean, or holy,
whereby he is admitted to the congregagation; The other is that which is
inward, which admits not only to external Church Fellowship, but to real
internal-fellowship with God, and to peace and calmness of Conscience: Now for
quieting the Conscience, and for giving a man peace, he tells them, that though
these external ceremonies admitted him to the congregation, yet they did not
purify his Conscience; but that notwithstanding of all these, the quarrel was
not taken away before God; and so they could not be the ground of inward peace,
nor bring it in to the man's soul and Conscience; but that its the blood of
Christ which only does that; and therefore his sacrifice is more excellent then
all these ceremonial Sacrifices, sprinklings and washings; for it admits a man
to peace with God and gives him quietness in his own Conscience.

To leave the comparison then; We have, in the latter part of these words
(which we intend to insist on) a notable effect, and the great efficacy of
Christ's blood, in purging of the Conscience, holden forth in these particulars,
1. It is employed, That the state of a man's Conscience by nature is this, viz.
It is polluted and defiled by dead works. 2. That the great mean whereby the
Conscience is purged and made clean; is, the blood of Christ. 3ly. The end
wherefore the Consciences of men are made clean, is, that they they may serve
the living God. 4. The proof and demonstration of the efficacy of this blood
(in these words of the former part of the verse, The blood of Christ, who
through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God;) Is taken from
the excellency of the sacrifice of the priest, and of the altar, whereby the
sacrifice was sanctified. We shall in passing, Observe a few things that may
make way ^or clearing of the words, and for that which we chiefly intend to
speak to from them; And, 1. Observe, That the state of men's Consciences by
nature is, That they are polluted by dead works, which are such works as are to
be repented of, as the Apostle says of them, Heb. 6. 1. Whereby he plainly
insinuats, that sins are called dea^ works, for three reasons, 1. Because of a
dead principle they proceed from, they flow from man that is dead by nature, as
to any spiritual life, dead in sins and trespusses; and even the sins of
Believers themselves are such, as proceeding from them, in so far as they are
not quickened and renewed. 2ly. Because of their demerit, and that which they
deserve, which is eternal death; final continuance wherein, does at last most
certainly bring on eternal death. 3ly. Because, though a natural man's
performances were never so specious and splendid, yet before God, they are but
dead, like a carcass that wants life: So that though the greatest heap of
prayers, and of other duties, should be found with a merely natural man, they
are but like to these Apples, which (as its storied) grow at, or about the lake
of Sodom, Which appear beautiful to the eye, but so soon as they are touched
with the hand, they presently fall into ashes; so the very best of natural men's
works, how shineing soever, are but dead works before God; Therefore (by the
way) ye would know, that there is a great difference betwixt dead works and
living works; And that there are many things that present fair and are pleasant
to look upon, which yet defile the Conscience; ah! How many men and women are
there, even living in the bosom of the visible Church, who are in as great
danger from, and by that, which se^ms at first blush to be somewhat, as by that
which is re^ly and obviously nothing; all such works are but empty shows
counterfi^s, and very cheats, they have no Soul (...) L^fe in them, being (...)
destitute of any (...) principle, or end however the world of pro^ of Re^igion
do to their own ruin, place all their Religion in them.

If we consider the influencing effect of these dead works on the Conscience,
We find it here to be, that they pollute and defile it, as a clear Spring is
mudded and defiled by the soul feet of Beasts going through it, even so is this
Divine thing, the Conscience defiled by sinful (...) in it, which make it to
become as it were a cage for every unclean and ha^eful Bird, or rather as a
hold of every ^oul Spirit; these Lusts as so many ^oul Spirits, swarming in it,
pollute and defile it, whereby it becomes q^ite another thing: Whence we may
draw these two Observations; The 1. Whereof is, That dead works, or sins
continued in, do pollu^e and defile a man^ Conscience; They make (as I just now
said) a clean and (...) Conscience to become polluted and filthy, so that ye^
ever saw a face more full of foul spots, more deformed by them, then the
Conscience is polluted by these dead works, defi^ing sins; Therefore is this
word to purge the Conscience, used there; which is rendered to cleans; Ephesians. 5
26. That he might sanctify and cleanse his Church; and as simpollu^es the man
in all his powers and f^culties, so proportionably it polluts him in his
Conscience; which is deeply polluted before it be purged, and cleansed by the
blood of Christ: For clearing of it, Consider that there is a threefold
pollution that follow^ (...) in the Conscience; 1. In respect of a man's State
(...) (...) before God; it mak^s him legally unclean; as we use to say of a
Murderer, or a Thief, or any (...) (...), when found guilty by an Assize, that
such a person is filed; so a man by committing of sin is (...) gu^lty obnoxious
to punishment, Iyable to wrath, even the eternal Wrath of God, because of it;
This is a legal Pollution or defilement. 2. In respect of a man's present peace
and tranquillity of Consc^ence; for though he be in a justified and clean
state, and has (it may be) win at clearness of his interest in God, and to
peace and tranquillity in his Conscience, so that his peace has run as a
clear, smooth and still River, or Stream; the letting in of sin is like to the
driving of a herd of Cattle through a clear running Stream, whereby it is mudded
and troubled; so that in stead of Peace, there come in disquieting Challenges;
and in stead of clearness, much confusion; as we may see in the sad instances
of several of Gods Saints, as particularly in David, after his fall; who
therefore Psalm. 51. prays to be washen from this filthiness, both from the
guilt and from the pollution of sin; and for peace, That God would restore to
him the joy of his Salvation. 3. In respect of a sinful propension and
inclination to more sin, which follows upon every sin; so that by frequent
falling into sin, the very nature as it were of Conscience is altered, that of
a loather of sin, it becomes a lover of it, and licks it up as a Dog does his
Vomit, and with the Sow that was washen, returns to wallowing in the mire, as
the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 2. ult. When a person is seemingly washen, and
returns to the same sins that he was given to before, his Conscience becomes so
filthy, that it can digest the filthiest, and most loathsome sins, it can
swallow them down, and glut them over, (to speak so) and never challenge nor
quarrel for them; In this sense the Apostle says, Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all
things are pure, but to these that are defiled, and unbelieving, there is
nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is defi^ed; The man that
follows a course of sin, his Mind and Conscience is defiled, not only in
respect of contracted guilt, and in respect of the want of peace and comfort;
But also in respect of utter indisposition for duty, and of a sinful
inclination to more sin; so that it becomes hardened and cauteriz^d: There is
such a contagion in sin, that it defiles and pollutes the Conscience all these
ways, that whereas it was before pure, It becomes now like a person that has
the Botch, and many Boils and putrefying Sores running in him: Only we would
distinguish here betwixt this pollution of Conscience, as it is total in an
unrenewed man, and as it is partial in a Believer, a Believer may be defiled in
Conscience, when he is offended and stumbled, so as to be tempted by the
example of others to do some thing, wherein he is not clear, as some were, 1
Cor. 8. verse 7, and 10. His Conscience is thereby mudded, jumbled and
troubled, and his peace marred, yet he has not a total and universal
defilement of Conscience; And therefore the effects of that uncleanness,
pollution and defilement follow not totally and universally oh him.

I shall only say for Use of this: 1. O! that ye knew what an abominable thing
sin is, and how dreadfully dangerous it is, thereby to defile and pollute the
Conscience, which is the most noble thing in you; sin would sure be more
abhorred and fled from: Its really a wonder that men should love dead Works so
well, when there is no Botch nor Plague so infectious and contagious, so
hurtful and destructive to the Bodies, as it is to the Souls of men. 2 This we
may also see, that its no marvel that men who are given to sin, be hard to be
wakned and reclaimed; for continuance in sin makes the Conscience full of holes
as it were, that all slips and falls through it; or (as the Apostle speaks) it
makes the Conscience to become cauterized, fenseless, and feelingless* as the
flesh is, that a Surgeon designs to consume away; so I say, continuance in
sin, deadens and eats out the very life and feeling of the Conscience; though
it will be found to be a Conscience still, and a Conscience that will speak,
and speak aloud one day, albeit in Gods righteous Judgment, it be silent now.
3. We may also see here the reason why many persons are so very filthy, that
sin becomes a delight to them, so that the sin that others could not sleep
with, they cannot sleep till they get it committed; because through a custom of,
and continuance in sinning, their mind and Conscience is defiled*

2ly. Observe. That a man before he be purged by Christ's Blood, has his
Conscience wholly defiled; Not only in part (as we said of the Believer) but
wholly; before he be in Christ, and be purged by his Blood, he is like that
wretched Infant described, Ezekiel. 16. 5. which description sets forth to the
life, what these people were before God entered in Covenant with them, cast out
in the open field, to the loathing of their persons, unsalted, and unswadled,
with their navils uncut, wallowing in their own blood, and having no eye to
pity them; And thus are all men and women, without exception* before they be in
Covenant with God; they are wholly in a state of irreconciliation and enmity
with God; whose Law does not only condemn this and that work, or deed of
theirs, but all of them as but dead works; Their very state and person is
condemned; their peace, if they have any, is no solid peace, none of Gods
peace, for there is no peace, nor ground of peace to the wicked, says my God,
Isai. 57. Their inclination is wholly depraved and corrupted; all their
Thoughts and Imaginations are evil, only evil, and continually evil, as it is
Genesis 6. 5. and as that often cited emphatick word is, Tit. 1* 15. To him that
is defiled and unbelieving there is nothing pure: Every practice of his, and
the use of every thing is to him impure, and his very mind and conscience is
totally defiled. And this will be yet more clear, if we consider; 1. The case
that the man is in, who is not in Christ; he is without God, without hope,
under his curse, and the condemnatory sentence of his Law; and can a man
possibly have a clear Conscience that is under Gods curse, and has the
Sentence of his Law, standing over his head unrepealed? Therefore he is said
John 3. to be condemned already, and to have the wrath of God abiding on him.
2. If we consider that a man in this condition is under the dominion of sin, he
is a captive of it, and of the Devil at his will, as it is 2 Timothy* 2. 26, So
that there is scarce any motion, or temptation to sin, but he hearkens to it,
and complys with it; his heart is open to swarms of lusts, and as a Cage to
unclean and foul Spirits, Legions of Devils in a manner haunt him: Now if such
a man can have a clear Conscience, ye may easily judge; and yet such is the
state and condition of every man by nature; and therefore when Christ speaks of
the Renovation of a man, he sometimes calls it the casting out of the Devil,
importing thereby, that every man in nature is a common receptacle as it were
to Devils.

The 1. Use of this serves to teach us, how we ought on the one hand to loath
the state of Nature, and how on the other hand we ought to love and long after
a state of faith in Christ Jesus, by whom only our natural state can be
changed: Is it not a wonder, that so many rational men and women can live and
ly still in their Natural state without minding or looking after a change?
Considering that this stands recorded of, and against them, That their very
mind and conscience is defiled, and that with dead works; and that all who are
not in Christ are so defiled, vile and abominable, that the most stinking
dunghill is not so loathsome, as the Consciences of such persons are; O! What
heaps and dunghils of Lusts, what pudles and myres, what kennels and sinks of
pollution, and noisome, and poisonable filthiness are there? What noisome and
poisonable sins are drunk down with pleasure as so much sweet Wine? all which
are kept in retentis by the Conscience, never one of them is forgotten, though
for the time, the Conscience by its silence, is supposed to have forgotten
them; yet it will set them all in order, marshal them all (as it were) in rank
and file against the persons who shall be found out of Christ, in a most
formidable manner; it will not suffer one sin, nor so much as one aggravating
circumstance of any sin to be forgot. It will bring forth all, and charge them
home furiously and irresistably; This in Gods holy Justice will be the use of
Conscience to all such persons; Its not like a Conduit or Pipe, that takes in
at the one end, and lets out at the other, but like a standing sink, that still
retains all that comes into it; O! then what a foul and filthy bag (to speak
^o) is the Conscience of many a man and woman? So that no Botch. Bovl, or
Imposthume, has such vile* filthy and abominable matter in it, as it has* O!
what a noisome and vi^ely stinking smell will that putrid matter send forth,
when God pricks it? This should make you all to loath living in your natural
state, and to long without ling^ing to be out of it: Its like that many take it
ill ^o have such things said or thought of them, but I assure you all that are
out of Christ, whether ye have a more full or empty purse about you, you have
this filthy bag full of sin within you; and while ye securely heap sins upon
sins, ye are treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, and of the righteous
judgment of God.

The 2 Use serves to let us see, what a poor and sorry ground the most part have
for their peace of Conscience; we may in truth wonder how it comes to pass,
that many of you can have any peace, having such a puddle of filthiness within
you; If it be true that your mind and Conscience is defiled (which are the best
things ye have); and one day will clearly and convincingly make discovery of
the truth of it; O! how much hypocrisy and presumption will be found to be
among you, in stead of true and solid peace? with which ye have nothing to do,
so long as these Whoredoms and Witch-crafts (to say so) of filthy sins, are
with you unpurged away by the blood of Christ.

The 3. Use serves to demonstrat, and clearly to hold forth the absolute
necessity of Jesus Christ, and the transcendent worth and matchless excellency
that is in him, that even when a man is thus defiled and polluted by sins these
dead works* there is access by his blood, to get the Conscience purged; and
this is the thing that we would mainly point at from these words (and which we
intend, God willing, afterward more largely to insist in) not only the
necessity of coming to Christ; but of knowing certainly that ye are got out of
black Nature into him, and have gotten your Consciences purged by his Blood:
Think ye it a small or little concerning matter; to be lying in a ^est house,
where thousands die at your right and left hand, and not to know if ye be
cleansed? To have the Plague in your bosom, and not to know whether ye be cured
of it or o^ not? and yet such is the state and condition of all of you, while
ye are in corrupt Nature: And if ye would (as ye are mightily concerned) have
some Evidences whereby ye may be helped to know if ye be as yet purged from
this total pollution; there are some things that may be gathered from this
Verse to that purpose: And 1. Did ye ever know and acknowledge your Conscience
to be defiled? It can hardly be exexpected that a man having such a Botch, and
Plague running on him, can think seriously of, let be* seriously seek after
washing, before he know that he is thus defiled, and thereby in such a
dep^orable state: I speak not now of what gracious change may be wrought in
some persons more early, and in their younger years, nor how secretly and
little discer^ibly the work of Conversion may be wrought in some that are come
to age; But I speak of Gods more ordinary way of dealing, and reclaiming and
converting of sinners* When Paul speaks of himself, Romans 7. He tells us that He
was alive once without the law, he was a clean man as he thought, and in his
own eyes; before the Lord discovered Sin, and wakened a Challenge for it in his
Conscience; But when the Commandment came (says he) sin revived and I died:
Now can we think with any shadow of reason, that after God called him
effectually by his Grace, that he had more of a (...) nature in him than he had
before? sure no; but the body of death, the corruption of his nature, was now
clearly discovered to him, and became loathsome, Challenges came to be quick and
sharply piercing, and his Conscience began to be touched with the lively sense
of its own Defilement; he was before alive, or rather seemed to himself to be
so; but now he became a dead man in his own esteem, as he was most really
before the gracious change* was wrought; and sin to his sense revived, and he
as to any account of his own righteousness, (...): O! si^s, do ye understand
this Doctrine? We are afraid that many of you do not understand it, at least in
your own experience; and for as abominable as corrupt nature and sin is, that
yet ye are ^leeping securely in it, and are often returning with the Dog to
lick up that ^ile v^mit: Its a very shrewd and evil token of a defiled and
unclean Conscience, where there was never any Challenge for, nor any the lest
kindly sense of its defilement and pollution. 2. Was the Conscience ever wa^hen
with the Blood of Christ? for alwise till that be, it is defiled and polluted;
Did ye ever find your Conscience (...) polluted, that ye could not get lived
with it, (...) ye was made to run to the fountain opened up in the house of
David for sin and uncleanness? spoke of Z^ch. 13. 1. ^ suppose several of you
have had now and then your* own Challenges for sin, but what course (...) ye to
(...)? did ye strive to close and stop the mouth of your Conscience by betaking
your selves to passe*^ime, and to good company (as ye use to call it) looking
on such exercise (as too many do) as a fit of Melancholy? or did (...) go ^ther
to betake your selves, for silencing your Conscience to Prayer and Reading
(good in themselves) only* without going to the Blood of Christ? That will not
^e an evidence of a clean and purged Conscience, but there must be a bringing
of i^ to the Fountain, to Jesus Christ to be cleansed and calmed; Thus it was
with Paul Romans 7. who when he saw his pollution, even in but a small remander
of it, and was challenged for it, Romans 7. C^yes O wretched man that I am ^ *
who shall deliven (...) (...) the body of this death? and subjoyns, I thank God
(...) Jesus Christ our Lord; He can quiet himself no where* (...) nothing but
in Christ; It is a good token when persons can admit the thought of no other
way of cleansing and ^ing their Consciences, but by bringing them to Christ and
his Blood, especially when the sense of (...), and the ^aith of the efficacy of
his Blood has brought* (...) (...)* bring them to him as the Fountain. 3. We
would ask you if the effect of a clean Conscience has followed your betaking of
your selves to Christ? and that is a clean Life and honest Walk and
Conversation; for a purged Conscience will have a purged and honest Walk
following on it; and if men have once gotten a cleansed and purged Conscience,
they will be very cheary of it, and loath to pollute it again; and their great
work will be to live so as they may not pollute it: But ^h! how few, how
lamentably few have attained to this effect? There are many purgings of
Conscience, which are like the sweepings and garnishings of that house, (spoken
of in the Gospel) that made it ready for the Devil to re-enter into with seven
spirits worse than himself; many after Light and transient touches of
Challenges, become more hardened and presumptuous, more secure and carnal than
they were before; and their Conscience digests (as it were) greater sins,
better and more easily than it had wont to do; and it fares with them according
to that Proverb, 2 Pet. 2. ^lt. (often cited) The Dog is returned to his vomit,
and the Sow that was washed* to wallowing in the mire; Their corrupt and filthy
Nature being still to the ^ore; they fall a licking up that which formerly they
seemed to have vomited out, and return to their former louse carriage. 4. What
discord and war is there with any remainder ((...) it be yet come to a
remainder) of corruption and pollution that is b^hind? What resenting and
loathing is there of it? If the Conscience be purged, and endeavored to be
kept pure, new defilements will be very unwelcome* Guests, and exceedingly
troublesome to your peace; The bond woman's Son (to say so) must not abide with
the free-womans in the house, but must be cast out, and will be endeavored to
be cast out: While a man is in black Nature* sin is at home, and any motion to
sin is entertained, and even in a manner invited and wowed; but when a man
comes to be renewed in his sta^e, and Grace gets the dominion, his great care
and work is, to get the remainder of corruption cast out; and if any thing of
it come back, or stay still within, that he cannot get cast out, he loathes it,
and cannot bear with it, nor dwell satisfiedly in the house beside it: We will
not say, but many filthy things may be in a pure Conscience, but it does not
comport well with them, nor digest them; They are as lukewarmwater to a man's
Stomach, that he cannot keep, but must needs vomit up again, and he is sick
till he do so. 5. Its a good token of a pure Conscience, when the man cannot
endure to be at a distance from Christ, but has many errands to him; would
fain be near him; yea, would fain abide constantly with him, as well as in him
by Faith, when he would ly beside him as beside the Fountain, to be bleatched
there (so to speak) because he k^ws that no sooner will he go from him, but his
Conscience will be defiled; and he loves so well to be clean, and loves Christ
so well that makes him clean, that he likes well to be always near him: This is
a good token of a person that has a pure Conscience; Because as it betokens a
great loathing of filthiness, so it betokens a great respect to Christ on this
account, as to the maker and keeper of the Conscience clean; and on the
contrary, its a very evil token when persons will pretend to a pure Conscience,
when yet they will not go to the Fountain for a very long time, if at all; and
when they go (if we may speak so) they scarce give their Conscience a dip, or a
little sprinkling or syning (as we use to speak) but they are away and gone
again; But a serious, tender and purged Soul, will no sooner perceive a ^oul
stain or spot, but it repairs quickly to the Fountain of Christ's Blood to get
it washed out; And O! but its precious to him, and he never thinks himself to
be right and well, but when he is there and near to him; Its true he cannot
always be in Prayer, or in other Duties of Worship; yet he endeavors to be in
the habitual exercise of Faith, corresponding with him for attaining and
keeping a clean and undefiled Conscience.

SERMON II.
HEB. 9. v. 14. and 10 v. 22. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your
conscience from dead works to serve the living God? Chap. 10. v. 22. Let us
draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.
IF we knew what sort of Consciences we naturally have, and were suitably
sensible of the evil state of them, it would be to us as good News from a far
Country, to hear how they may be gotten purged and made good; and how little
soever men think of this now, and how ever easy they fancy it to be to get
their Consciences solidly quieted and calmed, there is a day coming, when
sleeping and secure Consciences will be awakned, and when it will be found more
easy to endure the greatest toil, and the most exquisit torment on earth, then
to wrestle with, and to be closely pursued, and constantly haunted by the
terrors of an evil and awakned Conscience, which will roar against men, as a
lion, and tear as it were the very caul of their heart; Then, O! then they who
would never be persuaded before, to believe what an evil and defiled Conscience
is, nor what the benefit and advantage of peace with God, and in the Conscience
is, shall be made to their eternal prejudice to know the truth of both.

In both these places now read in your hearing, the Apostles scope is, to
commend the transcendent worth, and matchless excellency of Jesus Christ, and
the incomparable efficacy of his most precious blood, from this noble, notable,
and non-such effect of it, viz. That when nothing else can lay, or allay the
storm, and tempest of an evil Conscience, nor purge it, from these defiling
dead works, this blood can do it to purpose, and effectually, when applied by
Faith; when no legal Sacrifice, nor washings, that sanctified only to the
purifying of the flesh, could reach, perfyting the comer thereto, as pertaining
to the conscience, (as its said, Chap. 9. v. 9.) Neither could deliver him from
an evil Conscience, and give him confidence, and boldness in drawing near to
God over the belly of many quarrels, and grounds of challenge, the blood of
Christ can; as it is, Chap. 10. v. 22.

We left the other day at speaking somewhat to that natural pollution, that
thoroughly affects the hearts and Consciences of all men, before they be by the
blood of Christ purged; and the Apostles taking such pains to hold out this,
shows plainly, that it is a matter of greatest concernment to Christians, to
know the way how to get their Consciences purged from that deep defilement of
sin wherewith they are polluted; for is it not his manner to insist in any
thing that is not of concernment to the people of God, who will readily from
the sad and doleful experience of their own pollution, be induced to think that
this truth is such, and ought to be esteemed so by them.

2ly. Observe, That there is nothing that Christians should more aim at, and
endeavor more to be in the practice of, then to be following that way whereby
they may get their Consciences purged, and more particularly these who have had
their Consciences again defiled, after that they were once purged; no main
infected with the Borch or plague has more need of cleansing from it, then the
man whose Conscience is infected, and defiled with the dead works of sin, needs
to have it purged from them by the blood of Christ.

We shall but very briefly (to make way for that which we would mainly be at)
hint at two or three Observations from both these verses now read, put
together; first then* Observe, from Chap. 10. v. 22. That a Conscience not
purged by the blood of Christ, is a very evil thing: which we will find to be a
very sad truth, if we consider the unpurged Conscience, either as its awakned
or as its not awakned, but asleep, which is ill both ways; Its ill, if it be
awakned, and the terrors of God be fresh upon it; who can express, or
adequatly conceive the terribleness of such a case? The spirit of a man may
sustain his infirmity, and wrestle through many crosses, but a wounded, a
wrath-wounded spirit, or an ill Conscience, rouzed by the terrors of the
Almighty God, who can bear? This has made some, with Judas the trai tour,
rather to choice death* a violent death inflicted by their own wretched hands
on themselves, then life; whereby they have desperately run themselves under the
wrath of God to the full, O* poor silly miserable shift, and evasion, to flee
from some smaller fore-parties (as it were) of the wrath of God on earth, into
the very strength, and main battle of it eternally in hell, this is infinitely
worse then to leap out of the water into the fire; Nay some of the most eminent
Saints, by the falling but of some hot scalding drops of Gods fatherly wrath
and displeasure have been brought near the length of wishing rather for
strangling (though mercifully kept from it, and made to abhor it) then
life; As it was with non such holy Job, who looked on death, a violent death as
an easy matter, be what it was to be under the sense of wrath, and to be set
up as the mark for Gods arrows to be shot at, the venom whereof, to his
apprehension, drunk up his Spirits; though all the while he was kept up in the
faith of his interest in God, and of his love to him* To his purpose, Human
heavily complains, Psalm. 88. I am afflicted, and ready to die from my youth up,
while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted; If it be sometimes done thus in
the green trees, even the greenest, what shall be done in the dry? Now the
Conscience is in a special manner the receptacle of all the terrors of God; it
must therefore certainly be a very ill thing to have an awakned ill Conscience:
If an ill and unpurged Conscience be silent and a sleep, its in some respect
worse, for it has this black and dreadful awakning abiding it; and the longer
it sleep and keep silence, the the wakning will be the more terrible, and its
cries the louder; Its all the while of its silence and sleeping, treasuring up
more wrath, whereby the poor wretch will be paid home with multiplied increase
of terror, and horror, O! that ye knew how evil a thing, how very evil a
thing it is to have a Conscience not purged from dead works, a Conscience not
sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ: as no stranger can intermiddle with
the joy of a man's Spirit, who has a good Conscience, a Conscience sprinkled
and purged by the blood of Christ; so no man can to the full represent to you
the exceeding terribleness of the terror of an evil Conscience, when awakned
by the wrath of God pleading and pursuing a quarrel with the Soul, which
quarrel he is infinitely powerful to avenge; It would be very suitable to be
often enquiring at our selves, what is become of the quarrel? and what solid
ground of peace and confidence toward God is there? We will all most
certainly, and inavoidably be put on this great trial, O! suffer not your
selves to be so far deluded, as to think that a silent and stupid Conscience,
is a good Conscience, and has no danger with it, which is as great folly as to
think that a feeless and benumbed member of the body is thereby in ^o danger,
nay the danger is so much the greater.

2ly. Observe, That though all men naturally be under thi^ evil of an unpurged
Conscience, yet in the covenant of Grace, God has laid down a way how sinners
may get their Consciences purged; This is the Apostles scope in both these
scriptures, even to lay a solid ground for the consolation of Believers, and
for a high commendation of Gods grace, viz. That by application made to the
blood of Jesus, there is as a real purging of the Conscience from sin win at,
as there was access made to persons ceremonially unclean, by these sacrifices
and washings under the Law, to external Church Priviledges, being ceremonialy
cleansed thereby: which is not so to be understood, as if the sin committed had
never really and actually been, so as the purged Believer should neither
remember it, nor repent of it; that is not at all the meaning of the Doctrine,
but it is to be understood legally, that as to the removing of the guilt of
sin, and as to his having peace with God, and in his own Conscience, it is
purged so, as sin cannot stand in the way of his expecting Gods favor, nor
simply in the way of his delighting himself therein, more then if it had never
been; though the man be the debtor, yet there is a way laid down in the Gospel
covenant to declare him free; even as a man that has played the dyvour or
bankerupt, though he cannot simply, and in all respects be made as if he had
never been so, yet by another paying of the debt, he is before the Judge
acquitted, and is reckoned free of the debt, as if it had never been contracted,
or owing, and as to any effect that might in law follow on it, to his
prejudice; just so is it here with the sinner, that flees to the blood of
sprinkling, and the word purging, sufficiently holds it out, especially when it
is joined with coming with boldness, and confidence to the throne of God; for
if it should be said to such a sinner, how can thou, how dare thou come to
God with such confidence, that have an ill Conscience through so much sin? He
answers, Let us draw near, or come, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience; So that as to a confident approaching to God, and application of
Christ's righteousness* persons who have made application of the blood of
sprinkling, may come to God with as much holy and humble boldness, as if the
Conscience had never been defiled and pollured; and the experience of the
Saints, who in this way have found peace and confidence, is a great evidence,
and confirmation of the truth of it.

3ly. (To come a little nearer) We may Observe in the negative, That there is
no way for a man, that has once had his Conscience defiled, and polluted with
sin, to be cleansed and purged from it, but by the blood of Christ: If we look
through this 9th Chapter from the beginning, and the following 10th Chapter, We
will find that the Apostles scope is to prove, that it is not the blood of
Bulls, or of Calves, nor any one, or all of these ceremonial Sacrifices,
washings, or purgations that can do the business; as he more particularly
clears, v 9. of the 9. Chap. Where the Apostle insinuats, That though God
appointed many means and mid^es of purgation, yet if there had been no more but
these, they could never have effected the perfyting of a man, as pertaining to
the Conscience; Its only the blood of Jesus, that has this effect: And this
one reason will confirm it, viz. That there is no other thing, but the blood of
Christ, that can satisfy Gods justice, and remove the qu^rrel, that is betwixt
him and the guilty sinner; its he only, in whom God is well pleased; he is our
peace; and there is no name under heaven given, whereby a sinner can be saved,
but the name of Jesus; And till God be satisfied, the Conscience cannot be
quiet; seeing then that nothing can satisfy Gods Justice bu^ his blood, there
can nothing purge and satisfy the Conscience but it; Therefore David prays,
Psalm. 51. Purge me with hysop, and I shall be clean* Where he all^ds, and looks
to the blood of Christ, that was ^ypifyed by the sprinkling of Blood, with a
bunsh of hysop under the law, as the Apostle does here.

As the Use of this Doctrine, We would have the ^aith of this great truth well
fixed and riveted, that every man's Conscience, whether awakned or not, is still
de^iled and polluted till it be cleansed and purged by the blood of Jesus
Christ; as bodily, or outward exercises profit not as to this; So the mouth of
the Conscience will not be stopped, till it get of this blood; So that if it
should be said, Who will lay any thing to the charge of ^ods elect? As it is,
Romans 8. The Conscience will answer, I have many things to lay to their charge;
till that sweetest word that is ^ubjoyned, be spoken to it, for stopping its
mouth; its Christ who died, (shedding his blood) or rather is risen again;
then, and never till then will it be quiet.

In further prosecution of the Use of this Doctrine, We would have you to know,
that there are four ways that men are ready to take, for cleansing and purging
of the Conscience, some one, and some another of them; which are all (if there
be no more) ineffectual for reaching the real purgi^g* and solid satisfaction
of the Conscience, which ye would therefore be aware of; As 1. Some endeavor
to divert their Conscience, and to seek a Suspension of its pur^ing the quarrel
against them, pretending some other uptaking business; as Felix did, Acts 24.
Who finding himself beginning to tremble at the Apostles searching and powerful
discourse, and unable to stand before his own awakning Conscience, he seeks as
it were a Suspension from it for a time, saying to the Apostle (and to (...)
Conscience on the matter) Go thy way for this time, and I will call for thee
when I have a convenient season* Hence, when some persons are in heaviness, or
in some ^it of exercise of Conscience, they will (...) to some (...) and ^cund
friend, or to some game (...) (...) (...) ^way, o^ possibly to a four hours to
drink it down, and the devil is as busy to (...) on the divertion^ if there be
such a friend to make a visit, he helps them to (...) it over, and to b^nish
that melanchol^ous (...), and so to bring the person to bear down this trouble
of his Conscience, as a silly despicable fancy, and as if it were for their
good to do so: I beseech you beware of binding up your Conscience thus, else it
may grow worse on your hand, its even as (...) a man that has a sore and
aiking hand, should cut it off, or as if a part of his flesh were pained, and
he should clap a hot burning iron on it; and yet this is a way that is very
frequently taken by men, who cannot endure to converse with their disquieted
Conscience, and therefore they labor to quash, and quench any begun exercise
in it, whether under sickness or any other cross dispensation, or at a
Preaching or Communion: It may be that many of you have had some such thing,
and it has been driven, or it has worn away, and ye cannot tell how. 2ly.
Another way is also too ryff and ordinary, and that is by seeking to stop the
mouth of Conscience, by some other thing, then by the blood of Christ; hence
some under terrible convictions will promise and vow, i^ they drank excessively
before, that they will do so no more; That they will not go to such a Tavern*
nor to such a company for this and that long time; some will, it may be, after
the committing of such or such a gros^ sin, vow no^ to ea^ flesh on such a day
of the week, throughout their whole life; they will, it may be, vow to be more
religious* but so soon as the conviction, or trouble is over, they remain still
the same, and their Conscience lets them alone, they take their own sinful
latituds, and are found to have been all along, and still the same old carnal
men; because they aimed nor singly at peace with God through Christ's blood, but
for the ^ime to stop the mouth of their Conscience. 3ly. Some se^k to compense
the Conscience, or to compense sin to the Conscience, and not to purge it; they
will, it may be, take some penance on themselves; and this is it that leads
not only Papists to their pennances, whippings, pilgrimages, etc. but many
ignorant Protestants to make peace with their Conscience, by a covenant of
works; They will pray, and seek after tears in prayer, they will invite, in a
manner themselves to mourn, they will give some thing by ordinary to the poor,
and set themselves to amend some things for the time to come; and yet the
defilement and pollution of Conscience ^yes on still unremoved, because they
never be-took themselves to the right fountain to wash at, to the blood of
Christ to be purged; Hence, the Jews ordinar^ly betook themselves to their
sacrifices, and legal wa^hings and purifyings; when they sinned, if they
brought a bullock, calf, lamb or a goat, they thought they had done enough; and
therein had a sort of peace, such as i^ was; but says the Apostle, it was not
that which made them (...), as pertaining to the Con^cience, none of these, nor
all of these could purge, or truly pac^sy it; because they could not take away
the quarrel betw^xt God and them; and thus many professors of the Gospel betake
teemselves to external ordinances, or outward performances of duties* and rest
on these; I do not condemn, nor diswade from these duties, which are good in
themselves, because commanded by God, but your resting on them; and would have
you to put a difference betwixt founding your peace on them, and the founding
of it on the blood of Christ applied to the Conscience by faith; O! seek not
thus to bribe the conscience, for as it will not be boasted, so neither will it
be bribed. 4ly. There is another way (that being rightly made use of, has its
own commendableness in it) which is, when persons are under some trouble, or
disquie^ of Conscience, they betake themselves to Confer^nce, it may be with
some exercised Christians, holding ou^ their case to them for some ease and
quietness; which (as I said) is good and commendable in it self, and may
through Gods blessing do good, if the end be to be helped thereby, to go to the
fountain of Christ's blood and wash there, but its our fault, when in the use of
this mean of conference, we seek to have our Consciences quieted by arguments,
while in the mean time, the blood of Christ is not by faith had recourse to,
for cleansi^g and calming of it; I suppose the ablest of men, whether private
Christians, or Ministers of the Gospel, were speaking to us never so
convincingly and comfortably, and were holding out evidences* to us, sound in
themselves of a good stare, if (as I just now said) there be not believ^ng
application made to the blood of Christ, for taking away the ground of the
quarrel betwixt God and us, there is no reasoning, nor evidence whatsoever,
that will or can give a well grounded peace to the Conscience; considering that
the best and most disce^ning men may be mistaken, in their application of these
evidences to us: neither is it the end of Conference, to be a ground of peace,
when in the mean time, there is no solid course taken how to get our debt
paye^, and the justice of God satified: our main, yea, our first work would be,
to be take our selves to the Cautioner, and to the blood of sprinkling, under
the conviction and sense of sin and guilt; and then we may profitably reason
our selves, and admit of the reasoning of others for help to quiet our
Conscience; and unless there be actual fleeing to Christ, and to his blood
preceding and going before words of comfort or direction spoken, whether in
private or in public; This word of God declares them to be null and vo^d, as
to any advantage to us.

4ly. Observe, That when nothing can pacify an ev^l and defiled Conscience, nor
purge it from dead works, the application of the blood of Christ by faith, can
and will purge that Conscience, and give peace and quietness to it, with holy
and humble confidence, and boldness in coming, and drawing near to God, as if
in some respect it had never been defiled by these dead works of sin. Its the
Apostles great scope and design here, to press these two, which are the two
branches of the Doctrine. 1. The sufficiency of Christ's blood, as the price
that ^atisfies divine Justice, and quiets the Consc^ence; for when the
Conscience gets this blood applied to it by faith, it has no ground to crave
any further satisfaction, to the justice of God, whose deputy it is, as if
something were owing; that blood, as a full and condig^ price satisfies for all
the debt; How much more (says the Apostle here) shall the blood of Christ
purge your conscience from dead works? The 2d, Branch is that which follows
upon ^his* as a native use of it, That a Belle^er who has fled to Jesus Christ
after the committing of sin, and has actually applied his blood to the
Conscience, may have quietness in it, and go with boldness and confidence to
God, and may on this ground maintain his peace, in some respect, as if he had
never sinned: So ^uos the Apostles scope, if we look to the 19. v. of Chap. 10.
and forward* Having therefore brethren (says he) boldness to enter into the
holiest by a new and living way, ^y the blood of Jesus, let us draw near with a
true heart, in full assurance of says, having our hearts sprink^ed from an
evil conscience; though it has been polluted before: This is one of the rarest
pearls, and richest Jewels of the Gospel, one of the excellentest privileges
of a Bel^ever* and one of the noblest, and notablest expr^ssions and evidences
of the grace of God, and withal the great proo^ of the reality and efficacy of
the satisfaction of our blessed Lord Jesus, viz. That when the Consc^ence of
the poor Believer is confounded, and in a manner put on the wrack with many
challenges for sin, he may m^ke application of Christ's blood, and on that
ground have sweet peace and tranquillity of Soul.

For further clearing of this, We shall 1. lay down some grounds for its
confirmation. And then, 2ly. make some ^se of it; As for the first of them, to
wit, some grounds to confirm it* Take these few shortly, 1. If by the
application of Christ's blood, there be solid peace made up betwixt God and the
sinner, it will necessarly follow, that the application of the blood of Christ
will ^urge the Conscience, and ought to be ground of peace and quietness to it,
For (says John, Epistle 1. Chap. 3. v. 20.) God is greater then the heart, or
Conscience; and says Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 4. Though we know nothing by our selves,
yet are we not hereby justified, but ^e that judges us is the Lord; This is
sound reasoning, God has nothing to say, therefore the Conscience ought to be
satisfied: But it is clear, that by the application of Christ's blood, solid
peace is made up betwixt God and a sinner, As Romans 5. 1. Being justified by
says, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ; There is no
standing controversy, nor quarrel ^onger then by faith, the blood of Christ is
^led unto and applied; John 5. 24. He that hears my word, and believes on
^im that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation;
He shall come to judgment to be absolved, but not to be condemned; for (as it
is John 3. 18.) He that believes on him shall not be condemned; And Romans 8. 1.
There is therefore now no condemnation to them who are in Christ; And 1 John 5.
12. He that has the Son has life, etc. This being the over*word of the
Gospel, it will follow, that the Conscience of a poor sinner, that is fled to
Christ for refuge, has good ground of peace, and that there is no ground to
the Conscience ^ormentingly, or anxiously to challenge: And this is indeed no
small matter, and yet no presumption after a sinner has fled to Christ, to
quiet himself, and to be at peace on this ground. A 2d ground of confirmation
is, the experience of all the Sain^s recorded in the Scripture, after their
fa^lings and fallings into sin; what has quieted them, may also qu^et us; for
there is but one way of making peace with God, and the taking of that way
works, as to the main, alike to all: Now its this way, that has quieted them,
its the same faith in all, and alike precious (...) in all, as to the kind;
because it has the like precious substantial effects in all; It is this
therefore that must give qu^etness and boldness to us: That which quieted them
was a look, an often renewed look, as guilt was of new contracted, through all
these types and shadows, to Christ; all of them had their original and actual
pollutions, whereby their Conscience was some w^y defiled and disquieted; yet
through application of Christ's blood they wan to peace; Purge me, says David,
Psalm. 51. with ^ysop, and I shall be clean, etc. Even when the Conscience was
writeing his lybel, and he was under challenges for his guilt, he had the faith
of his interest, and attained peace, through application of the blood of
Christ, that was to come, signified by purging with hysop: For that ground
stands sure, which is laid down, Act* 13. 38, 39. Be it known unto you
therefore men and brethren, that through this man, is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins; and by him all that believe are (...) from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the law o^ Moses: There is indeed (as
if he had said) a large and long (...), and Indictment, that Sin, and the Law,
and the Conscience have against you, but be it known unto you, that through
Jesus Christ, remission of sins is preached to you, and that through says in
him ye are justified, and fred from the challenges of the Law, and from the
terrors of justice, and of the Conscience, even from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the law of Moses: outward means, and mis^aken law,
Christ being miskend and past by, cannot give freedom; but by Christ Jesus ye
may have freedom.

A* 3d. Ground of con^irmation, is taken from the consideration of the
excellency of Christ Jesus, and the efficacy of his blood; from the
consideration of the excellency of the Person, who steps in, and (...) his
blood for a ransom, which being applied, the Conscience ought to be quiet, and
should not (to speak so) have a face to lay any thing to the Believers charge:
And this is pressed in these two Scriptures on these grounds; How much more shall
the blood of Jesus Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself
without spot to God, purge the conscience? In which words, we have three things
to hold out the excellency of this sacrifice. 1. The excellency of the
sacrifice it self; its a Sacrifice without spot; all these Sacrifices under the
Law were but types of this Sacrifice, and there was always something to be
said of them, which argued their imperfection; but no such thing can be said of
his, He was never polluted; by his wonderful conception, by the Holy Ghost, he
was kept free from the least tincture, or touch of that pollution that all
Adams Sons and Daughters (the Mother of the Lord not excepted) descending from
him by ordinary generation are defiled with, and so was a sacrifice, against
which severe justice, had nothing to object, being most exactly conform to the
Law of God, to the Covenant of Redemption transacted betwixt Jehovah and the
Mediator, on which this is mainly founded; but he was completely satisfied
therewith, as we may see, Psalm. 40. 6, 7^ Where he is brought in saying,
Sacrifice and offering, thou did not desire; all these things were rejected,
as having no equivalent value, or worth in them, for a^oneing and satisfying
provoked divine justice, as is clear from the beginning of the following 10.
Chap. and down-ward; Where the Apostle cites, improves and applies the words of
the 40. Psalm; Then I said, lo, I come in the volumn of thy book it is written
of me, I delight to do thy will, O! my God; And says he, v. 10. By which will
we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus; The good will of
God willing such a thing, and accepting thereof, makes that we are thus purged,
and made clean.

But 2ly. Beside the excellency of the Sacrifice, we have the excellency of the
Priest that offered it; O! what pertinent and powerful reasoning does the
Apostle use, Heb. 7. To prove the excellency and pre-(...) of Jesus Christ our
great high Priest, above and beyond all the Levitical Priests; These Priests
were temporal, he is eternal; They were but servants, he is the Son* They were
consecrated without an oath, he with an oath, according to the order of
Melchisedeck; They offered many Sacrifices and often, He offered but one
Sacrifice* and bu^ once, as it is, v. 27. of that 7th Chapter, and chap. 9. v.
28. and chap. 10. v. 12. and 14. Whereby he has for ever per^yted them that
are sanctified; And (says he) such a High Priest became us, who is holy,
harmless, undefiled separa^ from sinners, and made higher then the heavens.
3ly. There is the excellency of the Altar on which the Sacrifice was offered
up; and the Altar is, (as the Lord says) that which sanctifies the sacrifice;
This was the Godhead of our bles^ed Lord Jesus, He through the eternal spirit
offered up himself: Though, as man he had a beginning, yet as God he had no
beginning; and through the Godhead, he offered up his humane nature, which had
its worth and efficacy from the divine nature, to which it was united in his
blessed person; in these three, the worth, value, and transcendent excellency
of this Sacrifice is held out; The Sacrifice it self, is Christ as man offered
up both in his body and Soul; The Altar on which it is offered, which makes the
S^crifice savor so very sweetly to God, to be of such value and worth, and to
be so highly acceptable, is the eternal spirit, the God head of the second
person of the glorious, dreadful and adorable Trinity; Therefore, Acts 20. 28.
God is said to purchase or redeem the Church with his own blood; not with
silver or gold, or any corruptible thing, as Peter says; and the Priest is,
Christ God and man in one person; He is the Sacrifice, in respect of his humane
nature; The Altar, ^n respect of his divine nature, giving value and virtue to
the humane nature; For though his humane nature was in it self unspotted, yet
being as such a finit creature, the divine nature to which it was united in his
person, did add thereto such a value, as made it in this respect to be of
infinite worth and value; and he was the Priest, in respect of both natures, as
God man and Mediator for sinners: Now these three being put together, what
imaginably can be more desired for quieting the Conscience, then may be had*
and is here? Especially i^ we add, the nature of Christ's offices and his
continuance in them: Having such a High priest over the house of God; a Priest
living for ever to make intercession for all that come to God by him; let us
draw near with full assurance of says; For he who clothed himself with the
vail of our flesh, has ^orn the vail, and taken down the pertition wall that
was betwixt God and us; and by his sufferings has made a new and living way to
us through it* into the holy of holies; and from this that sweet word follows,
which we have, 1 John 2. 1. If any man ^in, we have an advocat with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous; A High Priest, that has offered himself in a
Sacrifice, to satisfy divine justice; and a high Priest that lives for ever,
to interceed for the application thereof; hence also most comfortably follows,
that he is able to save to the uttermost* these that come to God through him;
able to save them from sin, from wrath due for ^in, from challenges for ^in,
from unbelief and disquietness of Conscience, and to give solid and perfyt
peace. The 4th and last ground of confirmation which we shall name, is drawn
from the consideration of the nature of the covenant of redemption, in the
reality, legality, efficacy, and extent thereof in reference to sinners; if
there be such a Covenant, and paction betwixt God and the Mediator transacted
(to speak so) ^n the eternal counsel of the Godhead, wherein it is agreed that
Christ shall come into the world, and take on the sins of the Elect, who shall
all in time, in due time flee unto him for refuge; And that they, upon their
fleeing to him, shall have their sins pardoned; and that his satisfaction shall
be accepted for them, as really as if they had paid their own debt, and
^atisfied justice in their own persons, (had that been possible;) and if on
^his bargan and transaction all his sufferings are bu^lt; then sure there is in
Christ's death a most solid and sufficient ground of peace and quietness to the
Conscience of a finner, that has fled to him, and closed with his
^atisfaction; even as solid and sufficient, as if he had paid the debt
himself: For it were blasphem^e to imagine such a covenant, so laid down, and
for such an end, and not to be most real and effectual for reaching the end;
This covenant being most sure, and this being the end of it, as it is ^ Cor. 5.
ult. viz. To make him sin for us who kn^w no sin that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: by the same covenant and good will of God, Father,
Son and Spirit, concurring to lay down this way of Salvation, Christ was made
sin for us, not against his will, but with his will, (for he was most willing
to undergo the work: as is clear from, Psalm. 40. compared with Heb. 10. And
this was the reason, or rather end, for which he was made sin for us; even That
we might be made the righteousness of God in him; That he being found the
sinner, and dealt with as the sinner, we might be declared righteous; not as if
we had never sinned, but that by imputation of his righteousness, and Gods
gracious accepting of it for us, we are reckoned free, as if we had paid the
debt our selves, in our own persons: and if the covenant betwixt God and the
Mediator, had a real effect on Christ Jesus the Cautioner; if he really took on
our nature, and in that nature suffered, and paid our debt; if our iniquities
in the punishment of them did meet on him, As it is* Isa. 53. The Lord laid on
him the iniquities of us all; If he drank the bitter cup that we should have
drunken, and satisfied justice for us; then sure the covenant must have a real
effect on the other side* as to us; and we have good and sufficient warrant to
believe, that God will accept of that satisfaction for believing sinners, that
lay hold thereon for making their peace; and that he will as really keep that
part of the bargane, viz. To m^ke the application of Christ's satisfaction
forthcoming to them, as he did the other, in exacting that satisfaction from
him: as many as are now before the Throne, are joyful witnesses, and glorious
Monuments of the reality of this part of the covenant; and indeed there is no
more legality (to speak so) in the impu^ing of our sin to Christ, then there is
legality in imputing his righteousness to us, in giving us absolution, and
declaring us righteous through him: for there was no ground for justice to have
any claim against Christ, but the will of God, and the covenant of Redemption,
wherein Christ undertakes the debt; and there is no other ground for making his
purchase forthcoming to the sinner, that by ^aith lays hold on him; Its the
same blessed design that carries on both parts of the bargan: And now putting
all these together, may we not most confidently say, that there is notably good
ground for quieting of the Conscince of a sinner, that by faith betakes himself
to the blood of Christ; and that such a sinner may with well-grounded
Confidence hope for, and certainly expect pardon and absolution, as if in some
respect he had never sinned.

We cannot now insist to speak to the Uses of this Doctrine; only from this we
may clearly see, 1. How much sinners are oblidged to God, and to the Mediator
Jesus Christ; and how poor, sorry and miserable a life, and how comfortless and
cursed a death we should have had, if he had not laid down a way for purging
the Conscience from dead works; even this excellent and wonderful way by his
own most precious blood: And therefore defiled and guilty sinners would
endeavor to make this Doctrine very dearly welcome, as Paul does, is 1 Timothy 1.
v. 15. When in a transport of holy admiration, he cries, This is a faithful
saying, worthy of all acceptance, that Christ came into the world to save
sinners; O! Believers in Christ prize his grace highly, and bless him heartily,
even with all that is within you, that ever the thoughts of this way of relief,
for lost sinners were in his blessed heart. 2ly. Since it is most certain, that
naturally we all have evil Consciences, through the debt of sin, and defilement
of dead works; and that through the blood of Christ, if we flee to it by faith,
and take hold of his satisfaction, we may get our Consciences purged, and our
debt as certainly paid as any man's debt is, who has in his Charter-chist, the
discharge of a Sum he was once owing. Then let me beseech you for the Lords
sake, to make this your great work, to get the application of this blood made
to your Consciences, and to have it on good grounds made sure, that ye have, by
faith made application of it* that ye may not live and die in a conjectural and
guessing uncertainty about it; O! How mightily momentuous and concerning to
you, through all eternity is it, to have your defiled Consciences sprinkled
with that blood; if it be of concernment to you, to have access to lift up your
heads with joy, and your faces with boldness in that day, when the hearts of
many shall fall them, for fear of those things coming on them, and their knees
shall smite one against another, when their faces shall gather paleness, and
they shall weep and houl desperately without all hope; Then doubtless it is of
your concernment, of your incomparably greatest concernment to get your
Consciences sprinkled with this blood; otherwise be assured, live as ye will,
and die as ye may, this defiled ill Conscience will cleave to you, as a girdle
does to the loins of a man, and it will yell and roar on you, with
unconceavable terror and torment: It will then be known, and acknowledged by
many, to their everlasting shame, and loss, and to their endless terror and
torment, that there was a greatly concerning truth in this Doctrine, viz. That
the only way how to get a defiled Conscience purged from dead works of sin, is
by the blood of Jesus Christ.

A SERMON
on Heb. 10. v. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water.
THe confident approaching of sinners to God, is the great design of the
manifestation of his Grace in the Gospel; and that they may boldly, though
humbly, draw near unto, and have communion with him, is the great fruit of
Christ's purchase; the Apostle discoursing here to these Hebrews, of the
excellent advantages which they had in and by Jesus Christ (whereof he gives a
short summary and abridgement, v. 19. 20, 21.) draws thence a pathetick
exhortation by way of conclusion, that Believers would make use of, and improve
these advantages and privileges, in a confident approaching to God, Let us
draw near (says he v. 22.) in full assurance of faith: But because there are
two things that readily stand in the way of Believers their coming to God, he
casts in two requisite qualifications of their coming, for removing these
obstructions, and to let us see, that though he allow of the well grounded
confidence of faith, yet he does not allow of carnal presumption in approaching
to God. The 1. thing that stands in their way is carnalness and deceit of
heart; and the qualification which he requires for removing of it, is in these
words, Let us draw near with a true heart; Which is not to be understood of a
simply si^less heart; but of a sincere, honest and upright heart, a clean
heart, loathing and working out the remainder of pollution and impurity; for
its opposed to an unclean, deceitful and hypocritical heart, otherwise the
next words of sprinkling, and washing would not be added: But because, 2ly.
Believers win not in this life to that perfection in purity and sincerity, but
still they are conscious to themselves of a remainder of deceit, impurity and
hypocrisy to be, and abide in them; so that if they have no more but the
testimony of their own purity, and sincerity to look to* it will be but as one
leg to walk upon, in their drawing near to God; They might therefore object,
alace! We have but little if any thing of a pure and sincere heart; he answers
this, by adding the second qualification, Having our hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water; Which is (as he had
said) wherein soever ye be unclean and defiled, and whatever be your impurity,
deceit or hypocrisy; come to the blood of Christ, that ye may be sprinkled and
washe^ thereby, and then come forward, and draw near to Go^ in full assurance
of faith; In a word he would have them coming, and coming in sincerity; and
whatever lamented over, and loathed deceit and hypocrisy, or uncleanness, they
find in themselves; he would not have that keeping them back; because there is
an efficacy in the blood of Christ, to purge away both the guilt and filth of
sin, and to procure welcome to such as are sincere and single in purifying
their heart and way, though they be not perfitly pure, but many degrees removed
from it, and because thereof, are under many quarrels from God, and challenges
from their own Consciences; he would have such making use of that blood for
removing all quarrels, and so to come forward.

This Phrase of having the conscience sprinkled, is an allusion to that which
we have, Exodus 12. v. 7. and 13. Where the Lord being to smite all the
firstborn of Egypt, to prevent the falling of the stroke and plague on the
Israelites, he appoints them to kill a Lamb, and to sprinkle the Lintel and
Door* posts of their Houses with the blood thereof, that when the destroying
Angel passed through to smite the firstborn of the Egyptians, he might pass
over their houses, that were so sprinkled: and the force of the allusion is
this, Man's Conscience in a natural estate, is like that destroying Angel, and
as Israel be-sprinkled the door posts of their houses with the blood of the
Paschal Lamb* so he would have them to be-sprinkle their hearts with the blood
of Christ, as Chap. 9. 14. and 12. v. 24. And then their Conscience will not
smite them to their hurt, but they shall be past over as the Israelits were
passed over by the destroying Angel.

In the words then these two are clear* 1. That the Conscience of a person
un-reconciled to God, is a mighty fearce, and terrible pursuer, ready to seize
on him, as the avenger of blood did on the Manslayer, or as the destroying
Angel did on the Egyptians; And, O! but it be a dreadful thing to be obnoxious
to Gods wrath, and to the challenges, accusations, throws and pangs of a
Conscience, that has just ground of a quarrel against a man; who has nothing
wherewith to answer its challenges, and accusations. 2ly. That the efficacy of
Christ's blood is such, that it is able to purge the Conscience of such a man
that flees to it, and to fence and guard him against the wrath of God, and the
challenges and accusations of his own Conscience* so that as it has no just
ground to pursue, so it being Gods Deputy, it cannot, neither will pursue him
as Gods enemy, it having no warrant from him as its Sovereign to do so; but as
the sprinkling of the houses of the Israelits with the blood of the passe-over
Lamb preserved them from being plagued or hurt by the destroying Angel; so
there is an efficacy in the Blood of Jesus Christ, to purge and pacify the
Conscience of the person, that in good earnest has believing recourse to it,
to preserve him from the stroke of Gods justice and wrath, and from the pursuit
and accusations of his own Conscience, I say when it is had recourse to,
actually applied, and made use of, by Faith.

We cleared and confirmed these two Doctrines, or two Branches of the same
Doctrine the other day, and now we come to the Use of them, which is Fourfold,
1. For Information and Direction. 2ly. For the commendation of the bargan of
free Grace. 3ly. For the consolation of Believers in Christ. And 4ly. For
advertisement and warning to others.

For the First Use, Ye may see here a main lesson of the Gospel, and from this
ye may hear glad and joyful tidings to a tossed and troubled Sinner, whose
Conscience is pursuing him like an armed man, nay the Conscience is more
terrible, when awakned, then any the greatest army of men: But behold here,
there is a way to win to peace, under these tossings and troubles, and to a
calm in the midst of that terrible tempest and storm; to an escape and
deliverance from the hot pursuer and avenger of blood (as it were) a city of
refuge to flee unto, even the blood of Jesus Christ that speaks better things
then the blood of Abel, even that blood of sprinkling that speaks peace when it
is applied by Faith.

In prosecution of this Use, we shall a little clear th^se three, 1. What a
sinner lying under the lashes of his Conscience, coming to this blood, may
expect. 2ly. How he may attain that which he may warrantably expect. 3ly* when
he may and ought in a more especial manner to make use of it.

As to the First, viz. What a Conscience-tossed and troubled sinner may expect,
by fleeing to the blood of Christ? Gods rich and liberal allowance on him is,
drawing ^ear to him with full assurance of faith, coming to him with confidence
and boldness, as a Father in all his worship-addresses and applications: The
meaning is not, That the sinner under a quarrel fleeing to this blood, has no
ground of humiliation, and repentance for sin, nor of challenges on that
account; these may, and should be, where the blood of Christ is made use of,
and applied by faith to the persons Conscience; They will not mar this
confidence, and boldness, nor full assurance of faith that we speak of (but
rather further it) as is clear from the drawing near of the Saints to God
recorded in the Scripture; As for instance, in that woman spoken of Luke 7. 38.
who weeps, and weeps so abundantly, that she washes the Lords feet with her
tears, yet she draws near to him with confidence; nay this drawing near with
full assurance of faith does not remove all fear, looking on fear as it carries
along with it, the consideration of the infinite distance and dis-proportion
that is betwixt the majesty of the great God, and a finit seckless and sinful
creatures, nor that holy awe and fillal reverence that is due to him, and well
consistent with this full assurance of faith, nay inseparable from the lively,
and kindly exercise of it: But it supposes these Four, 1. That the Believer
fled to the blood of sprinkling, may boldly go to God in prayer, as if his
friendship with him in Adam had never been broken; as the Apostle insinuats, v.
19. while he says, Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the
hollest, etc. There is a liberty and boldness (as I just now said) allowed him
to call God Father, as if the former covenant had never been broken, by a Son
turning a Rebel and Traitor; The covenant of grace under the bond of which he
is brought, as Gods confederat, making the relation to him as near, strait,
kindly, firm and sure as it was in that other, with considerable superadded
advantages.

2ly. That he may meddle with, and make use of the promises, of pardon of sin,
of sanctification, of throwbearing in affliction, of quickening, of peace, of
comfort, etc. according as he stands in need with confidence; and may draw near
with full assurance of the faith of Gods faithfulness, as to the performance of
them, in his own measure, manner and time; so that if the Believer could as
fully and strongly exercise his faith on the promise, as he has warrant to do;
he might with as much confidence, and fullness of assurance cast himself on
them, ^s Adam in innocence, did on the promise of life in the first covenant;
because the blood of Christ applied by faith, gives as real, just and legal a
right to the promises of the covenant of grace, as Adam had to the promise of
life by the covenant of works; the condition of that covenant, viz. perfyt
holiness and obedience, is fulfilled by Christ, in our name and room.

3ly. That the sprinkling of the Conscience by the blood of Christ, gives the
Believer a well grounded hope of heaven, of eternal life, and of glory, even of
all things that are contained in the promises; Therefore* Heb. 6. 11. The
Apostle exhorts Christians thus, Show forth the same diligence to the full
assurance of hope to the end, and be followers of them, who through faith and
patience have inherited the promises: The lively application of faith to
Christ's blood, reaches to the full assurance of the hope of all that is
contained in the promise; and if the promise be a solid and firm ground, and if
faith lean realy and strongly to it, hope may well expect the great things in
it.

4ly. The Believer who has his Conscience sprinkled with this blo^ (...)
expect full and through publication of absolution and justification in the
court, and before the tribunal of God, at the day of judgment, as the divine
historian gives ground of hope, Acts 3. v. 19. And in the court of the word and
of his own Conscience here in this life; He has ground with the Apostle, Romans
8. to say* nay triumphantly to boast, and bid an eternal defiance to all that
would offer at it, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is
God that justifies, who is he that condemns? He may say that indeed, he was
owing, and a debtor once, but they cannot crave payment of, and satisfaction
for the debt from him now, because by the blood of Christ he is acquit; For it
is Christ who has died, yea rather is risen again, who is at the right hand of
God making intercession for us: The believing elect making the right use of
this blood, of this most precious blood of Jesus Christ, may humbly, and
confidently expect all these things, from and by it* O! great and glorious
expectation.

As for the 2d. thing, how or after what manner, or by what means this
unspeakably excellent privilege of drawing (...) with full assurance o^ faith,
with holy boldness and confidence to obtain all these great things, may be
attained and win at? It is answered in the words going a little before, Having
therefore boldness to enter into the holiest, by the blood of Jesus, let us
draw near, etc. Its supposed* (...) That there be a fleeing to Christ for
satisfying of divine justice. 2ly. That application be made to him* for ^ging,
pacifying and satisfying the Conscience* (...) it is with the Conscience in
this case* as it is with the Sea after a great storm, which after the ceasing
of the storm, will, fro some time have its waves much tossed, and (...) in
great agitation; so after divine justice is pacified and ^almed (^o speak so)
by the Souls fleeing to Christ for satisfying thereof, there may remain still
for a while (shorter or longer, as he shall think fit) some raging as it were,
some trouble, tossing, and agitation in the Conscience of the Believer; as we
may see in that instance of David, who, after the prophet Nath^ had made
intimation of pardon to him, yet is still in considerable disquiet, and
agitation of his Conscience, as the 51. Psalm. gives us an account: Now, as for
the attainin of calmness, tranquillity and peace to the Conscience, we would
say, that whatever is necessary, and requisite ing the application of Christ's
righteousness, for making of our peace with God, the same is needful to calm,
and give peace to the Conscience: What is that? will ye say, See Romans 4. 5. To
him that works not* but believes on him who justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness; which being joined, with the words in the
text, says, that the way to this peace and calmness, is first, not for persons
to staift, or refuse their debt, but to take with it. 2ly. To renounce and
disclaim all possibility to satisfy divine justice themselves. 3ly. To flee to
Jesus Christ, and through virtue of his satisfaction and blood, and the
covenant of his grace, to rest on him for pardon; To believe on him, (tho
someway ungodly) who justifies the ungodly; For it is not enough to take with
our debt, and to quite and renounce the covenant of works, except we actually
rest on Christ, by virtue of the covenant of grace; This is it which the
Apostle holds forth, Philip. 3. 9. Where he says* That I may be found in
him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ; He supposes justice to be pursuing him, and that
nothing he can do for himself, will divert justice its persuit, nor secure him
against it; That he is a lost and gone man i^ himself; he rests not on the
discovery of his lost estate, but seeks to be found in him, not having his own
rig^ousness, which is by the Law, but the righteousness whi^ is by faith in
him: This is the ground that gives peace with God, and should quiet the
Conscience: but when the sinner has taken this way, if the Conscience be not
yet quieted and calmed, there is something further necessary, as first, the
actual renewing of that application to Christ, to get not so much a new pardon,
as a new extract of that pardon; which he received in his first fleeing to
Christ, that by this renewed application of faith to the blood of sprinkling,
he may also quiet the Conscience, so that when the man is fled to Christ, and
at peace with God, if he have not peace in his Conscience, he is to cast a
renewed look to the promise, and to act faith of new on Christ's blood, to hold
it forth as it were unto, and to lay it before his Conscience, taking with his
sin, yet holding still by it, that he is fled to Christ, and on that ground,
making use of the promise, for the renewed pardon of sin through his blood; in
this respect, faith is called, ( Ephesians. 6. 16.) A shield; Take unto you (says
the Apostle) the shield of faith, whereby ye may quench all the fiery darts of
the devil; when the challenge is cast in on the Conscience, it (as it were)
burns the Believer, even as a fiery, or poisoned dart thrown into a man's body,
burns and inflames it; But faith goes to the fountain of Christ's blood* to the
covenant and promises, and draws out of these wells of salvation bucketfulls
(as it were) to quench it; or when a challenge comes in backed with temptation,
it makes use of the promise, and blood of Christ to answer it; and so faith is
as a shield or targe to kepp the dart, and beat it back; it makes the Believer
say, I cannot satisfy for this sin; but here is a promise of pardon to the man
that is fled to Christ, and to the blood of sprinkling, as I am, and makes use
of Christ in the promise, for renewed intimation of pardon, or for renewed
pardon, as new guilt is contracted, And thus he is kept quiet, that the
challenge wins not in so sar, nor goes so deep, as to sting him in his vital
parts (to speak so) the heart of his peace and quietness is kept still alive,
t^ugh he be in quick and sharp exercise under the challenge. 2ly. Because
challenges will not soon nor easily be got removed, nor the Conscience quickly,
and without difficulty calmed, as we see in that forementioned instance of
David, Psalm. 51. There is need therefore of continuing in the fight, and of
drawing conclusions from solid and undeniable premises and grounds, to quiet
the Conscience, and ward off challenges, so as they may not wound and quite
mar peace; as Paul does, Romans 8. 1, 2. It might have been said to him, Thou
have been complaining of a body of death, and that with thy flesh thou servest
the law of sin, and is not that a grievous challenge against thee? It is true
(as if he said) But there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, That
is the making use aright of the targe or shield of faith; But to put the matter
out of doubt, he goes on, and subsumes, and draws the conclusion; (for the
words are applicative to himself; and spoken with a considerable regard to his
own particular exercise, set down, Chap. 7.) I, by faith, am fled to Christ for
resuge, and so am in Christ, and therefore there is no condemnation to me: and
indeed, when ever challenges come in from sense, and Conscience put through
other, or mingled together (as it were) blown upon by temptation, which will
pursue the Believer hardly; Its needful to reason from the grounds of faith, to
ward off the blow, and to queit the Conscience: And this, though it be a reflex
act of faith, which does not justify, yet it serves to reason the Conscience
into peace and calmness; and there is need of faith acting thus reflexly,
though not (as I said) to justify, yet to bring home the peace and comfort of
Justification, and renewed extracts, and intimations of pardon. 3ly. Its
necessary that Believers quiet themselves positively, by comforting and
confirming themselves In the faith of what the promise speaks, and in the hope
of what they have to expect: The difference betwixt the former and this is,
that in the former we draw home answers from the grounds of faith to ward off
the dint, and bitterness of challenges; but that is not enough throwly to calm
and settle the soul, therefore the latter is also needful, that the soul
positively draw in peace and consolation to it self by believing; Which (as it
is, Philip. 4.) is able to guard the heart and mind through Christ Jesus: and
we conceive this to be David's exercise, Psalm. 51. Where, by exercising his
faith on the promises, and on the blood of the Messiah to be shed, and by
wrestling for the intimation of pardon, and peace, he labors not only to get
his Conscience calmed, but even filled with consolation; and because the
promises are often somewhat wersh and tasteless (to say so) if not seasoned and
quickened by Gods voice going along with them, and putting favor and life in
them; This is the voice of joy and gladness, which he would so fain, hear:
Therefore the Believer insists with God thus, to be-sprinkle his Conscience;
and as he looks to the righteousness, and blood of Christ for Justification, so
he looks to it for calming of the Conscience; and this is in effect to be
beholden to free grace, as for pardon of fin, so for peace and calmness of
Conscience; without which any other thing will not do the turn.

As for the 3d. thing proposed to he spoken of* viz. The times or seasons, or
the cases wherein the Believer may and ought, in a special manner to make use
of his liberty and boldness, in drawing near with full assurance of faith:
There is no question, but a Believer who has made use of Christ for pardon of
sin, and Justification, may also, and should make use of him and his blood for
the sprinkling his Conscience, that he may come to God with boldness and
confidence, and there is no case wherein a Believer may not aim at this; but
more especially he should, in these cases; As first, when he is fallen into
more gross guilt, as David was, psalm. 51. 2ly. When that gross guilt, and
grievous sinning is waited with great aggravations; as in that Ps. David's sin
is aggravated mightily by him and yet he makes application to Christ over all
that guilt, and all these aggravations of his guilt. 3ly. When the Believer
has through his folly relapsed in sin; which is not spoken to give a liberty
to sin, God forbid, woe to them that make so cursed an use of such blessed
doctrine; but to the commendation of Gods free grace, and of the worth and
efficacy of Christ's blood, and for the encouragement of lost sinners, that
would fain be at Christ for pardon and peace: for as long as the blood of
Christ has efficacy and worth, and as far as the promise extends it self, as
long and as far may the Believer reach his faith for coming up to boldness and
confidence; although for his humiliation, and keeping humble, he may possibly
never win at, not recover his former confidence and boldness; yet looking to
the grounds of faith and hope, he may, and ought to study to streach his faith
to the attaining of it; 4ly. He may, and should thus endeavor confidently to
draw near to God, when challenges are quick and very sharp; yea, when the
challenges of Conscience are sharpest and most peircing; though challenges were
as so many troops of horses rushing in on him, and the Conscience were like a
Lion rampant, standing with his claws ready to to tear, he may and should
(humbly taking with guilt) step to confidently, and make application of the
blood of sprinkling; and indeed this is the very time when in a special manner
he should do it; as it was in the case of the manslayer, when he was most
hotly pursued by the avenger of blood, that was the very time when he was
called to flee, and with greatest speed, to the city of refuge; and the
allusion is made to this purpose, Heb. 6. 18. That by two immutable things
(says the Apostle) Wherein it was impossible for God to lie, we might have
strong consolation who are fled for refuge, to lay hold on the hope set before
us; When may they have consolation and strong consolation? even when they are
fleeing with the greatest haste to the clay of refuge, its then that the gates
of the city are cast widest open to them; when was it that David made his most
earnest and humbly-confident address to God for the joy of his salvation? even
when blood-guiltiness was stareing him in the face, and when his very bones
were in a manner broken, and when to his own sense, his grace was very much, if
not altogether gone, and when he had (as is were) forefaulted his right to
consolation; yet even then he comes foreward, draws near to God, humbly
maintains his interest in him, and pleads for former manifestations upon the
grounds of grace^ 5ly. The Believer may and ought, thus to make
humbly-confident application to God throw Christ, when he finds, to the great
grief of his soul, an exceeding in-disposition to duty; when his praying,
repenting, hearing, etc. go not with him, as he would fain have them; if there
be a real fleeing for refuge, to the hope set before him, he may and should,
even in that case step forward, and draw near with humble boldness; hence,
David, Psalm. 51. Prays not only for consolation, but for the lively exercise
of grace, while he says to God, Creat in me a clean heart, renew a right
spirit within me, and uphold me with thy free spirit: The sense of sin, and
exercise of repentance being real and serious, the exercise of faith is then
surely native; and will readily, looking to Jesus, go over all that comes in
the way of it: In a word, its then when the humble Believer may draw near with
full assurance of faith; even when he has the real sense of his sin, and
danger, and flees unto Jesus Christ for refuge, he is then warranted to run to
the city of refuge, and may confidently go on in his errand, viz. To get pardon
of sin renewed, consolation restored, and his spiritual frame righted: Its no
doubt a foolish conceit, and a prejudicial mistake, for troubled sinners,
first, to seek after peace, and then to make application to Christ, or to think
that first they must have all the requisits of a good spiritual frame and
grace, in the liveliest exercise before they adventure to draw near to God with
confidence; I grant these are very desirable, and the souls desire after them
very commendable; yet if the Believer resolve never to draw thus near, till he
be as he would be, when shall he do it? What if David had stood and stuck at
that, Psalm. 51? He might have been kept a-back, and so been unwashen all his
days; but knowing the way of Gods Grace, and the nature of his gracious
covenant made with his people, he steps humbly, yet confidently forward in the
exercise of faith out over the sense of guiltiness, and all the aggravations
of it, over relapsing in sin, over in disposition, and over many sharp
challenges, (all taken with, and lamented over) and makes all these together as
so many earands to God.

The 2d. Use serves to commend the bargan of freegrace, and to hold out the
excellency of this blood of sprinkling, which may also mightily encourage the
Believer to step forward: In prosecuting whereof, I shall 1. speak a word to
the efficacy of this blood of sprinkling. And then, 2ly. a word to the
necessity of it, as to us.

For the first, To wit, the excellency and efficacy of it, it may be seen in
these four, 1. In the noble and notable effects that it produces, or that come
by it, even all the great things contained in the promises touched on before;
such as pardon of sin, grace to subdue it, friendship, and peace with God,
fellowship with him, conformity to him, the hope of heaven and glory, the sweet
serenity, tranquillity and peace of the Conscience; its as a hiding place from
the wind and rain, and a covert from the florm, yea, even as the shadow of a
great rock in the midst of a weary land; when the soul sorely beaten with the
storm of challenges, and of the apprehensions of wrath comes under the shadow
and shelter of this, it presently finds ease and repose; what shall I say? what
can I say? words here may be swallowed up, from this proceed all the glorious
privileges of the people of God possessed and expected, in hand and in hope.

2ly. Its excellency and efficacy appears in this; That it has procured these
things, to sinners, to them that had an unclean and polluted Conscience; for
who is it, I pray, that may thus draw near to God with full assurance of faith?
It is not such as never had an evil Conscience, but such as having an evil
Conscience, flee unto this blood, and get it sprinkled therewith; its these who
had their Consciences defiled with dead works; and came to it, and got them
purged from these dead works. 3ly. The excellency and efficacy of it shines
forth in the tenderness of the Person, that applies the remedy to such a
loathsome sickness, and otherwise insutable desease, or by any other hand but
Christ's; Having (says the Apostle) such an high Priest over the house of God,
^et us draw near; The Physician is Jesus Christ himself, his blood is the cure;
and he also is the applyer of the cure; and O! how very tender, dexterous and
simpathizing is he: he even excells in such cures to admiration; He is a high
Priest that is holy, harmless, undefiled, separat from sinners, and higher then
the heavens; (He is holy and harmless himself, he loves these qualities, and is
able and willing to work them in these that come to him) and such an high
Priest became us, He is one that has compassion on the ignorant, and such as
are out of the way; who was in all points tempted as we, yet without sin; That
he may from his own experience the more kindly and strongly simpathize with his
People, and succor them in all their temptations; an high Priest, that is
touched with the feeling of their infirmities; The a^king of the least finger,
or toe in his mystical body, stounds, up as it were, to the very heart of him
who is the head thereof, And Chap. 2. It behoved him to be made like to his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest, etc. 4ly. The
excellency and efficacy of it appears in this, even in the exceeding great
freeness of his applying this cure; There is no more required, but to come and
receive it; to come, however unclean, and be sprinkled with his blood; to
confess the debt of guilt, and draw out an extract of the discharge, by virtue
of his payment thereof; And if there be any pollution in the Conscience, any
challenge, or sore, whatever it be, he furnishes the remedy and cure freely
and frankly.

Now a Word to the 2d thing, viz. The necessity of this blood of sprinkling, If
it be so, as we have said, if it be so virtuous and efficacious, is there not
here an encouragement for the guilty, to flee to this blood? and is there not a
necessity to make use of it, a very pressing, and vehemently urging necessity?
for as it was not possible for the man slayer to stand with safety before the
avenger of blood out of the city of refuge; so no more can the guilty sinner
stand before his own Conscience* and far less before the Tribunal of God, Who
is greater then the conscience, till this blood be fled unto, and till he get
his Conscience sprinkled with it: And therefore, seeing ye have Consciences,
and guilty Consciences, many sins on your score, and though the Conscience now
sleep, it will most certainly once awake, and turn a hot and hard pursuer far
beyond what ever any avenger of blood was, and the longer that it sleep, it
will pursue the harder; and seeing Christ Jesus is as a city of refuge, to whom
ye may now flee and be sase; Consider O! consider these words of the Apostle of
the Gentiles, Acts 13. 38, 39. Which we, in the name of the Lord, say over
again to you, Be it known unto you, men and brethren, that through this man is
preached unto you forgivenaess of sins, and by him all that believe are
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of
Moses; And it is the great end and design of the Gospel, ^o proclaim the market
of grace, and to make this offer unto you sinners freely; seeing I say, all this
is, O! takewith and be humbled under the sense of your guilt, from which ye
cannot be pessibly delivered any other way, and come forward and make use of
it: And be-think your selves seriously, I beseech you, if this day of salvation
be sitten, and if this offer of grace be despised; your Conscience may and will
certainly waken upon you, yea war upon you most terribly, and ye will never
get it quieted; but if ye will now in time embrace, and make use of the off^r;
We dare confidently say, to the commendation of Gods grace, and of the efficacy
of this precious blood of Jesus Christ, that the sinner can never lay before
Christ that sin, with what ever aggravations of it, nor the disease, how filthy
and loathsome soever it be, but the blood of Christ applied by faith can
abundantly satisfy Gods Justify for it, and pacify and purge the Conscience
from the guilt and defilement of it; And if God be pacified, the Conscience
(being his deputy) dar no more challenge and pursue to death no more then the
avenger of blood could the Manslayer, when once got within the city of refuge;
or the destroying angel, who smote all the firstborn of Egypt could, or did
destroy the Israelits, whose houses were be-sprinkled with the blood of the
passe-over Lamb.

The 3d Use is, For strong consolation to Believers in Christ, And it is
threefold, 1. Under the rise of a challenge, when the Conscience pursues;
because there is here a city of refuge to run unto, A Mediator for sinners, A
shield, or targe to keep off such a Da^, and to quench or ward off the deadly
wound of it: Let us make the supposition (and blessed eternaly be God, through
Jesus Christ, its but a supposition) What if this had not been? How dreadful
would the very apprehension of a challenge, let be of the vindictive wrath of
God have been? 2dly. To the sinner that flees to this city, there is strong
consolation in this respect, that he shall be made welcome; and therefore the
Believer needs not skar to make use of Christ, nor to come to this blood of
sprinkling; for he waits for employment, and its the more to the praise of his
exquisit skill, the more be cleansed and cured by him through the virtue
thereof; ye may therefore come, and not only so, but, come with full assurance
of faith of attaining whatever ye want, and would have. Come therefore
Believers boldly to the throne of grace, that ^e may find mercy, and obtain
grace to help in time of need, as on this ground the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 4.
3ly. These that have fled to this City of refuge, may quiet themselves; they
are at peace with God, and with their own Conscience, their peace is as sure as
Gods Covenant that cannot be annulled, nor altered, is, And as Christ's purchase
is of worth and efficacy; if the covenant of grace be firm and sure, and if
this blood of sprinkling be of value and efficacy, they have certainly solid
grounds of peace and consolation: and therefore we exhort Believers in Christ
on all occasions to flee to this city, to renew your applications by faith to
Jesus Christ, and after every defilement to be-sprinkle your Consciences with
this blood; and then comfort your selves in it, and bless God, who allows such
large and strong consolation on you, and the Mediator, who has purchased it
for you, by this his own most precious blood.

But some tender, and exercised Soul will, belike here, Object, and say; Is it
not presumption for me, to comfort my self under challenges for sin? I answer,
no, Thou taking with the challenge, and being humbled for the sin that is the
ground of it, and betaking thy self to this blood of sprinkling, for pardon and
purging; because the Apostle commands thee to comfort thy self, and sure he
commands none to presume; To whom, I pray is it that he speaks here? Is it not
to them that have an evil conscience, at least in part? and what says he to
them? Let us draw near in full assurance of faith, and on what ground, Having
our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience: When the Conscience through guilt
challenges* we are called to flee to this blood, and having sprinkled it there
with, we have warrant, to draw near, and it is not presumption to do so; nay
resting on Christ, and comforting our selves in him, under challenges taken
with, argues strong faith, wherein he has great complacency, and whereby he is
much glorified; for presumption will never stand before an evil Conscience, nor
credit Christ, when Conscience sharply challenges: So that if ye come by this
new and living way, it is not presumption to lean to Christ; but that is
presumption to lean to any other thing; nay the more humble boldness and
confidence there be under challenges, it argues (as I just now said) the more
and the stronger faith; because its the more sickerly founded on the covenant
of God, and on the blood of Christ; and it gives God most glory, when the
difficulty is greatest: It is no great practique to calm the Conscience, when
there is no storm, but then indeed it is so, when there are many waves and
billows of challenges and discouragements, rising and swelling high in the way,
to go over all these, and to grip hard to this rope cast out by him, and
confidently, though humbly, and in fear to make use of this remedy, which he
has graciously proposed: It will never be accounted presumption by him, for
serious souls to take to themselves Gods allowance on them, which is strong
consolation to them who are hotly pursued, and fly to this city of refuge; but
it may very readily be accounted presumption to cast at his allowance; he knows
well (who has the tongue of the learned) when to give a word of consolation,
and to whom; and we are not to be wi^er then he.

The 4th Use is for advertisement, and warning to others, who are not
Believers, but ly still in unbelief, and slight our blessed Lord Jesus; O! what
a dreadful disadvantage, and praemunire (to speak so) will ye fall under? your
condition is fearful beyond what words can express, or thoughts fully
comprehend; Though your Conscience sleep now, It will up upon you, and the
longer it sleep, it will (to speak so) waken the hungrier, and g^aw the sore^:
This, O! this, is your great prejudice, ye make your selves obnoxious to the
fearce wrath of the Almighty God, and to the biteing challenges and tormenting
accusatsons of your own evil Conscience; which will be more terrible to you
then if hills and mountains did fall on you, the one will be called and cried
for as a favor in comparison of the other; it will in that day appear, that an
evil Conscience was, and is a dreadfully evil thing; and ye will have this
aggravation of your guilt, even the dispising of the Redeemer, and of the dear
price of his precious blood paved for the Ransom of Sinners; of the Physician
that offered perfectly at his own cost to cure you; and of the Cautioner that
offered freely and frankly to pay your debt; and this will wait upon you, to
make the prickings, and peircings the woundings and stoundings, the ga^lings
and gnawin^s of the Conscience mo^e deep and into^lerable: Therefore let ^e in
the name of the Lord, (who is in earnest with you, and we desire according to
our measure to be in earnest with you) warn you to flee from the wrath to come;
O! know that ye have Consciences, and that they (as I said before) will once
awake; and when they shall begin to be rouzed, O! but they will challenge, and
accuse in a dreadful manner; lay your account to meet with such un answerable
challenges, and confounding accusations; and if there be no other ground
whereon ye can with safety bottom the eternal salvation of your immortal Souls,
but the righteousness of Christ; If nothing can possibly purge* and pacify,
cleanse and calm the Conscience, but coming to, and washing at this fountain
of the blood of Christ; O! come in time; if ye cannot wash your selves, put him
to it, as David does, Psalm. 51. when he cries, wash me, cleanse me, purge me,
wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities. It will be no excuse, I assure you, it
will be no plea, nor apology for you in the great day, to allege, that ye
could not do it; since he offered himself as a fountain to wash at, and to wash
you all in particular that hear me this day, and is doing so very seriously
just now, if you will employ, and put him to it: Consider that sad word, Ier.
13. 27. Woe unthee, O Jerusalem will thou not be made clean? when shall it once
be? it is not, can thou not make thy self clean? but will thou not be made
clean? To wit, by me, who am able to do it, and offer to do it freely, if thou
be but honestly willing; This will be the loud and terrible voice wherewith
God and the Conscience will in that day cry to many a man and woman that lived
under the Gospel, and had this offer, Woe to thee, thou would not be made
clean; Thou would not make use of the blood of Christ of this blood of
sprinkling, when it was in thine offer; Thou would not come to him that thou
might have life; Thou would not-take him for a Physician to hea^ thee, but
chose rather to ly still wallowing in thy filthiess, and to rot away and die in
thy sores and wounds, then to come to him to be cleansed, and cured by him,
though he offered to do both very freely: amongst all the w^es that will be
denounced then, and executed against sinners, those against professing
Christians, who lived under this Gospel, and refused to come to Jesus Christ
for Life, and neglected so great a Salvation, will be the loudest and most
terrible; the woes of Chora^in, and Bethsaida, and of Capernaum will be more
in^ollerable in the day of judgment, then those of Tire and Sidon; yea, the^
those of Sodom and Gommorrah; How yet more terrible and intolerable, suppose
ye will be the woe and judgment of them that live now under the clear and
bright Sunshine of Gospel Light? Let me therefore once more earnestly beseech
and obtest you in the Name of the Lord, by the love you profess to bear to your
own immortal Souls, to take with your sin, and to flee, and speedily to flee to
this city of refuge, set open before you; least the avenger of blood, the great
avenger of this despised and trampled on blood of the covenant, this blood of
sprinkling, over-take you; if you seek not to draw near to God, by this new and
living way; but live and die under your defilement, and at distance from him;
Woe upon woe, woe upon woe, will eternally take hold of you.

FINIS.

