The Dying man's TESTAMENT to the Church of Scotland;

OR, A Treatise concerning Scandal. Divided into Four Parts.

1. Concerning Scandal in the general. 2. Concerning Public Scandals, or
Scandals as they are the object of Church Censures, and more particularly as
they are in practice. 3. Concerning Doctrinal Scandals, or scandalous errors.
4. Concerning Scandalous Divisions.
In each of which there are not a few choice and useful Questions, very shortly
and satisfyingly discussed and cleared.

BY

That singularly faithful and wise Servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. JAMES DURHAM,
late Minister of the Gospel in Glasgow, Who being dead (by this) yet speaks:
And published by John Carstares, one of the Ministers in GLASGOVV.

To which is prefixed an excellent PREFACE of famous Mr. Blair, Minister of the
Gospel at St Andrews, (wherein he also vigorously drives the main design of
the blessed Author in this last Piece of his Labors)

Together with a TABLE of the CONTENTS of the several Chapters of each Part.

Matthew. 18. 7. Woe unto the world because of Offenses: for it must needs be that
Offenses come: but woe to that man by whom the Offense comes. 1 Cor. 10. 32.
Give none Offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church
of God. Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have all they which love thy Law: and
nothing shall offend them. Edinburgh, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts
Close, over against the Trone-Church, 1659.

The Preface.
THe rise of the subsequent Treatise, the blessed Author, in the very first
words thereof, declares to be the occasion he had from Revel. 2. on the
Epistle to the Church of Pergamos, to meditate on the nature and sorts of
Scandal. And before I say anything of this present work, I shall hence take
occasion, to show my thoughts of his Commentary on the Book of Revelation. In
my humble opinion, that which was spoken of the virtuous woman, Prove. 30. v.
29. may well be applied to the pains this Author has taken on that Book: Many
Writers have done worthily, but thou excellest them all. The reason of my so
high estimation thereof, is taken from a threefold excellency I find therein.
The first is, a brief, clear and accurate opening of the most difficult Text in
the whole Bible, applying with great sagacity and admirable dexterity, dark
Prophecies to their historical events: and yet with judicious sobriety, not
restraining, as it were, to single stars of several persons, that which rather
relates to conglobate constellations of agents or patients: together with a
modest, yet a diligent search of those things which are not yet accomplished.
Whoever would compendiously have an experiment hereof, let him read the first
Lecture on Chap. 6. (which parcel, with some others, were sent to me by the
Author, some months before the printing) And as herein I did find great
satisfaction, by reason of the clearness and notable coherence of the
Interpretation, and convincing grounds and arguments proving the solidity
thereof* So may thou, Christian Reader, be sweetly refreshed and strongly
confirmed thereby. The second excellency hereof, is the great plenty of
practical Divinity, relating to all Christians, but more especially to
Ministers of the Gospel. I cannot name any Authors work, wherein I have
perceived so many edifying overtures, so many searching discourses and
encouraging helps as this Commentary abounds with. From the first Lecture on
Chap. 3. both the careful Christian and the well-gifted diligent Preacher, may
be first allarmed, and then well strengthened, by that searching discourse on
these words, Thou have a name that thou live, but art dead. The third
excellency of this work, lies not only in clearing and answering many doubts
very succinctly, but also in discussing more largely, by way of digression,
many weighty and important Truths, even to the number of twenty five: So that
this Commentary, besides profitable opening of such a Text, and handling much
practical Divinity, clears with great modesty, without any personal
reflections, and discusseth edifyingly as much darkened Truth, as if the whole
work had been written to dispute and determine pertinent and important
questions.

But now, to say no more of that Work, which speaks for it self, being in the
hands of many, and I wish it be diligently perused with a blessing from Heaven:
I come to say something of this Treatise of Scandal.

And well was he fitted to write of this subject, whose exercise it was, to
have always a conscience void of offense toward God and toward men: and very
succesfull was he in walking this way; for, in a time wherein scandals of all
sorts did abound exceedingly, few there were (if any at all) who did stumble at
his way, or he at the way of others, endeavoring still and by all means
winning and edifying. And whoever knew his way of walking, they will read the
same in this Treatise, set forth to others*

In the first part thereof thou will find, Christian Reader, the nature of
Scandal dexterously opened, with the several sorts of it, and the variety of
ways whereby it is both given and taken, with considerable grounds to make
Christians loath and wary, both as to the giving of offense and taking. And
withal, many intricate cases are cleared, as namely, what is to be done when
the matter is lawful, and the offense doubtful: Also what ought to be our
carriage, when there is a real difference between parties upon the account of a
civil interest: Also what behavior is requisite, when the command of Superiors
and the eschewing of offense are in opposition: Also that very important case,
is accuratly debated and wisely determined, what is to be done when offense is
like to follow on either side. And finally, what course both private Christians
and Pastors ought to hold when scandals and offenses abound. The answer to
which alone, holds forth a very excellent directory for christian walking
toward others.

The second part treats of Scandal as it is public, and falls under
Ecclesiastic censure, wherein there are many excellent overtures for the wise
and right exercise of Church Discipline. Among many, this is considerable, That
the saving grace of repentance, is not to be enquired into, as the alone ground
upon which Church Officers are to rest for removing an offense: but that a
sober, serious acknowledgment of the offense, with the expression of an
unfeigned-like purpose to walk inoffensively is sufficient. This is very
accurately debated, and solidly and soundly determined. There is also, Chap.
12. a clear discussing of that tickle Question, What ought to be done by private
persons when Churchofficers spare such as are scandalous, to wit upon
supposition that there is a real defect (in the truth whereof often there is a
mistake) yet private professors are to continue in the discharge of the duties
of their stations, and not to separate from the Communion of the Church, but to
count themselves exonered in holding fast their own integrity, mourning for
offenses, representing the same to Church Officers, and, if need be, to
superior Judicatories. All this is strongly, convincingly, and very
satisfyingly proven by Scripture.

The third part is concerning Doctrinal Scandals, or Scandalous Errors, a
Theme very necessary for these reeling times. If I should offer to pick out
thence points very remarkable, I would far pass the just bounds of a Preface.
Wherefore, I shall only thereof say this, That both Christian Magistrates,
Ministers and People, will find their duty laid before them, no less solidly
than accuratly, what to do in the case of spreading error. And, O that the
Most High would strike in with His sovereign Authority upon the hearts and
consciences of all so^ts, especially Magistrates, in whose hands this Tractate
shall come!

But now I come to speak a word of the fourth part of this Treatise, and that
so much the more, 1. Because it was the last labor of this precious man of
God, and so it is his Swan-like song. The Only Wise thought it fit to recommend
to all His People, especially within this Land, in these distracted times (when
passion and prejudice makes it most difficult, if not altogether impossible to
speak a word in season acceptably) the hatefulness of scandalous division and
the loveliness of a godly union by the words of a Messenger, who was one of a
thousand* known to be moderate, wise and faithful, very far from
factiousnesse, sharply perceiving what was duty, and very impartially uttering
the same. At the dictating of this Part, the infirmity of the decaying
tabernacle was so great, that he could not endure the labor of writing with
his own hand, But being now ripe for glory, and having entered the suburbs of
Heaven, he breathed-out his wise and godly thoughts to a borrowed p^n.

Next, I have the greater reason to consider diligently this piece of the work;
and having considered it, to recommend it the more earnestly to all Christ's
People, and especially to my reverend and dear Brethren of the Ministry,
because it was sent to me sealed from the Author, in the beginning of his last
sickness, as a Depositum committed to me to make it ready for publishing;
which I performed carefully and faithfully, without the alteration of one
material word: and having lately perused the Copy the Printer makes use of, I
hereby testify it is the same for matter, order, sentences and words, the
Author sent to me and I transmitted to him a little before the Lord removed him.

And now, upon the matter, I think verily that this healing Tractate is so full
of that wisdom, which is from above, first pure, and then peaceable, that it
will speak plainly the Author fitted of God to bring forth a seasonable word.
At the first reading thereof, my spirit was greatly refreshed, and my heart
enlarged to bless the Lord, conceiving that the Prince of peace, in compassion
over our putrified sores, had provided this mollifying ointment and cleansing
plaster, in order to a cure of the same. And I doubt nothing but every
true-hearted lover of Sions peace, who longs to see the Lord exalted, in
binding-up our hither-till incurable wounds, will magnify the Lord with me and
exalt his Name together. Herein thou will find excellently discovered, the rise
of divisions, what hand the holy Sovereignty of God has therein, and how the
corruptions of men, even of the Godly, both raise and wonderfully heighten
divisions; and how great influence occasional means may have in the same;
together with the sad and dreadful effects thereof; and the necessity of
endeavoring unity herein. Thou will also find the cure and remedy singularly
opened, not only general grounds and preparatory endeavors for uniting, but
also what things are to be forborne, and what is to be done in order to uniting,
and that as well in closing doctrinal differences, not fundamental nor nigh the
foundation, as for union in points not doctrinal, arising from diversity in
external administrations, and especially practical differences in
Church Government, and about the Constitutions and Acts of Synods, when the
Authority thereof is declined and denied: Yea, remedies are proposed, of
divisions arising from the misapplication of power, in censuring or sparing
Church Officers, real or supposed. And finally, against the fears of
misgovernment for the time to come, overtures are prudently given-in: and all
closed with laying out briefly, and yet very effectually, grounds and motives
of the desired union. That which I conceive is most eminent in this choice
Treatise, lies in these two things: first, That this our Cancer is most
tenderly handled, in a very abstract way, never so much as stating or
particularly touching any difference among us, and yet, upon the matter, the
whole discourse comes home to the very point most pertinently. Herein appears
the finger of God to them that will have eyes to see it. The next is this, That
the holy Scriptures are diligently searched, both in order to the disease and
remedy: and the ancient Church History and purer Antiquity, is most plentifully
and sweetly made use of. The judicious and impartial Reader will, I think, say
Miscuit utile dulci, and that here are words fitly spoken, like apples of gold
in pictures of silver. One thing I shall entreat, that the Reader judge not
finally of any parcel or section thereof, till he read and ponder the whole.
Stumble not at his asserting, That authoritative ways at first are not the
best to cure rents. A rent would be handled as a broken bone or a dislocation,
where anointing and ligatures are so necessary, as without these, healing
cannot in haste be attained. If the question be made, How a man in that case
should carry himself? Ought he to stretch himself to the full and put forth his
whole strength? Or is that then impossible? And if through passion in a fit it
be practiced, is it not obstructive to the recovery of strength and healing?
Let the Reader remember this when he comes to that part of the discourse, and
he will, upon that consideration, make the better use of the whole remedy as it
is proposed. I shall not detain much longer the Reader from the Treatise it
self, having added these few considerations, for advancing heart-uniting in the
Lord, which of all other, I conceive, ought to be most weighty in the judgment
and on the affections of all the lovers of our Lord Jesus Christ. First, from
Ephesians* 2. v. 14, 15, 16 17. the great Peace* maker, in offeringup Himself a
sacrifice for the sins of the Elect, intended, with the reconciling of them to
God, to unite them in one body among themselves: yea, even those who were at
furthest distance and greatest enimity, Jew and Gentile, and consequently other
His Elect in their several differences and divisions throughout their
generations. He took on HIm the debt of their sins and their enimities, and
lifted up with Himself these on His Cross, representatively, virtually and
meritoriously, to expiate them in His flesh: and by His Spirit efficiently to
slay and abolish them in due time, by making them one new man in himself. Mark,
I pray, from that Scripture cited, that this complex business is the great
design of our blessed and great Peacemaker. Also, secondly, in the
Sacrifice-feast of His Supper, this is still represented and exhibited, till He
come again: So that this standing Ordinance, destinated and appointed of God to
carry-on and seal-up uniting with God, and one with another, till He come
again; at His coming will stand up and testify against all who comply not with
Christ, but, following their own inclination, act rather against His design.
And, thirdly, in His solemn prayer, Ioh. 17. which is a specimen of His future
intercession, He mainly presses after the salvation and sanctification of
those that are given Him, ver. 21. That they also may be one, as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; that the world may
believe that thou have sent me. Do not these words significantly and shyningly
hold out, what the Mediator is still about, and that uniting in God is His
design still? And fourthly, upon this same very ground, the great Apostle,
speaking to Jews and Gentiles who had embraced the Gospel, and in them to all
dissentients who love the Gospel Truths and Ordinances, says, Romans 15. 7.
Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of
God. Meritoriously and virtually the Elect are received to the glory of God,
and to the end they may be actually received, Receive one another, says the
Apostle, as it were suspending the one upon the other. And now upon these
grounds, Christ our Lord his grand design being so conspicuous, His
Supper-ordinance standing as a Landmark in the way, having this engraven upon
it, Union Communion, the glorious Mediator his intercession running in that
same channel, and the blessed Apostle making this the upshot of his doctrine;
what lover of our Lord, well advised and recollecting himself, dare stiffly
stand out from complying with Him, to satisfy their own inclination and
habituated custom and carriage. My fear is, that every one of us will look to
some others rather than themselves, as obstructing the desired uniting in the
Lord. But upon mature afterthoughts, it will be found the mind of Christ, that
we narrowly search our selves, every one of us, how we have provoked the Holy
One to smite us so in His displeasure, and accuratly to try what yet remains
in us obstructive to this union: and withal to fly to our slighted duty, as
in a City they run to the quenching of a public burning, laying this evil to
heart more than sword or pestilence. All the vvritings and actings against
Presbyterial-government, which is the wall of the house of God, have never
wronged or hurt it so much, as our ill raised, and worse-continued contests.
Our nakednesse-discovering writings, what have they done but added oil to the
flame? For Christ's sake, my reverend and dear Brethren, hearken to this word in
season, from the Oracles of God, and treasures of pure Antiquity, pointing-out
the way of a godly and edifying peace. It will be no grief of heart, but sweet
peace and consolation, when we are to appear before the Judge of the quick and
dead. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus; So heartily prays

St. Andrews, April. 28. 1659. Your Brother and fellow servants, ROBERT BLAIR.

THE Publisher to the Reader.
THere are, I suppose, few or none amongst us, or about us, so great strangers
to the observation of Providential Occurrents in Scotland, as to be altogether
without the knowledge of what has come to pass here in these days, How the
holy, just and sovereign Lord, who sometime lifted us up, has now cast us
down; who crowned us with glory and honor, has stripped us of our glory and
made the crown to fall from our head, (though we have not said, Woe unto us, for
we have sinned) who sometime made us a praise in the earth, has now made us a
hissing, a byword and reproach to all that are round about us; How He, who
once by our unity and oneshoulder* service did make us beautiful as Tirza,
comely as Jerusalem, and terrible as an Army with Banners, has now, alas,
(which is one of the most imbittering ingredients in our cup) in stead of
giving us one heart and one way, in His anger, divided, sub-divided, weakened,
disjoynted and broken us; So that Judah vexes Ephraim, and Ephraim envyeth
Judah, and every man's hand almost is against his brother; and through our
lamentable and most unseasonable intestine jars and divisions we bite and
devour one another, and are like to be consumed one of another; O tell it not
in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice* lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph! that when
God has cast us all down together, we endeavor to keep down and tread upon
one another, That when He has been justly angry with our mother* her children
are sinfully angry one with another, and when He has cast us all into the
furnace, we are even there struggling and wrestling one with another to the
increasing of the flame; And when brotherly love and lothnesse to give or take
offense, is in a special manner called-for, love did never wax* more cold, nor
offenses more abound. Now, when our Church thus in a manner distracted and
drunk with the wine of astonishment, is in so sad a posture, and but few of the
sons she has brought forth to guide her or take her by the hand, they all
almost fainting and lying at the head of every street as it were so many wild
bulls in a net, full of the fury of the Lord and of the rebuke of our God; Then
steppeth forth (the Spirit of the Lord coming upon him) one of her sons, the
Author of this excellent Treatise concerning Scandal (having made some serious
essays before to take his mother by the hand, though but with small acceptance
with many of his Brethren, for which, it may be, the jealous God was in part
provoked to remove him) whereby, as by his latter Will and Testament,
especially to the Ministers of the Church of Scotland, he does again renew his
formerly fruitless and unsuccessfull attempt: In which Treatise as there
breaths a far more sweet and savoury spirit* than in most, if not all of the
Papers published upon occasion of our late lamentable differences, (which I
hope will by none be looked upon as any reflection) So there is throughout a
most strong and fragrant smell of more than ordinary piety, that it may be
averred of him, as once it was of Cyril of Jerusalem, in his last and best
days, he was magnae sanctimoniae vir, a man of eminent sanctity: It plainly
also speaks forth special acquaintance with the Scriptures (for, in all his
discourses (as it is said of Basil) he does exquisitly mingle divine testimonies
of Scripture, that they are like precious stones, not sewed to, but bred in
purple clothes) and intimacy with the mind of God, as to what may be duty
under the various dispensations of his providence, So that it may be said of
him, he was a man that had understanding of the times, and knew what Israel
ought to do; for he does with admirable perspicacity take up* and with no less
dexterity direct unto, what ought to be done in this, and that, and the other
case, as a most skillful Anatomist dissecting the whole complex body of duties
in reference to ordinary and extraordinary cases and emergents, never missing,
as it were, one lith or joint* and like a left handed Benjamite, that in the
greatest intricacies, and gravest difficulties can sling stones at an hairs
breadth and not miss. It savoureth likewise all-along of ^ most sharp, strong
and pregnant wit, in supposing cases, proposing pertinent overtures and
expedients, in disposing of arguments, framing distinctions, anticipating
objections, in cautious guarding against mistakes and inconveniences, etc. So
that it is verified of him what was once said of Origin, Origenis ingenium
sufficiebat ad omnia perdiscenda, he had such pregnancy of wit that he could
reach any thing; and of Joseph Scaliger, he was portentosi ingenii vir, a man
of a stupendous wit. It discovers withal so very great insight in
Church History and Writings of the ancient Fathers, where with it is every
where most beautifully illuminate, that it may well be said of him, as once of
sweet Bucholtzer, that one would have thought universam antiquitatem in ejus
pectusculo latuisse recondit^m, that all antiquity lay hid in his breast; and
of famous Mr. Holland, Regius Professor of Divinity in Oxford, Adeo familiaris
erat cum Patribus ac si ipse pater, He was so familiarly acquainted with the
Fathers as if himself had been one of them. As for his style and manner of
expressing himself, it savoureth very much of the primitive and
Gospel-simplicity, So that what is spoken to the commendation of Basil by a
learned man, may fitly be applied to the Author, The Reader will find in him a
simple and natural form of speech, flowing from his holy breast, much drained
of all humane passions; And that which is said of Ambrose, he studied non aures
titillare, sed corda pungere, not to tickle and please ears, but to prick
hearts: As likewise that which is said of another great man, His words were,
non inflantia sed inflammantia, not inflating but inflaming: He shows himself
here many ways to have been indeed a great man; but I (having been his
Colleague in the Ministry and of his very intimate acquaintance for some
years) knew him to be such more particularly and several other ways, So that
while I reflect upon, and call to remembrance what I have seen in, and heard
from him, I am constrained to say, as once Urbanus Regius (a man much more able
indeed to discern) said of Luther, upon occasion of a conference with him,
Semper fuit mihi magnus, at jam mihi maximus est; vidi enim praesens and audivi
quae nullo calamo tradi possunt absentibus, He was always to me a great man,
but now very great; for I saw and heard things when I was present with him,
which can hardly by any pen be communicated to those that were absent. In a
word, as to the whole Treatise, it may, I think, without any hyperbole be said,
that it is universally most profitable and seasonably beautiful; For, in the
first part of it concerning Scandal in the general (excellently compended and
commended as all the rest are, by the stately-styling profound and precious
Prefacer, like-minded in all these things with the blessed Author, whose sage
mind in them, and not the less because of this co-incidency, would be more
laid weight upon, lest we be put out of time to lament also the loss of such a
Healer and Pillar in this sorely sick and shaken Church) In the first part, I
say, the ancient, primitive, long-dead, buried, and almost-forgotten
tenderness in the matter of Offense (a specially-adorning requisite to a
Christian and Gospel-becoming conversation) is again rivived and portraied as
risen from the dead with a most amiable and comely countenance and taking
aspect, so that it forces the serious beholders to say, Peace be upon as many
as walk according to this Rule. In the second part concerning Scandals as they
are the object of Church Censures, there is a very complete and compact
directory according to the Scripturepattern for Church Officers how to manage
the great Ordinance of Discipline in its exercise* which, if it were diligently
and conscienciously followed in the several steps of it, (as it was most
convincingly so by the Author himself) would undoubtedly make that work both
much more easy and much more succesfull than it uses ordinarily to be. In the
third part concerning Scandalous Errors, wonderfully suited to this time of so
great infection, sickness and mortality, by the raging plague and botch of
error, exceedingly gathered to a head, ripened and made to break and run out,
to* the infecting, in a manner, of the very air wherein the Churches of these
Nations breath, by the heat and warmness afforded to it from a lamentable
liberty and vast Toleration; In this third part, I say, there is, as it were, a
Physicians Shop, full of choice preservatives against, and sovereign remedies
of, poysonable errors and heresies. In the fourth part, concerning Scandalous
Divisions, he does, as another Irenaeus, with much meekness of wisdom and
singular moderation of spirit, without any the least reflection or irritation,
most tenderly, singly, unbyassedly and impartially, and most affectionatly, as
a man burnt with the offense that waits on divisions amongst godly Ministers
especially, strongly endeavor an innocent and wholesome union and composure, so
that (as an eminent, aged and experienced servant of Jesus Christ, whose praise
is in the Gospel throughout all these Churches, when he first saw this Piece in
writ, said) it will be unwelcom to none but such as are led with a bitter
spirit; to which may well be added, that as it is reported of Nazianzen, he was
of such authority in the Greek Churches, that whosoever durst oppose his
testimony, was suspected to be an Heretic: So may it be said of the piously
and prudently-peaceable, and healing-spirited Author, that he deserves to be
of such authority, at least in the Scottish Church, that whoever shall
adventure to oppose (as it is hoped none will) his wise, harmless, holy and
healing Overtures, may be suspected to be no great friend to the union and
peace of this afflicted and rent Church. I will not, Christian Reader, detain
thee any longer from perusing this notable Tractate, but shall only offer to
thy grave and serious consideration these two things, which I suppose will not
a little commend the same unto thee, especially as to the last part of it; one
is* That the Author, when he was (but a very little before his last sickness,
and after his finishing the three first parts) most unexpectedly surprised with
a motion suggested to him anent the expediency of handling somewhat of the
Scandal of Divisions, it did so exceedingly affright him, and had such
astonishing influence upon him through the apprehended difficulty and
ticklishnesse of the subject (so tender was he) that (as himself did to some
afterward profess) he sunk down in his seat, and yet being convinced of the
necessity of saying somewhat to it, the Lord having withal helped him in the
other parts, he durst not forbear; whereupon this choice discourse (for it was
no^ divided in Chapters till afterward) did follow, much whereof I know and am
persuaded did occur and was given unto him inter dictandum. The other thing is,
That sometimes before his death to some friends, he did humbly and gravely call
it his Testament to the Church of Scotland; which Testament and Latter-will of
a dead, but yet speakingfaithfull servant of God, will, I hope, in due time be
confirmed by all godly, judicious, sober, peaceable and unprejudicate men, as
containing in it a most excellent and enriching Legacy, worthy to be put into
the Churches Treasury. Now, that it may go forth with a rich blessing from the
God of truth and peace, to all the honest-hearted lo^ers of the truth in peace,
for the advancement of truth and a holy peace, is the desire of him, who
desires to be

Thine to serve thee in the Gospel of Peace, J. C.

The Contents.
THe rise of the Treatise, page 1, 2. The ground^ of it, p. 2, 3.
PART I. Concerning Scandal in the general, The sum of it, p. 4.
CHAP. 1. COncerning several distinctions of Scandal, p. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14. CHAP. 2. Holding forth what offense is not, and what it is, p.
15, 16, 17. CHAP. 3. Concerning the several ways that offense may be given, p.
17, 18, 19, 20, 21. CHAP. 4. Concerning that upon which offense works, or the
several ways by which it is taken, p. 21, 22, 23. CHAP. 5. Concerning what
ought to make men loath and wary as to the giving of offense, p. 23, 24, 25.
CHAP. 6. Holding forth the difficulty to lie mainly in practice, and showing
how far offense ought to have influence on a Christian in his walk, p. 25, 26,
27, 28, 29. CHAP. 7. Showing what the Scandal of the Pharisees or malicious is,
and clearing several other important questions, p. 29. as, What is to be done
when men stand not to offend us, p. 30. What, when the matter is lawful, and
the offense doubtful ^ p. 30, 31. What, if sufficient pains have been taken to
inform, ^or preventing of men's taking offense? p. 31, 32. What is to ^ ^one
when there is a real difference betwixt parties upon ^dac count of a civil
interest? p. 32, 33. What is to be done when the Commands of Magistrates and
Offense are in opposition? p. 34, 35. What is to be done when offense is like
to follow on either side? p. 35, 36, 37. What when doing will offend the weak
and tender, and irritate the perverse, and contra? p. 37, 38, 39. CHAP. 8.
Holding forth what is called-for when offenses abound, in several directions,
p. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. CHAP. 9. Holding forth what ought to be
the carriage of Ministers when offenses abound, p. 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 44, 55.
PART II. Concerning Public Scandals, or Scandals as they are the object of
Church Censures; and more particularly as they are practical, or in practice.
CHAP. 1. Showing that every offense is not public, and when it is so, p. 56,
57, 58. When a Scandal is to be brought to public, p. 58, 59. Where offenses
are public, yet difference is to be made, p. 60, 61. CHAP. 2. Concerning what
order is to be kept in the following of public Scandals, p. 62. Herein the
ends of discipline would be respected, which are set down, p. 62, 63. All
offenses of the same kind not always to be equally dealt with, p. 63, 64. What
is to be guarded against when there is a different way taken for censuring of
the same offenses, p. 64, 65. How Churchofficers ought to carry in Censures, p.
65, 66, 67, 68. How Discipline is to be ordered so, as it may not mar, but
further the Word, p. 69, 70. CHAP. 3. Showing that Christ's order and method,
Matthew. 18. is to be kept, and what it does imply, p. 71, 72, 73, 74, 75.
CHAP. 4. Holding forth the frame wherewith Church Officers ought to proceed in
Censure, and helps toward the same, p. 76, 77, 78. Church-processes would be
carried-on with expedition, the reasons why, p. 79. CHAP 5. Concerning what is
to be done when offending persons give no satisfaction, p. 80, 81, 82, 83. When
is a person to be accounted obstinate, p. 83, 84. What is to be done when an
offense is not gross, and yet has contempt with it, p. 85. CHAP. 6.
Concerning what is to be accounted satisfying as to the sisting of process and
removing of the offense, p. 86. What kind of satisfaction is not sufficient for
making a Church-judicatory to sist their processes, p. 86, 87. How dissembling
may be discovered when a person makes offer of satisfaction, p. 87. CHAP. 7.
Showing what is not necessary to satisfaction; where it is cleared, that the
saving grace of repentan^e, or godly sincerity therein, is not the alone ground
upon which Church Officers are to rest satisfied, p. 88, 89, 90, 91, 92. CHAP.
8. Holding forth what may be satisfying, to wit, a sober, serious
acknowledgment of the offense, with the expression of an unfained-like purpose
to walk inoffensively for the time to come, p. 93, 94. How moral seriousness
may be discerned, p. 94, 95* If always charity should judge a person sincere,
who is thus morally serious, p. 95, 96, 97, 98. If not, upon what account is
this morally-serious profession to be accepted as satisfying, p. 99. That this
moral seriousness is sufficient, confirmed by several reasons, p. 100, 101,
102, 103, 104. Some differences betwixt the key of Doctrine and the key of
Discipline are assigned for further confirming of this, p 104 105, 106, 107.
That such a profession was satisfying for admitting to Ordinances amongst the
Jews after uncleanness, and therefore ought to be so now, proved, p. 107, 108.
CHAP. 9. Concerning what is to be done when men appear neither serious nor
obstinat, p. 109. How a public rebuke is to be given, ibid If it be always
necessary that the offender speak in public when he is rebuked, p. 110. How an
offender is to be reckoned after a public rebuke, p. 111. If an offense may at
first instant be brought to public, p. 112. When an offense is to be accounted
public, p. 113, 114, 115, 116, 117. CHAP. 10. Clearing whether in
Church-processes an Accuser be always necessary, p. 118, 119, 120. CHAP. 11.
Concerning what is to be done when the complaint is, some injury done to the
complainer, p. 121, 122, 123. What is to be done when a Calumniator, being
complained of, offers to make out the thing, p. 123, 124 What if a profane
confessing party refuse to give satisfaction, p. 125. CHAP. 12. Concerning what
ought to be done by private persons, when Church Officers spare such as are
scandalous, p* 126, 127, 128. They are to continue in the discharge of the
duties of their stations, and not to separate from the communion of the Church,
nor withdraw from the Ordinances, but to count themselves exonered in holding
fast their own integrity, since their consciences are not defiled by the
presence of scandalous persons, as is cleared by several pregnant arguments, p.
128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135. For further confirming of this, there
is a particular consideration of 1 Cor. 11. v. 17, 18, etc. p. 136, 137, 138,
139, 140. CHAP. 13. Showing more particularly what it is that private persons
are called unto in such a case, p. 141, 142. Why it is necessary to acquiesce
in the Churches determination as to practice, p. 143, 144, 145. which is
confirmed by those three New England Divines, Cotton, Hooker, and Norton, p.
145, 146, 147. CHAP. 14. Clearing whether the Ordinances of Christ be any way
polluted by corrupt fellow-worshippers, p. 147, 148, 149, 150, 151. CHAP. 15.
Showing if any thing further in any imaginable case be allowed to private
Christians, p. 151, 152, 153.
PART III. Concerning Doctrinal Scandals, or Scandalous Errors.
CHAP. 1. HOlding forth the expediency of handling this matter, p. 154. Error
vented by those who are corrupted therewith, is no less scandalous, and no
less to be accounted so than gross practices, p. 155, 156. CHAP. 2.
Concerning the spreading of error; Gods displeasure at the suffering thereof,
and the fainting even of good men in restraining the same, p. 157. What height
delusions of this kind may come unto, p. 158, 159. with what use may be made of
the same, p. 159, 160. The tolerating of gross error is most displeasing to
God, and why, p. 160, 161. Sometimes those who want not affection are too
condescending to erroneous Teachers, and why, p. 162, 163. CHAP. 3. If any of
the People of God may be carried away with gross delusions, p. 164. It is not
simply impossible but some may, in a great measure, for a time be carried away,
ibid. yet not so easily as unto gross practical evils, p. 165, 166. When any
Believers fall in such evils, usually the Lord singularly chastneth them for
the same, p. 166. Ordinarily corrupt Teachers set more upon Professors to
withdraw them than upon others that want profession, and why, p. 167, 168, 169.
CHAP. 4. How it is that gross delusions may come to such an height as they
often do, p. 170. What hand the Lord may have in such a plague, cleared, p.
171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177. CHAP. 5. How error may be known to be a
judicial stroke, and why the Lord smites with it, p. 177, 178, 179. What
causes do most ordinarily procure this plague of delusion, p. 180, 181. CHAP.
6. By what means, and how, Satan drives on this plague amongst a people, p.
182, 183. What is Satan's method of proceeding, p. 183. How he prosecuteth it,
p. 184, 185, 186, 187, 188. The means and arguments that are used to carry on
this design, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193. The manner how this design is carried on
by Satan through corrupt Teachers his emissaries; p. 194. What accession a
people may have to the bringing of this plague upon themselves, cleared, p.
195, 196. CHAP. 7. What is called for as duty in such a case, p. 196. What is
not the proper duty or remedy in such a case; Sure an absolute toleration of
all errors and the promoters thereof is not, p. 197, 198. Extremes here are to
be eschewed, p. 198, 199, 200. CHAP. 8. When some errors are to be forborne, p.
201. Some necessary and useful distinctions hereanent, p. 201, 202, 203, 204,
205, 206, 207. Some things not at all to be forborne, p. 208. CHAP. 9. What is
called-for from Church Officers in the case of spreading error, p. 209. What a
Minister is called unto, in reference to God and himself at such a time, p.
210, 211, 212, 213, 214 Union amongst Ministers, and their flocks, is carefully
to be studied in such a case, p. 215. What is the Ministers duty in reference
to the flock in general at such a time, p. 216, 217, 218, 219. What is spoken
of the duty of Ministers, does by proportion agree to Ruling-Elders according
to their station, p. 220. What is a Ministers duty in reference to those that
are seduced, ibid. Trial and discovery is to be made of what errors are
maintained, and by whom; Then the party is to be convinced, p. 222, 223. CHAP.
10. Whether at all times a public debate be necessary with such persons upon
these points, p. 223. In what cases it is called-for, ibid. and p. 224. In what
cases it is not called-for, p. 225. What is to be accounted the sufficient
conviction of a gainsayer, where it is cleared, that it is not only the putting
of the adverse party to silence, p 226, 227, 228. How a public debate is to ^e
managed when necessary, p. 229, 230. CHAP. 11. Admonition is necessary, and how
to be performed, p. 231. The several steps of admonition, p. 232. Some things
observable in the way of admonishing, p. 233. That rejecting of an obstinate
Heretic, is to Church Officers a necessary duty, and a mean to be made use of
for the Churches edification, ibid. and p. 234. What if the person seduced, be
judged to be truly gracious, p. 234 What if he be no fixed Member of any
particular Congregation, p. 235. What if Civil Magistrates concur not to the
backing of the Sentence, ibid. and p. 236. Two limitations to be adverted to in
the rejecting of Heretics, p. 236, 237. CHAP. 12. What is to be accounted a
satisfying and succesfull admonition. p. 237. Some useful distinctions of
satisfaction are set down for the clearing of this, ibid. and, p. 238, 239.
Whether any thing be required of Ministers toward those that are rejected as
Heretics, p. 239. CHAP. 13. What is required of Magistrates for restraining of
seducing spirits, p. 240. They are called, according to their places, to
interpose, p. 241. They are not merely to look to outward order, p. 242, 243.
That the grounds against Toleration concern Magistrates as well as Ministers,
p. 244, 245. That total forbearance is not like the Gospel, cleared, p. 246,
247. It Is Magistrates duty to prevent the infection of the people under them by
corrupt doctrine, p. 247. CHAP. 14. What may be justly acknowledged to be
within the reach and power of the Magistrate in such a case, and so, what is
his duty, p. 248. Some Cautions premitted, ibid. and, p. 249. The Magistrates
duty may be considered, first, with respect to God, p. 249. Secondly, with
respect to themselves, p. 250. Thirdly, with respect to those that are yet free
of infection, p. 250, 251, 252, 253. Fourthly, with respect to the Deluders, or
those that are deluded, p. 254, 255, 256. It is not sufficient for a Magistrate
to maintain civil peace only, p. 256, 257. CHAP. 15. What is called-for from
people who are desirous to keep themselves pure in such a time and case as the
increasing of errors and seducers, p. 258, 259, 260, 261. What is their duty in
reference to the persons infected, And if they ought to refrain from their
fellowship, p. 262, 263, 264. A main part of the peoples duty lies in
countenancing and adding weight unto the several steps of procedure by
Church Officers, against such persons, p. 264, 265. CHAP. 16. What further duty
is required of private professors toward Heretics that are cut off, p. 265,
266, 267. Some Considerations to provoke Ministers and others to the faithful
discharge of their duty in all the forementioned particulars, p. 268, 269.
PART IV. Concerning Scandalous Divisions.
CHAP. 1. HOw Heresy, Schism and Division differ, together with the several
kinds of Division, p. 270. The Introduction to to this Part, ibid. The Scandal
and hurtfulnesse of Divisions, p. 271. The beads of this part of the Treatise,
p. 272. What Heresy is, ibid. What Schism is, and the kinds thereof, p. 273,
274, 275, 276, 277. What is here meant by the word Division, the several kinds
thereof, p. 278, 279, 280. Division amongst the godly is a thing incident to
the Church, p. 281. It may continue long and come to a great height, ibid. It
is not easily removed even when amongst such, p. 282. CHAP. 2. Whence Divisions
do arise, and how they are fostered and increased, p. 282. Sometimes various
apprehensions of inferior truths have influence upon this, ibid. Sometimes the
mistake of some dispensations, p. 283. Sometimes different apprehensions about
persons and things, ibid. and p. 284. usually heart-burnings at the credit of
others, ibid. aggreging the infirmiries of others, p. 285. A factious
vindicating of truth, ibid and p. 286. Undue censures, ibid. Leaving the
matter, and falling upon reflections, p. 287. Studious engaging of others in
the difference, ibid. Too much liking of corrupt men, because of some fair
pretenses, p. 288. Peremptoriness without condescending, ibid. Dissatisfaction
about some persons, ibid. Encroachment upon the exercise of one another power,
p. 289. Much meddling in extrinsick things, ibid. Novelty of notions and
expressions, ibid. CHAP. 3. The height of evil that division brings, p. 290.
as, heat and contention, ibid. Alienation in affection, ibid. Jealousy and
suspicion, p. 291. Virulent expressions, ibid. Personal reflections, and
condemning what formerly they commended in each other, and contra ibid.
Imprecations and instigations of the Civil Magistrate against one another, p.
292. Inflicting of sharp censures, ibid. Renting of whole Churches, ibid. Heat
and fury amongst their respective followers, ibid. Furious madness of Divines,
ibid. Diversion of them from their main work to the great advantage and
satisfaction of open adversaries, p. 293. Both schism and heresy often follow
division, ibid. Both sides of the division are often faulty though not equally,
294. Division is very hardly curable, ibid. CHAP. 4. The causes why division
usually comes to such an height, p. 295. The Lord has an holy sovereign hand
in this, partly trying both good and bad, chastising also and punishing, ibid.
yea, plaguing the world thereby, p. 296. Division burdeneth the godly, ibid. It
hardens the adversaries of the Truth, p. 297. Some characters of judicial
division, ibid. and p. 298. Men engaged in this division may have accession to
it several ways, p. 299. a^, by former guiltiness, ibid. present distempers,
ibid. inconsiderat expressions or actings, p. 300. Too great severity in
Discipline and Censures, ibid. Sleighting of the persons, writings or actings
of others, ibid. Hunting after credit, ibid. Little condescending to remove
mistakes and prejudices, ibid. Acts that state a Schism, ibid. which are of
several sorts, p. 301. Some other ways by which men may have accession to
this, ibid. CHAP. 5. What occasional means may have influence upon division
amongst the godly, p. 302. Tale* bearers, ibid. fears of Censures in many, p.
303. Civil Powers may have influence upon this by pretending to side with one
party against another, and by their weakening of Government and giving men
liberty to do what they will, ibid. Peoples engaging and siding in such
differences does not a little heighten and lengthen the same, p. 304.
Applications to Magistrates for ratifying or crushing of elections, ibid.
Miscariages of persons differing, p. 305. Occurring dispensations of
providence, are sometimes made use of for this end, p. 306. The strength of the
tentation in respect of some other circumstances, As personal credit acting
under the covert of zeal for God, p. 307. Evil grounded confidence, ibid. A
judging of the matter in difference to be necessary and of great moment when it
may yet be far otherwise, p. 308. A particular mistake of men's persons and
actions as they agr^e with* or d^ from them, ibid. A conviction of singleness
in prosecuting and adhering, p. 309. fear of losing credit by relenting, p.
310. fear of hurting their respective followers, p. 311. The tentation
strengthened, by looking upon the failings of opposits, ibid. and by the hope of
the ceding of others, ibid. CHAP. 6. What be the sad effects of division, and
the necessity of endeavoring unity, p. 312, 313. The necessity of endeavoring
unity, granted by all, ibid. and p. 314. CHAP. 7. General grounds leading to
unity, p. 314. The cure of division most difficult, ibid. An absolute necessity
laid upon a tent Church to unite, p. 315, 316. Union a thing attainable amongst
orthodox Divines or Ministers, p. 316, 317. Endeavoring union does not infer
union in all points of judgment and practice, but may stand with several
defects, p. 317, 318, 319. Union may stand with some defects in Worship, and
manner of Government, p. 319. With what kind of defects union may be made up,
cleared in several Rules, p. 320, 321, 322. When inconveniences are on all
hands, what side is to be followed, cleared, p. 322, 323. What may be accounted
such impediments as a tender conscience may be scared by from uniting, cleared,
p. 323, 324. Mutual cond. scending at such a time in a special manner
necessary, p. 324. Wherein there must be no condescending, p. 325.
Condescension ought to be mutual, ibid. What side ought to be most
condescending, even that which is right and has Authority, ibid. and p. 326.
They who did the wrong, ordinarily most averse from condescending, p. 326.
Those who have condescended most, have always been thought the greatest
friends to the Church, ibid. Yielding in all particulars that do not involve
any consent unto, or approbation of what is wrong, commendable, p. 327, 328.
Some negative Conclusions concerning the upmaking of a breach; as, division not
to be cured by destroying any orthodox side or party, p. 329. Division not to
be cured by incapacitating any profitable Officer or Member to do his duty,
ibid. Union not to be studied with any note of disrespect upon either side,
ibid. No simply authoritative way is the fit mean to begin the healing of a
rent Church, p. 329, 330. Though one side fail in condescending, the other
ought not to fail, but to go the furthest warrantable length, p. 330, 331.
Better any orthodox side be practically condescended unto in the supposed case
than that division should be kept up, p 331. It was the actings and not the
formality of the constitution of Synods that occasioned divisions of old, p.
332, 333. Debates concerning Government most difficultly removed, and whence it
comes to be ^o, p. 334. CHAP. 8. Some preparatory endeavors for uniting, p.
335. Walking under an impression of the dreadfulnesse of such a plague, ibid.
and p. 336. Division would be looked upon as having a fearful snare in it, p.
336, 337. Ministers and others would diligently view their own inward
condition, p. 337. There would be repentance suitable to what is sound, p. 338.
Union would by all warrantable means be commended unto, and pressed upon, those
that differ, and by those that differ, one upon another, ibid. The design of
union would be prosecuted with singleness and constancy, p. 339. Union would
be endeavored with all tenderness and respect to the persons, actions and
qualifications of men differing, ibid. and p. 340. Several particulars wherein
this respect would be manifested, spoken unto, p. 341. It would be further
manifested in expressions of mutual confidence, p. 342. kind visits, ibid.
abstaining of personal reflections, even though there be much provocation
given, ibid. and p. 343. In such a case Ministers would in a special manner
stir up themselves and others to the life and practice of Religion, p. 344.
There would at such a time be solemn addresses to God for his leading in the
way to this desirable end, ibid. CHAP. 9. What things are to be forborne in
order to uniting, p. 345. All things that weaken the reputation of others to be
avoided, ibid. Evil counsel would be taken heed to; neither at such a time in
this business would all men's advice be indifferently laid weight upon, p. 346,
347. There would be a forbearing to engage judicially pro or contra, and why,
p. 348, 349. There would be abstaining from propagating different opinions
factiously, and why, p. 349, 350. All contrary acting would be abstained, p.
351. Separated meetings to be eschewed, and separated fasts, ibid. Acts and
principles laying restraints upon either side, would be abstained, p. 352.
CHAP. 10. What is to be done in order to uniting, p. 352. There would be a
seeking after meetings and conferences, ibid. In such meetings there would be
an offer made of fair conditions, p. 353. There would be a right way of
carrying-on such meetings, p. 353, 354. Contentions about formalities, as also
personal criminations, would be forborne at such meetings, p. 354. There would
be condescending in some circumstances though they should not seem so
reasonable, p. 355. The most tender of the Church most condescending, ibid and,
p. 356. CHAP. 11. What is to be done in closing doctrinal differences, p. 357*
The first way of closing doctrinall differences, when one party brings the
other to the same judgment with them; or, when both parties quit something of
extremities, and join in a middle opinion, p. 357. The second way of composing
such differences, by endeavoring to keep unity notwithstanding thereof, by a
mutual forbearance in things controverted, which is of two sorts, p. 358, 359.
The third way of composing such differences, is, When though there be some
meddling with such questions, and so a seen difference, yet it is with such
forbearance as there is no schism nor division, but that is seriously and
tenderly prevented, p. 360, 361, 362. CHAP. 12. What to be done for union in
points not doctrinal, but about matters of fact or personal faults, p. 363.
Contests about these are of several sorts, As sometimes there is
dissatisfaction with the constitution of a Church as to its Officers and
Members, ibid. and p. 364. A second sort of such contests, is, when faults are
alseaged, which either are not true, or cannot be proven, p. 364, 365. A third
sort of such contests, is, when there is a pleading for such persons as are
justly censured, or censurable, p. 366. There is a threefold way of composing
these last contests, 1. by clearing the justness of the Sentence, 2. by
recalling the Sentence when the person may be profitable, ibid. 3. By the
sentenced persons submitting themselves, p. 367. A fourth sort of contests of
this kind is, when there are mutual upbraidings for failings in a time of
darkness and tentation, ibid. These most satisfyingly removed by forgiving one
another, ibid. CHAP. 13. What is to be done toward uniting in divisions
arising from diversity of circumstances in external administrations, and
especially arising from Church Government, p. 368. Condescendency in such
things, necessary, p. 368, 399. In such things better to forbear some new
thing, than to alter the old, without some considerable reason, ibid. Divisions
about Church Government ordinarily most bitter, and of many kinds, ibid.
Concerning the form of Government, p. 370. Practical difference herein makes
division, ibid. Characters of Government fit for uniting, p. 371, 372. Debates
about the Constitution of Synods, p. 373. Defects in the constitution of a
Synod, will not easily annul without defect in the matter, ibid. In ancient
Councils soundness of matter more regarded than formality or number, ibid. and,
p. 374. What should be done for union when division arises about the
constitution of a Synod, p. 375. It would be considered how little useful the
thing controverted is, as to the Churches edification, ibid. and 376. This
difference is either in judgment and may be forborne, p. 376. or, it relates to
practice, and so somewhat is to be tolerated, and somewhat done, p. 377, 378.
What usually has been done when Authority was declined, p. 379. There is great
difference betwixt declining of synodical Authority simply, and the
constitution of a particular Synod, p. 380. CHAP. 14. What is to be done in
order to union when divisions are about doctrinal Determinations, p. 381. Such
Determinations are here understood as are in Doctrines not fundamental nor near
the foundation, ibid. Some of which are merely doctrinal, ibid. Others have
practical consequents following upon them, some of which again infer division,
others but diversity, p. 382. Some determinations are of things daily
practicable, others only for an exigence scarcely ever again occurring, p. 383.
Some determinations are for Ministers practice, others are answers to the
questions of Rulers, p. 384. Mere doctrinal decisions about smaller points,
ought to make no division, p. 385, 386, 387. How the smaller number should in
such decisions yield to the greater, cleared, p. 387, 388. CHAP. 15. What
should be done in order to union about such decisions as have practical
consequents following thereupon, p. 388. Contrary practices build a wall of
separation, p. 389. There may be diversity without division, ibid. It is great
folly to make, or keep up division for what is rarely or never practicable,
ibid. Union is not impossible notwithstanding diversity of judgment, And though
neither party should acknowledge any offense, p. 390, 391. What to be done when
the decision is a simple declaration of the lawfulness of a thing, and where
the matter determined concerns such practices as actually are to be performed
but in some extraordinary case by civil powers, cleared, p. 392, 393, 394.
CHAP. 16. The remedies of divisions arising from the misapplication of Power in
Ordination of Ministers, and admitting unto, or debarring from, communion, p.
395. The ordination of a person worthy of the Ministry, ordained by
Church Officers, i^ not to be accounted null for some defects, ibid. Union
would not be suspended upon the trial of the worthiness or unworthiness of some
persons, but the rather endeavored, that such trials may be the better
compassed, p. 396, 397. What to be done where there are contrary Ordinations,
cleared, p. 397, 398. CHAP. 17. Remedies of divisions arising from the
misapplication of power, in censuring or sparing Ministers, real or supposed,
p. 399. In what cases extremities hereanent are to be eschewed, ibid. Church
judicatories their wise remitting of rigor, of great advantage in such a case,
p. 400. Corrupt, or gross and profane men for no interposition to be received,
p. 401. How to carry when debate falls to be about conniving at guilty men,
p. 402. Union is the rather to be followed that satisfaction in this may be
attained, p. 403. In times of division, rumors especially concerning eminent
persons, not so to be regarded, p. 404. Zeal in justly-censuring, well
consistent with a spirit of union, ibid. Yet union is to be preferred to the
censuring of some unfaithful men, p. 405 Union no prejudice to the purging-out
of corrupt Ministers, ibid. and, p. 406. Purging not to be so vehemently
pressed till union be fixed, p. 406, 407. CHAP. 18. The fears of misgovernment
for the time to come, and the remedies thereof, p. 408. The difference here, is
either anen^ the persons that are to govern, p. 409. or anent the ordering of
things that may fall out, p. 410. The satisfaction here must be such as neither
party is fully satisfied, ibid. The abstaining of union, will not prevent the
inconveniences upon either side, p. 411. The thing feared in this case, is not
the bringing-in of new Doctrine, nor a wrong Government, ibid. Union is not to
be suspended till there be satisfaction in every particular, p. 412. Some
particulars to be referred to some persons acceptable to both sides, who may be
trusted with the decision of them, ibid. and, p. 413. Such things are not to be
decided by a mere authoritative way, ibid. and, p. 414. Better for a time to
forbear many things, than to brangle union, p. 414. Doubtful practices to be
abstained in such a case, p. 415. There would at such a time be many brotherly
conferences for preventing of abrupt surprisals by things moved in
Judicatories, ibid. Matters of difficulty rather to be committed to ^ome
deputed persons, than instantly decided, and why, p. 416. It is not unfit some
persons be designed to compose such occasional differences as may arise, ibid.
and, p. 417. This ^endeth to recover strength to Judicatories, p. 418. And is
consistent with Ministerial Church Authority, ibid. and, p. ^9. The great
Apostle often lays aside authority, ibid. Several other reasons also are
brought to prove the consistency, ibid. and, p. 420. CHAP. 19. Some
Advertisments concerning the Overtures proposed, p. 421, 422. CHAP. 20. What is
incumbent to Magistrates and People for remedying this evil, p. 423, 424. CHAP.
21. The grounds and motives of the desired union, p. 425, 426, 427, 428, 429,
430, 431, 432: all pertinently, pathetickly and pungently proposed and pressed.
If there be any thing in the Collection and frame of these Contents unsuitable
to, or unworthy of, the precious Author, let it not be imputed to him, but to
the Publisher.

ERRATA.
Page line read 35 26 Jews for hearers 41 10 an for and 45 ult add, after
taken 46 34 way for may 60 32 light for like 96 24 not to be 97 13 evident 100
6 recovering ibid 35 an for one 123 17 dele it 126 4 add, after these 153 12
possible 160 35 add: after entered in 166 2 11 for 10 167 27 many for away 168
4 leavening 171 10 Romans 1. 21, etc. 176 25 2 Timothy 4. 1, etc. 195 1 2 Cor. 197 4
Gal. 5. 9. 204 18 unto for too ibid 27 alse for also 205 3 one for an 210 33
his for this 219 4 alse for also 228 21 for the last an, one 234 3 commended
245 14 has not made 252 3 burying for burning 261 31 dele and 272 4 dele 2.
289 7 add, after others 298 11 crosses for cases 300 36 in for one 302 27
suggested 310 8 aim for mind 330 6 not as what agrees 337 11 constructions 339
30 of others 353 28 where for when 360 21 the others ibid 36 writings f.
meetings 377 1 put, after debating 392 5 dele etc.

Page 385 in the margent, read mere for more.

Any other such or lesser escapes thou will easily help as thou go through.

The Rise of this following TREATISE.
HAving had occasion to consider the Book of the Revelation, and being on the
Epistle to the Church of Pergamos in the second Chapter, ground was given to
speak somewhat of Scandal, by reason of several doctrines clearly arising from
that place: upon this occasion I did first essay the writing of something of
the doctrine of Scandal in general, intending only to have spent a sheet or two
thereupon, as elsewhere on some other subjects: When this was brought to a
close, I found the place to give ground to speak of public Church-offences, as
they are the object of Church Discipline and Censures; And being convinced,
that that subject was not impertinent to be spoken of, I yielded to spend some
thoughts upon it also, which did draw to a greater length than at first was
intended, or was suitable for a digression: This being finished, as it is, and
any more thoughts of this subject laid by, it occurred again to me to think of
doctrinal Scandals, or of scandalous Errors; And considering that the Scandals,
mentioned in that place* are of such nature, and that such are very frequent in
this time, I yielded also to put together what thoughts the Lord would furnish
concerning the same; whereupon followed the third part of this Treatise. When
this was even at the closing, there was a fourth part of the same subject that
did occur to me to be thought on, which before that had never been minded, and
that was concerning scandalous Church-divisions: To this my mind and
inclination was exceeding averse at first, as knowing it not only to be
difficult in it self to be meddled in, but also exceedingly above me, who am
altogether unsuitable to hazard on such a subject: Yet, considering the rise of
the motion, and how the Lord had helped-through the other parts, I did resolve
to condescend to follow it, at least so far, till it might appear what was His
mind to me therein, and accordingly did follow it till it came to the period
(whatever it be) that now it is at.

This is the true rise and occasion of this Treatise, and of the several parts
thereof, and therefore I have continued its entry in the original mould
thereof, to wit, in laying down some general doctrines from that place of
Scripture, and if there be afterward any more particular relation to the second
and third chapters of the Revelation than to other Scriptures, this simple
narration of the rise thereof may satisfy any concerning the same: whereof we
shall say no more, but, first, lay down the grounds of all from that text, and
then proceed in the Treatise, which is divided in four parts, upon the reasons
formerly hinted at.

The Grounds of this Treatise.
AMongst other things that troubled the Church in the primitive times, Scandal,
or, offense, was a chief one; and the many directions that are given concerning
it, and the reproofs that are of it, show that it is a main piece of a
Christians conversation to walk rightly in reference thereto, and a great
evidence of loosnesse where it is not heeded. On ver. 6. we show that this was
a foul fault of the Nicolaitans to be careless of offending, or of giving of
offense, and not to regard Scandal; and here the Lord holds it forth to be
so, by comparing it with Balaam's practice, ver. 14. which is aggreaged from
this, that he taught Balac to lay a stumbling block before Israel. From which
these doctrines may be gathered, 1. That there is such a fault incident to men
in their carriage, even to lay stumbling blocks before others, and to offend
them. 2. That men ought to walk so as not to offend others, or so, as to lay no
stumbling block before them: So that it is not enough not to stumble
themselves, (if this could be separated from the other) but also they ought to
be careful not to stumble others* 3. The Lord does take special notice how men
do walk in reference to others in this, and is highly provoked where He sees
any guilty of it. 4. The devil has ever endeavored to have offenses abounding
in the Church, and to make some lay such stumbling blocks before others. 5. It
is most hurtful to the Church, and destructive to souls where offenses abound,
and men walk not tenderly in reference to these; so that the Lord expresses it
with a twofold woe, Matthew. 18. as being a woe beyond sword or pestilence. 6. We
may gather, that corrupt doctrine never wants offenses joined with it, and
that ordinarily those who spread that, are untender in this. 7. That offenses
often accompany the rise and beginning of any work of Christ's amongst a
people; these tares of offenses are ordinarily then sown. 8. That some offenses
are of a public nature, and that Church Officers should take notice of such,
and that it is offensive to Christ when they are over-seen and not taken heed
unto. 9. Church Officers, even such as otherwise are approved in their
carriage and ministry, may fall in this fault, as by comparing the Epistles to
Pergamos and Thyatira, is clear. 10. When Officers fall in this fault, it is
yet no reprovable thing in members that are pure in respect of their own
personal carriage to continne in communion with such a Church, the Ordinances
otherwise being pure.

PART I. The sum of it.
THese doctrins being in the words, and Scandal being a great part of the
challenge of the Nicolaitans, or at least a great aggravation of their
challenge, and also being a most necessary thing for a Christian's daily walk,
to be carefully taken heed unto, there is ground here to speak to the same, (in
a time especially wherein offenses abound) and that in respect of what is
calledfor, both in private persons and in Church-judicatories; or, of private
scandals, and such as are public. We shall draw what we would say of the first
to these five, 1. To show what an offense is. 2. To show how it is given. 3. To
show some considerations that ought to deter from giving of it. 4. To show what
weight it ought to have on a Christian in his walk. 5. Point at some directions
necessary to be adverted unto when offenses are rise and multiply.

CHAP. I. Several Distinctions of Scandal.
FOr clearing of the first two, we shall premit some distinctions; and we would
advert, that by offense here, is not understood that which does actually
displease or grieve another always: for there is a great difference betwixt
displeasing and offending; as also betwixt pleasing and edifying: for, one may
be displeased, and yet edified; well satisfied, and yet offended. First then,
we are to distinguish betwixt First Distinction.
displeasing and offending; for, here offense is taken in opposition, not to a
man's being pleased, but to his edification; and so offense or stumbling in
short here, is something that does, or may mar the spiritual edification of
another, whether he be pleased or displeased, as by comparing Romans 14. ver. 13.
with ver. 20, and 21. is clear: for what he first calls a stumbling block, or
an offense, he expounds it afterward to be any thing that may be the occasion
of a fall to another, and make him stumble, or weak, or to halt in the course
of holiness, as some block would hinder or put a man in hazard to fall in the
running of a race; And from this is the similitude drawn in this phrase.

2. Scandal is either given only, or taken only, or Second Distinction.
both. Given only, is, when one does lay something before another which is apt
of it self to cause him fall or sin; although the other do not fall by occasion
of it, yet if it be inductive to sin of its own nature, it is an offense or
stumbling block, as Christ says to Peter, Matthew. 16. Thou art an offense to
me; though there was nothing could stick to Him, yet that was in its nature
such, which Peter had given Him in advice. 2. It is taken only, when no
occasion is given, but when a man does what is not only lawful, but necessary,
and yet others from their own corruption do carp thereat, and stumble thereon:
Thus did the Pharisees offend at Christ, Matthew. 15. 12. who did never give
offense to any; and this is common to wicked men, that stumble where no
stumbling block is, and, as it is said, they know not whereat they stumble,
Prove. 4. 19. This also is called passive offense, as the other is called
active. 3. It is both given and taken, when there is something active on the
one side, that is apt to draw another to sin, and something that is yielded
unto on the otherside, and the bait is accepted: This was it in that
stumbling block which Balaam laid before Israel; and thus ordinarily it is
amongst men, who, having corruption, are soon inflamed in less or more with
every incitement. Thus, Gal. 2. Peter gave Barnabas offense, and he took it,
when he was also carried away to dissemble. It is this active Scandal that
properly is to be enquired in, and is meant here, which is, in short, any deed
or word that in it self is apt to make another to sin, or to weaken them in
their spiritual course, either in respect of life, or comfort, and that whether
the person be actually stumbled or not, or whether the person actually intend
offense or not. In all this we are to understand, that one act may be offensive
in many considerations, as one deed may be against many commands, and be many
ways sinful.

3. There are doctrinal offenses, and there are some Third Distinction.
that are practical: doctrinal, are such as flow from matters of judgment,
wherein men vent some untruth, and so lay a stumbling block before others, this
is to break a Commandment and to teach others so to do, Matthew. 5. 19. And this
is sometimes also in matters of practice, when a corrupt practice is defended,
as these Nicolaitans strove to do theirs. Scandal in practice, without any
doctrinal defense, is, when doctrine being kept pure, a person falls in some
practice, that of it self without any verbal expression, is inductive to sin.
Thus David's adultery was a scandal: and this was the fault of the Priests,
that made the people stumble at the Law: And thus every public or known
irregular action is offensive, because it is of ill example to others, or
otherwise may have influence on them to provoke to some sin.

4. We may distinguish offenses according to the Fourth Distinction.
matter thereof. And, 1. some are in matters that are simply sinful in
themselves, and have this also following on them: Thus all errors and public
sinful practices are offensive. 2. Some matters are not simply and in
themselves sinful, yet have the appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. and thus
dangerous and doubtful expressions in doctrine, that have been, or use to be,
abused; and practices also that are not becoming that honesty and good report
which a Christian ought to study, as it is Philip. 4. 8. 9. are offensive. In
the first respect, David would not take the name of Idols in his mouth, Psalm.
16. because others did too much reverence them: Of the last sort was Peter's
dissimulation and withdrawing, Gal. 2. because, that appeared to strengthen the
opinion of the continuing of the difference betwixt Jew and Gentile, etc. for
that cause, Paul would not circumcise Titus, Gal. 2. 3. and did condemn eating
in the Idoltemples. 3. Some offenses are in matters otherwise lawful and
indifferent, though not necessary, as the eating of, or abstaining from meats,
or what was offered to Idols in the primitive times, which was indifferent to
be done in the house of an Heathen, and so was sometimes lawful, but was not
indifferent to be done in the Idol-temple, because that had the appearance of
evil, as if he had had some respect to the Idol; nor was it to be done, if any
weak Brother had been at table in the house, because it grieved him, 1 Cor. 8,
and 10. It is these last two, (and more especially the third) that are
concerned in the doctrine of offenses properly, and do rather arise from
circumstances in the thing, as time, place, person, manner, etc. than from the
deed considered in it self.

5. We may distinguish them in respect of the intent Fifth Distinction.
of the work, or of the worker: some things may be offensive in themselves as
so circumstantiated, and yet not be so to the person that may give offense by
them, I mean, not be esteemed so; and thus was Peter's offense which he laid
before Christ, Matthew. 16. And sometimes the person may intend the others
advantage, and yet may offend and stumble him, as Eli intended his sons good,
but really by his too gentle reproof did stumble them by confirming them in
their offense; And thus some, by unseasonable reproofs or censures, and
commendations also, may really make another worse, although they intend the
contrary.

6. Whence arises another distinction of offenses, Sixth Distinction.
viz. from the matter of a practice, or from the manner of performing of it, or
the circumstances in the doing of it: for, as it is not an act materially good
that will edify, except it be done in the right manner; so will not an act
materially good keep off offense, if it be not done tenderly, wisely, etc. And
often we find circumstances have much influence on offense, as times, persons,
places, manner, etc. for, it is not offensive to one to pray or preach, but at
some times, as before an Idol, or on an Holy Day it may be offensive.

7. As sins are distinguished in sins of omission Seventh Distinction
and commission; So offenses may be distinguished also: for, some give offense
when they swear, pray irreverently, etc. others, when there is no seeming
respect to prayer at all, in the very form; for this fostereth profanity as the
other does: And for this Daniel will open his window, lest he should be thought
to have forborne prayer: and this offense of omission, or omissive offense, is
not guarded against only by doing what is duty, except there be also a doing of
it so as conveniently, and as becomes it may be known to be done, as in the
former instance: and this, Rev. 6. 9. is called the holding of the Testimony;
and it is this mainly that is edifying to others, when the light of holiness
does shine; and when that is veiled, others in so far have darkness to walk in,
and so it is as to them an occasion to stumble, because they hold not forth the
light unto them; but still this is to be done without affectation or
ostentation, lest a new offense should follow thereupon.

8. Some offenses contrare the graces of Gods Eighth Distinction
People, and these make them sad; some foster corruptions, and these are too
pleasant: thus, soft reproofs, corrupt advices, flatteries, etc. minister
matter to many to fall on.

9. Some offenses may be called personal, when a Ninth Distinction.
person commits them in his private carriage, that is, when his way of
eating, drinking, living, etc. offends others, although he has no meddling
with them, but live retiredly: Some again are more direct offenses (as the
first are indirect and consequential) that is, which flow from men in their
public actings, or in their mutual converse with others, which have more
direct influence to offend.

10. Offenses may be distinguished as they hurt Tenth Distinction.
folks either by pleasing them in their corruptions and strengthening them in
what is sinful, or when they hurt by irritating and stirring up corruptions to
vent. In the first respect, too much gentleness in admonitions, rashness or
imprudence in commendations of what is good in one, or extenuation of what is
evil, corrupt advice, and such like, do offend: Thus Iona^ab offended Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. and Eli his sons. In the last, sleighting of men, wronging of them, or
not condescending to remove a wrong, or to vindicate our selves, if there be a
supposed wrong, does grieve and offend; so do evil-grounded reproofs, or
unadvertent admonitions that are not seasoned with love, hard reports, etc.

11. We may consider offenses with respect to the Eleventh Distinction.
party offended; and so, first, we offend friends in many respects, whom, it
may be, we would not desire to grieve, yet unadvertingly we stumble them, and
hurt their spiritual condition by unfaithfulness to them, carnalnesse in
conversing with them, siding with their infirmities, and many such like ways.
Or, secondly, they are enemies, or such to whom we bear no such respect, these
also are scandalized when they are provoked through the carnalness of our way
to judge hardly of us, or of Religion for our sake, or to follow some carnal
course to oppose what we carnally do, when we irritate them and provoke their
passion, etc. and thus men in all debates are often guilty, whether their
contest be in things Civil, Ecclesiastic or Scholastic, when, beside what may
further their cause (suppose it to be just) they do not carry respectively to
the adversary, and tenderly and convincingly, so as it may appear they seek the
good of their soul, and their edification, even when they differ from them.
Thirdly, we may look on offense as it offends wicked or profane men, possibly
Heathens, Jews, or Gentiles; they are offended when hardened in their impiety
by the grossnesse and uncharitableness of those who are professedly tender:
thus it is a fault, 1 Cor. 10. 32. to give offense either to Jews or Gentiles,
as to the Church of God. Fourthly, Amongst those that are tender, some are more
weak, some are more strong: the first are often offended where there is no
ground in the matter, as Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8. etc. and it venteth readily by rash
judging and censuring of others that are stronger than themselves, for going
beyond their light, or because of their seeming to be despised by them, etc.
which shows wherein the offense of the strong also lies; therefore these two
are put together, Romans 14. 3. Let not him that eats, (that is, him that is
strong) despise him that eats not: And let not him that eats not (that is,
the weak) judge him that eats.

12. Offenses may be considered as they directly Twelfth Distinction.
incline or tempt to sin, either in doctrine or practice; or, as they more
indirectly scare and divert from, or make more faint and weak in the pursuing
of holiness either in truth or practice: Thus a blot in some professor makes
Religion to be some way abhorred; this especially falls out when Ministers
and Professors that are eminent, become offensive: For that is as a dead fly in
the box of the Apothecaries ointment* that makes all to stink: Thus, Mal. 1.
the Priests made the people stumble at the Law; as also did the sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. and this is charged on David, that by his fall he made the Heathen
blaspheme: and thus contention and division amongst Ministers and Disciples is
insinuated to stand in the way of the worlds believing in, or acknowledging of
Christ, as it is, Ioh. 17. 21.

13. Sometimes Scandal is in immediate duties of Thirteenth Distinction.
religious worship, as praying, preaching, conferring, speaking, judging of
such things, etc. that is, either by miscarrying in the matter of what is
spoken, or by an unreverent, light, passionate manner, etc. or, it is given by
our ordinary and common carriage in our eating, drinking, apparelling, manner
of living, buying and selling, etc. that is, when something of our way in these
things gives evidence of pride, vanity, unconstancie, covetousness,
addictedness to pleasure, carnalnesse, or some such thing whereby our neighbor
is wronged: Thus the husband may offend the wife, and the wife the husband by
their irreligious conversing together, whereby one of them does strengthen the
other to think exactness in Religion not so necessary. And so a servant who
has a profession may stumble a master, if the servant be not faithful and
diligent in his service.

14. Again, some offenses are offensive, and are Fourteenth Distinction.
given from the first doing of the action; thus where there is any appearance
of evil, the offense is given in this manner. Again, offense may be at first
only taken and not given, and yet afterward become given, and make the person
guilty, although in the first act he had not been guilty. This is, first, when
suppose a man eating without respect to difference of meats as he might do
indifferently, if he were told by one that such meat were offered to an Idol,
and therefore in his judgment it were not lawful to eat it, although before
that, it were not offense given, but taken, (he not knowing that any were
present that would offend) yet if he should continue after that to do the same
thing, it should be offense given upon his side. Secondly, If a man should know
one to have taken offense at him, or his carriage, in a thing indifferent
(although he had given no just occasion thereof) and if, after his knowledge
thereof, he should not endeavor to remove the same according to his place, In
that case the offense becomes given also, because he removes not that
stumbling block out of his brother's way. Fifteenth Distinction


15. Some offenses are offensive in themselves, that is, when the thing it self
has some appearance of evil, or a tendencie to offend in it self. Again, some
but by accident in respect of some concurring circumstance of time, place, etc.
Some offenses also may be said to be given of infirmity, that is, when they
proceed from a particular slip of the party offending, when they are not
continued in, stuck to, or defended, or, when they fall into them, not knowing
that they would be offensive; and when that is known, endeavoring to remove
them. Again, other offenses are more rooted and confirmed, as when a person
has a tract in them, is not much careful to prevent them, or remove them, is
not much weighted for them, but sleighteth them, or defends them, etc. This
distinction of offenses answers to that distinction of sins, in sins of
infirmity and sins of malice: which maliciousness is not to be referred to the
intent of the person, but to the nature of the act; so is it to be understood
here in respect of offenses.

In the last place, we may consider that distinction Sixteenth Distinction
of Scandals in private and public: both which may be two ways understood;
either, 1. in respect of the witnesses; or, 2. in respect of the nature of
them. 1. It is a private scandal in the first respect, which does offend few,
because of its not being known to many, and so a public offense in this
respect is a scandal known to many. Thus the same offense may be a private
offense to one at one time, and in one place; and a public offense to another,
or the same person, in respect of these circumstances. In the last respect, a
private offense is that possibly which does stumble many, yet is not of that
nature, as publicly, legally, or judicially it might be made out to be
scandalous, for the convincing of a person offending, or of others, although it
may have a great impression upon the hearts of those who know it. Thus the
general tract of ones way and carriage (who yet may be civil, legal, and fair
in all particulars) may be exceeding, offensive, as holding forth to the
consciences of those that are most charitable to him, much vanity, pride,
earthly-mindednesse, untendernesse, want of love and respect, and the like;
which says within the heart of the beholders, that there are many things
wrong, when yet no particular can be instanced wherein the person cannot have
fair legal answers; Of this sort are unseasonable starting of questions, or
doubtful disputations, Romans 14. wherein possibly the person may assert truth,
yet by moving such things, at such times, and in such expressions, he does
confound and shake the weak: Those offenses especially arise from a supposed
unstreightnesse in the end, excess in the manner of a thing,
disproportionablenesse betwixt a man's way and his station, and such like,
whereof a man may have much conviction in himself, from observing of such an
ones way; yet it is not a public offense in the sense spoken of here, because
there is no demonstrating of those. Thus Absolom's insinuating, self-seeking
way gave evidence of pride; and such as Paul speaks of, Philip. 1, and 2.
that some preached out of envy, and others sought their own things, etc. are
of this nature, which by his discerning he was convinced of, yet did not found
any sentence on them.

Again, oppositly to these, Offenses may be called public, when there is a
possible way of bearing them out before others, or instructing them in
particulars to be contrary to the rule, as drunkenness, swearing, etc. These
may be called ecclesiastic or judicial offenses, as being the object of
Churchcensure, all the other may be called conscience, or charity-wounding
offenses, because they are the object of a persons conscience and charity, and
do wound them, and are judged by them, and may be the ground of a christian
private admonition but not of public reproof; or rather may be called
unconsciencious, and uncharitable offenses, as being opposite to conscience and
charity.

Many other distinctions of Scandals may be given, Other Distinctions of
Scandal.
as, some are immediate, that is, when we hear or see what is offensive from
the person himself; Some again are mediate, and so the very reporting of
something that is true may be offensive to those to whom it is reported; As, 1.
when it may alienate them from, or irritate them against another person. 2.
When it may occasion some sinful distemper, or incite to some corrupt course,
or any way provoke to carnalnesse, those to whom it is reported; and thus
offense differs from slander: for, slander affects and wrongeth the party
spoken of, who, it may be, is absent: Offense again, stumbleth those who are
present, although the same act in a person may be both a calumny and an offense
upon different considerations. Thus Ziba calumniateth Mephibosheth, but really
stumbleth and offends David, 2 Samuel 16. (although David was not so displeased
with him as Mephibosheth was) So also Doeg calumniateth David and the Priests
in a thing which was true, but really offended Saul, as the effect cleared, 1 Samuel 21, and 22. Also some things offend others properly; as when a Minister
fails in giving of an admonition prudently, or seasonably. Again, some things
offend virtually, when, it may be, a Minister gives an advice in season, but
in something has not condescended formerly, whereby he has not such access
with his admonition to edify; Thus Paul prevented offense, when by becoming
all things to all, he made way for his being acceptable in his station. Again,
some offenses may simply be offenses, as having hurt with them. Some again may
be comparatively; so it is when a thing actually hurts, not by an emergent
loss, but when it keeps from that growth and edification, that otherwise
might have been, it is a comparative loss, and so offensive.

CHAP. II. Holding forth what Offense is not, and what it is.
THese generals may give a hint of what is signified by Offense and how it is
given. To add a word more particularly to the first Question, Let us consider,
1. what offense is not; 2. what it is. 1. It is not always any hurtful and
actually displeasing thing to the party that is offended; and so is not to be
constructed such, or not, from their pleasure, or displeasure. 2. It is not
always to be judged by the matter; for, an offense may be in a lawful matter,
that simply is not to be condemned, as in eating, drinking, taking wages for
preaching, etc. 3. It is not always to be determined by the effect; sometimes
one may be offended, when no offense was given: sometimes again, offense may be
given, and the person be guilty thereof (as has been said) when no actual
stumbling has followed, but the thing of it self was inductive thereto. 4. Nor
is it to be judged by the person's intention; one may be without all design of
hurting, who yet may really wound, and offend another, and be guilty by
rashness, omission, too much love and condescension in sparing,
unfaithfulness (it being much to be faithful to one that we love, and, which
is a pity, we are readiest to offend them, as in Ionadab's case to Amnon; yea,
in Job's friends to him, etc.) inconsiderate zeal, imprudency, or falling in
some thing, that is as a dead fly, which may make much that is profitable,
become unsavory. 2. Scandal then must be something accompanying some external
deed or word (for internal give not offense) which being considered at such a
time, in such a place, or in such a person, etc. may be inductive to sin, or
impeditive of the spiritual life or comfort of others. When this does flow from
a sinful act, it is not so difficultly discernable, readily all actions that
are materially evil, are clear; but the difficulty is when the matter is
lawful or indifferent in it self; or when it is in the manner and other
circumstances of a lawful or necessary duty, then to discern when they become
scandalous in such respects; and accordingly to be swayed to do or abstain in
the matter, and to do in this or some other manner, as may eschew the same.
This properly and strictly is that which is called offense, and is that wherein
most wisdom is to be exercised in ordering and regulating us in the use of
christian liberty; and concerning this are the great debates in Scripture, that
men may know, that not only the Command is to be looked unto in the matter of
the act, so that nothing be done against it in that respect, nor only that our
own clearness be considered* that we do nothing doubtingly, but that others be
considered also that they by our deed be not in their spiritual estate wronged
or hurt* that is, to do or abstain for consciencesake, not our own, but of him
that sits with us, 1 Cor. 10. 24, and 28. for, if charity and love be the
end of the Law, and men ought not only to seek their own things, but the things
one of another, and love their neighbor as themselves, then ought they to seek
their neighbors edification as their own, and to eschew the prejudging of
them. Hence Scandal is opposite to that charity and love, and also to that
respect which we ought to carry to our brother, Romans 14. v. 10, and 15. yea, it
is a scandal and offense as it is opposite to, and inconsistent with, love to
his spiritual wellbeing; and so, in a word, that which is apt to make him worse
in that respect, or that which may impede and hinder his spiritual growth and
advancement therein, is an offense and scandal, Romans 14. 21. And thus a scandal
differs from an injury: for, this hurts his person, name, or estate, or
some outward thing; that, again, hurts his spiritual condition, either by
wronging his liveliness, or activity, or comfort, etc. though the same thing
often, which is an injury, is an offense also, but not contrarily.

CHAP. III. Concerning the several ways that Offense may be given.
IT is hardly possible to show how many ways one may offend another, there
being so many, yea, so very many ways whereby men both wrong themselves and
others; yet, by considering the effects that offense given, has, or may have
upon others (although the effect follow not) and by considering that upon which
active offense works, and which usually is offended at in another, We may
draw them to some heads accordingly; As, 1. men may be drawn to some sinful
action upon such an occasion: thus an action materially lawful and good in it
self, becomes a scandal, when by our deed another is fostered in some sin, or
encouraged to commit it, as supposing himself to be strengthened therein by our
practice; Or when it may occasion others to go beyond our intent, or to do what
we do in another manner which may make it sinful: So, zeal inconsiderately
vented, may strengthen folks in passion; and thus eating in Idols temples
(which in it self was nothing) was scandalous when done publicly, because it
strengthened Idolaters to think somewhat of their ^ols, and made others who were
weak, to continue some respect to them, because they supposed such men, by such
a practice to do so; or made some judge them to have respect to Idols, and so
to be less in their esteem; or, caused others to eat with respect to the Idol,
when they themselves did it without it: Thus doubtful expressions in points of
Truth* and uncircumspectnesse in not abstaining from all appearance of evil, or
what does appear to be evil to such a person, and at such a time, etc. may be
offensive; as suppose one in their apparel, diet, or otherwise, should by
some be conceived to go beyond their station, and what is fit at such a time,
or be an occasion to some others indeed to exceed, when, without such
misconstructing beholders, there might be nothing offensive in the deed it
self; and thus the deed of one person may be offensive (supposing him to be
esteemed proud, covetous, unclean, etc.) which would not be so in another: So
also, a thing will be offensive to one, and not to another. Wherefore, in
reference to Offense, men would have an eye on themselves, and what generally
they are reputed to be, and so would abstain from the least appearance of what
is supposed to be predominant in them, as also they would have respect to
others that are present, or may be hearers or beholders, considering what are
their thoughts of them, or of such deeds, etc. and accordingly would carry,
although it were to abstain from such a place, apparel, diet, etc. which in
reason, abstractly from offense, might be pleaded for, as becoming. Thus one
walking abroad on the Sabbath, may be sanctifying it, yet by his example some
other may be provoked to vage and gad and cast off all duties of the day, and
to neglect what is called-for in secret, or in the family; in that respect, it
becomes offensive to go abroad, although it be lawful in it self to meditate
abroad in the fields, as well as in the house.

2. When a lawful act does breed or occasion misconstruction or rash judging
in an other, then it becomes offensive to him; As, 1. when it makes him think
the thing unlawful, which is lawful, that is, ( Romans 14. 16.) to make our
good to be evil spoken of: Or, 2. when it occasioneth our selves by that deed
to be condemned as untender and unconscientious in the performing of such an
act, that is, to make one judge his brother rashly, Romans 14. 10. 1 Cor. 10. 30.
Or, 3. when it occasioneth our profession, or the Gospel to be mistaken and
mis-judged, or godliness to be accounted fancy, hypocrisy, etc. Thus by the
indiscreet use of liberty, the Gospel was evil spoken of by some, as if it had
given way to loosnesse, for so those that were zealous for the Law did esteem
of it.

3. The effect of a Scandal, is to grieve and make heavy others; and so any
indifferent action which is apt to do that, is a scandal, as we may see, Romans
14. 15. because it marreth their spiritual comfort, weakneth them in love to
us, faints them in the doing of duty, at least marreth their cheerfulness in
it* etc. and so is against charity, and becomes a breach of the sixth Command,
Romans 14. 15. This is the notion that most ordinarily we use to take up offense
under, viz. when it may grieve some to hear that we have done such a thing,
when it may lessen their esteem of us, (and so much incapacitate us to be
profitable to them) or alienate them from us, etc.

4. We may try Scandal by our hazarding to disquiet the peace of our brother's
conscience: that is, when by our lawful deed we engage or virtually persuade
him to follow our example, supposing him to doubt of the lawfulness of that
practice, or to condemn the same. Thus, 1 Cor. 8. 10. one is emboldene^ to eat
of things offered to Idols, with respect to them, because he beholds another
that is more strong than he to do the same. And so by his eating, he gives
ground to his conscience afterward to chal^enge him, for which cause he that
gave the example, ^s said to wound his weak conscience. The like also is, Romans
14. 22, 23. in the case of doubting: for, supposing one to doubt whether such a
thing be lawful or not, merely by our example to go before him, is to put him
in that strait either to condemn our deed, or doubtingly to follow; for, the
mere example of no man can warrant any other to follow, or satisfy a
conscience in the lawfulness of such and such a deed. This also may be when a
weak man, having possibly done something in another manner, (and that lawfully)
than afterward he beholds one that is strong to do, (which also may be lawful
in it self) he is brought to look over his own practice, and to condemn the
same as sinful, merely because that other did it in another manner. For,
though indifferency in the manner of practices in lawful things, is sometimes
edifying, yet in such cases when they have not sufficient information joined
with them, they drive men on the extremities foresaid, and so become offensive,
especially then when such things are actually doubted of, or disputated in
their lawfulness.

5. Things become offensive when they prove obstructive to the edification of
others, and, as the word is, Romans 14. 21. do make them weak, or infirmeth them*
not only by fainting and weighting them, as is said before, but by confounding
them in the Truth or practices of Religion, whereby they are either shaken in
their former assurances, and so weakened, or made doubtful whether such things
be Duties and Truths, or not; or, by such and such things, are diverted from
the more necessary practices of Religion. This is the scope of Romans 14. ver. 1,
etc. and of other Scriptures elsewhere, whereby the Apostle Paul does guard
against doubtful disputations, which do not profit them that are occupied
therein, Heb. 13. 9. And thus, not only writing and reasoning for what is not
Truth, but writing and speaking of Truth in a new manner with new expressions
and multiplying moulds of these, or doing it unseasonably, passionatly,
contentiously etc. does prove offensive. Thus what is not actually edifying, is
offensive; and upon this account, Paul becomes all things to all, that he may
gain some, as in his circumcising of Timothy that he might have access to
edify the Jews, and such like; And thus often not condescending in indifferent
things to please others, does much incapacitate them to be edified by us, or
does give them prejudice at the way of the Gospel, whereby their edification is
obstructed and they offended.

6. An action becomes offensive when it stirs corruption, wakeneth passion,
or confirms jealousy and suspicion, etc. although that jealousy and
suspicion be groundless. Thus Paul's taking of wages in the Church of Corinth,
had been offensive, because it had confirmed the suspicion of his seeking of
himself amongst them, and would have strengthened his traducers in their
calumny, and given them occasion of venting their carnal cheerfulness and
insolency; And thus, when one is unjustly suspected of error or inclination
thereto, to dispute for such things, even when he disowneth them, to converse
with persons of that stamp, or such like* are offensive, and are to be shunned,
though it may be there would be no such construction put upon another doing so.

CHAP. IV. Concerning that upon which Offense works, or, the several ways by
which it is taken.
THe considering of the second thing, to wit, that upon which Offense works,
and by which it is taken, will clear this more: For, sometimes, 1. it affects
the weakness of understanding and light; So, it raises doubts,
misconstructions* etc. 2. Sometimes through that it affects the conscience;
whence comes judging and condemning of others, and their deeds, and the
awakening of challenges, etc. 3. Sometimes it stirs the affections, either
by awakening carnal joy, or carnal grief. 4. It affects corruption, when men,
from prejudice, are fretted or grieved upon such an occasion; Thus often deeds
become offensive, when they confirm men's jealousy* stir their pride,
emulation, etc. 5. A deed may have influence on some folks infirmity or
impotencie; So, some that are more given to passion, suspicion, or such like,
will be offended sooner than others, and some things will be offensive to them
that are not so in themselves. 6. Men as they are gracious may be offended;
for, though grace, as such, is not capable sinfully to take offense, yet
gracious persons may offend, or some actions may have an aptitude to offend a
gracious zealous person rather than another. Thus Peter's dissimulation might
be said to be offensive to Paul, Gal. 2. though more properly it was a scandal
to Barnabas, yet it grieved and stirred Paul, though in a sanctified manner he
did vent that which possibly some other gracious person might either have been
irritated with, or, out of respect to Peter, led away, as Barnabas was; when an
ungracious person would not have laid any weight on Peter's deed, as to any of
these, that is, either to follow it, or be grieved with it.

From what is said, it may be someway clear how an indifferent or lawful act
may become offensive, to wit, as it does, or is apt to work any of these
effects upon others, whether they be weak or strong, gracious or profane, and
whether conscience or corruption does rise at the offense that is taken: for,
as giving of offense, does imply uncharitableness and pride to be in the
giver, so that he neither loves nor regards his brother as he ought to do,
neither does in this as he would have others do unto himself; So offense taken,
does imply corruption and infirmity, (at the best) to be in him that takes it;
and therefore in this matter of offense, respect would be had to the infirmity
and corruption of others, as well as to their graciousnesse and affection. The
not observing of which, makes us take liberty in giving offense to many,
because we do either esteem them to be wicked and profane, or not affectionat
to us, or, at the best, weak; and therefore not much to be regarded whether
they be satisfied or not with our practices, which does evidently show, that
there is despising and uncharitableness in the heart, when there is this
regardlesnesse in our practice, as may be gathered from Romans 14. ver. 2, 10,
and 15.

CHAP. V. Concerning what ought to make men loath and wary as to the giving
Offense.
TO come now to consider those things which ought to make men tender in this,
we will find, first, that there is not any duty in the matter thereof more
commanded than this of giving no offense, nor any sin more condemned than
untendernesse in this, as we may find from the Epistles to the Romans,
Corinthians, etc. wherein whole chapters are spent on this subject: Yea, Act.
15. The Apostles and Elders thought the regulating of indifferent things for
preventing of scandal, worthy to be enacted in the first Synod and Council.
Secondly, There is no sin that has more woes pronounced against it, the Lord
Himself denounces and doubleth a woe against it, Matthew. 18. 7. and the Apostle
confirms it, Romans 14. 20, etc. Thirdly, The hatefulness of it may appear in
the rise thereof, it being, 1. an evident sign of dis-respect to God, and want
of the impression of His dread, 2. of inward pride and self-conceitednesse, 3.
of uncharitableness and regardlesnesse of others, and setting them at naught,
which may be gathered from Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8, and 10. and can there be any
thing more to be shunned than these? And upon this we will find, that men are
tender and conscientious in the matter of offense, and the use of their
christian liberty, as they are tender or untender in the material duties of
Religion toward God, and toward others. Fourthly, There can be no worse
effects than follow upon this, It brings a woe to the world, and is in
Christ's account a most grievous plague when abounding; for, it has
destruction with it to many souls, Romans 14. 20. It brings reproach upon the
profession of Christianity, cools love among brethren, begets and
fostereth contention and strife, marreth the progress of the Gospel, and, in a
word, makes iniquity to abound, and often, in particular, ushereth-in error
into the Church, which may be gathered from the places cited, and from Matthew.
24. 10, 11, 12. And we suppose when it is tried, it will be found, that
untendernesse in the matter of scandal, has been as prejudicial to the Church
of Christ in respect of her outward beauty and peace, and the inward thriving
of her members, as either error or prophanity, which have been but the product
of this. Fifthly, Untendernesse in this, opens a door to all untendernesse in
the person that gives offense, because by it the conscience becomes less
sensible of challenges, and so he has the greater boldness to do things that
are materially evil; by this also he becomes habitually regardlesse of others.
And although where respect to others is predominant, it be no good principle;
yet often has it great influence in restraining men from loosnesse, and in its
own place ought to have weight. And does not experience teach, that once
liberty being taken in this, even things materially sinful do often follow?
Sixthly, Tenderness in this adorneth the Gospel exceedingly, convinces those
we live among, entertaineth charity, and warmeth love, even as carelessness in
this does open men's mouths, and make both profession and professors a
reproach. Seventhly, Untendernesse as to offenses, strikes at the root of
Christian communion: there can be no freedom in admonitions, little in
conferences, and, it may be, no great fervor in prayers with* and for others,
where these abound; And is it possible that Religion can be well where these
are? And may it not from these appear why Christ has said, Woe to that man by
whom offenses come?

CHAP. VI. Holding forth the difficulty to lie mainly in practice, and showing
how far Offense ought to have influence on a Christian in his walk.
THe greatest difficulty is in reference to practice; (for Scandal cannot but
be accounted abominable) We shall therefore answer some Questions for the
clearing of this. 1. It may be questioned, How far offense ought to have
influence on a Christian in his walk? In answering of it, we would, I. consider
the matter in which offense may be given or taken. 2. The persons who may be
offended. For, some things in the matter are simply sinful, some things are
necessary duties; some things* again, are in themselves indifferent: So some
persons are gracious and tender, some are profane and malicious, etc. We
answer therefore in these Assertions,

1. For no offense whatsoever should men forbear a necessary duty, or commit
any thing which is materially sinful. Christ would need, go up to Jerusalem,
although His Disciples were displeased, and would continue in preaching the
Gospel, and in doing what was entrusted to Him, although the Pharisees were
offended, Matthew. 15. This is clear: For no evil should be done that good may
come of it. Romans 3.

2. Assert. Yet in other things there ought to be great respect had to offense,
and men ought to be swayed accordingly in their practice, as the former reasons
clear; As, first, If the matter be of light concernment in it self, as how men's
gestures are in their walking, (suppose in walking softly, or quickly, with
cloak or without) men ought to do, or abstain as may prevent the construction
of pride, lightness, etc. or give occasion to others in any of these; of such
sort are salutations in the very manner of them: of this sort was women's
praying with their head uncovered amongst the Corinthians, it being then taken
for an evil sign; yet, if it be necessary, there is nothing little, as Moses
will not leave an hoof, Exodus 10. nor Mordecai bow his knee to Haman, because
that it looked like fauning on an accursed enemy: Of this sort also are
offenses in the fashions of clothes, as some men's wearing of ribbands, and
such like, which being of small concernment, ought certainly to be regulated by
offense. Secondly, If it be indifferent, that is, in the matter thereof, such
as may be done, or forborne; as eating or not eating such a meat for such a
time, (for although no action is indifferent when it is done, because the
circumstances of end, motive and manner, do determine them either to be good or
bad, as they are agreeable or disagreeable to the Law when they are done, yet
some actions in themselves are such) in these actions a Christian ought to do
or abstain accordingly, as his doing or not doing may edify or give offense;
yea, in such things he may be for ever restrained, according to that word of
Paul's, 1 Cor. 8. 13. I had rather not eat flesh while the world stands, than
by my meat make my brother to offend. This is to become all things to all men
for their gaining, 1 Cor. 9. when our practice in such things is conformed to
others edification rather than our own inclination or light; And thus many
things, which we are persuaded are lawful, and that we desire to do, are to be
forborne out of conscience, conscience, I say, not our own, but of some others
that have not such clearness, as 1 Cor. 10. 28, 29. Thirdly, In positive
duties of worship and things that are necessary by affirmative precepts,
Scandal ought to have weight to time them so as not to give offense by them.
For, although a Scandal cannot make duty to be no duty for ever, yet it may for
a time suspend one from the exercise of a lawful duty, although not always:
Thus to give alms, is a commanded duty, yet if there be hazard that an indigent
person may abuse it, or others may take offense by that example either
ostentatively in a selfie way to give, or to account so of him that does give,
or such like, in that case giving of alms is for that time to be forborne,
except the persons strait make it necessary, or some other circumstance, and a
private way afterward is to be taken: So, preaching to a Minister, and hearing
to a professor, are commanded duties, Yet supposing that a particular man's
preaching at such a time, would stumble more than edify, it is to be forborne.
So in giving of admonitions, or in correcting of children, we are not to do
these when we, or others, are in passion, although they be duties, but to take
a fit time, l^st more hurt follow than advantage: That being a rule anent
affirmative precepts, that they bind continually (or semper) but not always to
the actual performing of them, (or ad semper) Thus a servant, or wife, or any
other person are bound to pray always, yet to do it then when the master,
husband, or family calleth-for some other thing necessary, would be an offense.
Fourthly, In necessary things, offense ought to have weight according to the
circumstantiat case, to sway one in the manner and circumstances of that
necessary duty; Thus, supposing it necessary to pray, a man is to choose the
place and posture of praying accordingly; Thus it is offensive in some cases to
pray so as we may be observed, because that looks hypocritical like, and is
condemned, Matthew. 6. Sometimes again, it is offensive not to be known to pray,
as was in Daniel's case, Dan. 6. because his not evidencing of it by opening of
his windows, had looked like his receding from his former piety, etc. And in
this respect, what is ofensive at one time, may be edifying at another, And
what is edifying now, may become offensive afterward upon another occasion, As
by Paul's circumcising of Timothy, and refusing to circumcise Titus, does
appear. So sometimes (suppose it when Nehemiah is standing before the King) to
kneel down to pray, would have been offensive; at other times for a man to pray
and not to kneel in his chamber, (as in Daniels case) may be offensive also.
And in this sort of offense, custom guides much in the indifferent
circumstances; and alteration in these, is often offensive. Fifthly, In our
particulars, in temporal things we ought rather to cede in what is our own,
than to offend others, and mar their spiritual good. Thus Christ condescended
to quit His privilege, Matthew. 17. 27. rather than to offend, And thus Paul
shunned the taking of wages in Corinth, although he had right thereto, and did
even then take from other Churches: The reason is, because the spiritual
edification of our brother is of more value than our temporal right; much more
is this to have influence in limiting and hedging us up from lawful pleasures
and contentments, or what our inclination and affection leads to, even though
it be lawful, if so be the following thereof may be an offense to any. It is
for this also that Paul, 1 Cor. 6. condemns their contentions going to Law
before Infidels* because of the scandal thereof, And why (says he) do ye not
rather suffer wrong? Our Lord also, as was just now hinted, went before us in
this, Matthew. 17. 27. when He paved Tribute, and in that ceded His own right,
lest He should offend; and it is like they were not of the most tender men.

3. Assert. We say that there is equal respect to be had to all kind of persons
in the giving of offense, if the matter be equal that is, we ought to shun the
offense of the weak as well as o^ the strong, of the profane as of the
gracious* etc. For, 1. the command is general, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Give no offense,
neither to ^ew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God, under which three, all
sorts of persons are comprehended. 2. As we ought not to sin in reference to
any person, so ought we not to give to any of them an occasion of sinning,
because that is never good. 3. I^ we look to the good or strong, as we ought
not to do any thing that is sinful to please them or abstain from any thing
that is necessary to prevent their offense; So ought we to do in reference to
the weak and profane. Thus Paul would not give the false teachers of Corinth
ground of stumbling more than the Church Members; And in this respect we are
debtors both to the Jews and Greeks, to the unwise as to the wise, To. 1. 14.
Yea, we are in indifferent things to become all things to all men, even to
those that are weak and without Law (though still we are to be under the Law)
that the more may be gained, 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21, etc.

CHAP. VII. Showing what the Scandal of the Pharisees or malicious is, and
clearing several other important Questions.
IF it be said, What then is it which is called the Scandal of the Pharisees or
the malicious, which ought not to be respected? We answer, 1. In constructing
any maliciously to take offense, there is great need of spiritualnesse, lest we
account men malicious because of some particular difference from us or some
other persons; even as from David's imprecations against his malicious enemies,
we would not draw an example for regulating of our prayers, in reference to our
enemies. 2. There is need also here to take heed what spirit we be of in our
accounting men to be such, as the Lord said to the Disciples, Luke 9. when they
pretended Elias example: for, to make a man malicious in taking offense in this
respect, so as not to be regarded. 1. It must be a necessary duty that he
offends at, even the best, as the Pharisees did at Christ's preaching of the
Gospel. 2. It must not be out of ignorance or weakness that this offense is
taken. 3. It must not arise from any personal or particular account, but from a
man's being isntrumental in furthering and advancing the Gospel, and so must
be very sib to the sin against the holy Ghost, and therefore ought not to be
pretended in our ordinary carriage.

If it be yet said, that they do not stand to offend What, when men stand not
to offend us?
us, therefore they are not to be regarded by us, when the thing we do is
lawful. Answ. This were to render evil for evil, whenas we should overcome
evil with good; and if it be a sin in them not to care for us in their
practices, can it be otherwise in us? and our meeting of them in their untender
way, is to harden them in it, and bring their blood on our own head, whereas
more tender dealing might edify them, and, as by heaping coals of fire upon
their heads, soften them and make them more pliable.

If it be asked further, what one is to do in such a What, when the matter is
lawful and the offense doubtful?
case when the matter is lawful and it be withal doubtful whether it can be
offensive or scandalous to any? Answ. 1. Beside the consideration of the thing,
we would also consider circumstances of time, person, occasion, etc. 2. We
would try what an action, so circumstantiated, has formerly been thought of in
the case of others in former times; Yea, 3. what use to be our own thoughts of
such actions in other persons, if we have not counted them offensive in them?
for often men more impartially judge, especially of what is offensive, in the
persons of others than in themselves. 4. The conscience would be reflected on
what it says; for often there is a murmuring in the conscience, which shows
its suspicion, that such a thing is offensive and hurtful, before it be acted,
which is yet often born down by the impetuousnesse of men's inclination. 5.
Others that may be more impartial, would be tried; yea, the thoughts of these
that we supposed to be the least tender of us are not to be neglected, for
often they are most impartial in judging what is offensive. These things may
have the more weight to sway one in their determination, because the trial
runs not to know what is duty, or lawful in it self, but whether or not
such a lawful practice may be done or forborne without wronging the spiritual
estate of any. 6. If it continue yet doubtful whether it be offensive or not,
the same rule is to be followed, as if it were doubted whether it were lawful
or not? to wit, It is to be abstained from, because as he that doubts of the
lawfulness of a thing, cannot do it in faith, because he knows not but it
may be sinful; So neither can he that doubts whether a lawful thing be
expedient or not, do it with persuasion, because he knows not but it may be
scandalous to some, and so cannot but be sinful to him. Lastly, pains would be
taken rightly to inform others, and to rectify them that they may not take
offense at things lawful in themselves.

If it be said, that sufficient pains have been taken What, if sufficient pains
have been taken to inform?
to inform them already, and that therefore their taking offense is
inexcusable. Answ. 1. Men would beware of making this an excuse, for many have
great ignorance and are not soon capable of instruction, others have prejudice
which is hardly rooted-out; Therefore I conceive it will not be easy to be
able to assert an exoneration in this case. 2. If the thing continue to be
indifferent (which is the matter concerning which the question is) there can be
no term set to it: It is the Apostle's word, 1 Cor. 8. 13. If meat make my
brother to offend* I will not eat flesh while the world stands. I^ the case
alter and the matter become necessary by some circumstances, as Daniel's
opening of his window did, then that which formerly was indifferent, becomes
necessary, and it would be offensive to omit it.

It may be further asked, What is to be done where What to be don when there is
a real (...) betw^xt p^r ti^, upon account of a civil interest?
there is a real difference betwixt parties, suppose for a civil interest? for*
a man, by seeking his own, may irritate another, and, Is there a necessity of
abstaining in that case? Answ. 1. There is no question but in some cases a man
is to cede in his particular right, rather than to give offense by a legal
pursuit, as when it may occasion the Gospel to be evil spoken of, and harden
corrupt men in their ha^ed of the same. On this ground, 1 Cor. 6. the Apostle
condemns their going to Law before infidel Judges, and does expressly say,
ver. 7. Why do ye not rather take the wrong? and suffer your selves to be
defrauded? And though the case now be not every way the same, yet we suppose
Christians ought to lay weight on this, l^st in their pursuits they give
occasion to make the professors of the Gospel to be accounted contentious,
covetous* etc. And therefore it would seem, that when they contend for civil
things, it would be for something of moment at least to the person, which also
is clearly, or may be made appear to be clearly theirs, and that after friendly
ways are essayed for attaining satisfaction. 2. We say, it ought to sway
Christians in their manner of pursuing differences, so as there be not heat,
passion* carnalnesse, overreaching and going beyond one another, nay nor the
appearance of these to be seen in their carriage, but still following a civil
difference, with respect to the spiritual good of the adversary, and that in
such a manner as may be convincingly evidencing thereof both to him and others.
3. We say, that these cautions being observed, this doctrine of Scandal will
not simply bind up a Christian from pursuing of a civil difference, because, in
some respect, it may be a necessary duty for a man to recover his own in a
legal way, as it is for a man to labor, and otherwise by lawful means to
provide for his Family: for which end God has appointed Judges and Magistrates
to hear complaints, and to rectify wrongs; and to hear complaints is a main
part of their duty, without which humane society would turn like to the fishes
of the sea, Hab. 1. Therefore we would distinguish here betwixt displeasing,
yea angering and offending, and would desire rather not to stumble than to
please; for there may be anger when there is no offense given, as suppose one
should fret because they get not their will vented unjustly on some other in
their ^rson or estate. In that case, their satisfaction is not their
edification, nor their displeasing their offense; So is it in this case, where
a man pursues his own in a due manner, there is no just ground of offense
given: because, 1. The thing it self is neither evil, nor has the appearance
of evil, but has an approbation from God who has appointed Magistrates for
that end to hear and redress wrongs, and cannot but be approven by others;
yea, the deed it self cannot but be approven in the conscience of him that is
offended, seeing it is taught to men by nature to keep themselve, from injury,
and it is not in things so clearly approven by God, and taught by nature, that
offense is given, but where the action is doubted in conscience to be
unlawful, at least* as so circumstantiat, which cannot be in this case. 2. It
is no offense to complain to a Church-judicatorie of one that offends, if it
be done in a right manner, though it anger him, because it is a legal allowed
way, Therefore neither is it so here. 3. To condemn this, were really to offend
many, even those, who from their covetous and malicious humor might clearly be
emboldned to wrong others; wherefore we see Paul and others do approve legal
defenses for preventing or remedying of hurt, though, no question, malicious
opposers were fretted therewith. Yet where two are Ministers, or eminent in
profession, we suppose there ought to be more warrinesse, because so
necessarily it is employed, that the one has the wrong side, which cannot but
offend.

It may be further moved, what is to be done when What, when the Commands of
Magistrates and Offense are in opposition?
there seems to be an opposition betwixt the command of a Superior, and the
eschewing of offense, so that we must either disobey him or give offense in
obeying, as suppose a Magistrate should command to preach upon some pretended
holy day: the thing is lawful upon the matter, but the doing of it is
offensive, either by grieving many, or strengthening others in the esteeming
somewhat of that day? Answ. In that case, the Scandal is still active and
given, and therefore no command or authority can warrant one in such a deed:
for, as these two worthy Divines ( Ames in his Cases of Conscience, lib. 5.
cap. 11. and Gillespie in his Dispute of Ceremonies, chap. 7. sect. 5.)
observe, no man can command either our charity or our consciences, or make up
the hazard of a given offense; and therefore none can command us warrantably to
hurt the spiritual good of our neighbor, that being contrary to the command of
love that God has laid on. And we may add, that an indifferent action, being
involved with offense, cannot but be in its practicing sinful as it is
complexly considered, and therefore cannot be the object of a Magistrates
command more than an action that is sinful in it self. On this ground, many of
the Saints in the last persecution, did choose rather to suffer Martyrdom, than
to be constructed to have ceded, or delivered the Bible, and therefore they
would not redeem their life by giving of any piece of paper at the command of
the Officers, lest thereby they should have been by others interpreted to have
given up their Bible. It is to be remembered that we spoke not of displeasing,
seeing by a Superiors command that may be done, but of Scandalizing, either by
strengthening somewhat that is wrong, ot seeming to do so, by wounding the
consciences of others, provoking them to judge us, or some such way: And if it
were not so, the three children* Dan. 3. might have escaped the furnace; for,
to fall down at the Kings command, was not simply sinful (and had they done
that, no more had been called for) but to fall down at such a time, in such
place, etc. had at least the appearance of evil, and therefore there was no
room left for obedience. And, no question, Ioabs resisting, and in part
neglecting of David's command for numbering of the People, was more approvable
than his obedience, yet was the thing lawful in it self; but considering it as
circumstantiat, it tended to foster David's pride, and to be subservient in that
which brought on wrath, Therefore was not to be obeyed to the confirming of him
in his sin. The same also may be said, when doing something that is offensive
may seem a way to prevent a cross; for, active offense being ever sinful in
respect of the complex case, it is not to be allowed whatever peril follow, as
we may see in Daniels case who would not stumble others by shutting of his
window, although it hazarded his own life, and the welfare of the (...): And in
this case Paul says, that it were better for him to die than that any should
make his glorying void, or make him an occasion for others to stumble upon, 1
Cor. 9. 15. etc.

It may be said, that sometimes the case is so stated, What is t^ be done in a
case when offense is like to follow on either side.
that whatever be done there will be offense, as if Paul take wages, he is
called a self-seeker, that is, one that makes gain of preaching the Gospel, if
he forbear, it is said he loves not the Corinthians, and therefore he takes
not from them; again, some weak Jews are ready to stumble, and not receive the
Gospel if he circumcise not Timothy; others again, are ready to take advantage
and to plead the necessity of the ceremonial Law if he circumcise Titus: It
may be asked, what is to be done in such cases? In reference to which we
answer, 1. That we would ever look* what is most expedient as to edification,
it is like it did displease Peter and the Jews more that he did not circumcise
Titus, and the false Apostles that he did not take wages, than if he had done
it, yet he did what was most edifying, and of it self aptest to further their
spiritual good; and a spiritual discerner will readily find what is most
edifying in it self, or in that case, which is to be followed, although it may
be most displeasing. 2. Respect would be had to these that are most unbyassed;
prejudice possessed the Jews and these corrupt Teachers, and therefore whatever
Paul did they stumbled at it; but it is like he had respect to others, and did
what might most wipe away the calumnies that were cast upon him and the Gospel
by these false Apostles. 3. In such a case, a man would look to what is most
denied like, and it is ever safest to sway to that hand, as suppose a man were
in hazard upon one side to be thought negligent, if he be not painful, and
even someway rigorous in his dealings with men, as on the other side, covetous,
if he be but painful. It is safest to hazard upon diligence without rigidity,
although it should occasion him to be accounted negligent: Because there is
least selfinesse on that side, and that has least to commend it unto men's
corruptions. Thus Paul rather hazardeth upon what might follow upon his
refusing to take wages than to take them, because taking is of it self more apt
to give offense than refusing, and does not look so single like, and there is
not so easy access to vindicat that against clamorous mouths. 4. When the
offense seems to follow both from omitting and committing, Paul chooses
often to commend forbearance, as in the cases of forbearing to eat meats, and
to take wages, at least, in Corinth, seeing he was otherwise supplied. So, when
there is hazard of being accounted proud on the one side, if men take so and so
on them, or live in such and such a rank, on the other side, they may be
accounted silly, and of no spirit, if they be short of that; it is yet safest
to eschew what may look like ostentation, because the tentation of self-seeking
lies nearest that. 5. The present state of the time, and the temper of those
we live among, would be observed; as sometimes folks are ready to count an
indifferent thing necessary, then it is to be abstained from; Therefore Paul
would not circumcise Titus: Sometimes again, the omitting of an indifferent
thing may seem to import the condemning of some necessary duty, and therefore
Daniel will not forbear his ordinary circumstances in prayer: thus it is to be
observed, to what side (to speak so) the tide of offense does run, and that is
to be shuned. 6. The nature of the persons is to be observed, which we have to
do with in the mentioned case. Some are weak, So condescending edifieth them,
and grieving of them might stumble them at the Gospel; others are perverse, and
condescending to them, strengthens them in their opposition, and so proves a
stumbling to them. Upon this ground, circumcising of Timothy to the weak at one
time is edifying, and forbearing thereof had been a stumbling block: at an
other time, and to other persons circumcising had been an offense, as in the
case of Titus instanced; and Paul's refusing to circumcise him, was not that he
regarded not their stumbling, but that he knew the circumcising of him would
puff them up and strengthen them, and so stumble them indeed, therefore he
would not do it. What, when doing will offend the weak and tender, and irritate
the perverse, and contra.


If it be asked, what if the case stand so stated, that doing will offend the
weak and tender, no doing will displease and irritate the perverse? as suppose
in the case of eating things sacrificed to Idols; or contrarily doing offends
the gross, and no doing the tender, what is to be done in such a case? Answ.
As there is never a necessity of sinning, so there is never a necessity that
one should fall in an active offense, the offense therefore upon the one side
must be taken, and that is not to be regarded in comparison of the other. As
suppose in some cases the weak be really offended, and the perverse are but
irritated, in that case their irritation is not to be stood upon: for often
they are really edified when they are dissatisfied, as in the instance
proposed; eating of things sacrificed to Idols, was really offensive to the
Godly, as being ready to draw them to sin, but though it might possibly
displease others that the Believers did not eat with them, yet was there
nothing in that deed of it self apt to stumble them, and induce them to sin;
Again, sometimes the Godly are displeased, and the perverse and profane are
really stumbled, as when Paul refused to circumcise Titus, it is like his not
doing thereof did really displease many godly Jews that were zealous in the
Law, yet his doing of that had really been a stumbling to many corrupt Teachers
who did teach the necessity of circumcision, and would have been confirmed by
that practice. Therefore Paul will rather displease the godly Jews than stumble
the profane Teachers by a deed which had also been a real stumbling unto the
Jews. This then is the first rule, to wit, that we would look well upon what
side the active offense lies, and upon what side the displeasure only, and to
choose the eschewing of offense, who ever be displeased. 2. When the thing is
in it self indifferent to be done, or not to be done, it is safest to forbear
whoever be displeased* as we see in the instances given, Paul inclines still
to forbearance, he forbore to eat flesh, and to circumcise Titus, and to take
wages, etc. when the case is so stated, because whoever be displeased, that is
not of it self so inductive to sin, as doing is, Which either does strengthen
others to do doubtingly upon our example, or to judge us for doing what they
account sinful, or some such like. Indeed, in some cases where there is no
hazard of Offending by doing, we may do what is indifferent to prevent the
irritating of any, that so there may be the greater access to edify them: And
therefore, Act. 16. 2. Paul will circumcise Timothy, lest he make himself
ungracious to the Jews in those parts; yet, had there been any there to take
advantage from that to confirm their error, he had not done it, as in the
other instance of Titus does appear; for so it had not been an offense, but
somewhat which was displeasing to those Jews. Yet, 3. supposing it to be so,
that neither have ground, but both may be displeased, Then the tender are to be
respected, and the preventing their offense is to be preferred. 1. Because they
are displeased out of conscience, and that is wounded; others are but irritat
in respect of some lust, and so it is displeasure simply to them, but it is
offense to the other, because on a ground of conscience they are displeased. 2.
The Lord is most tender in the grieving, or not grieving of the godly (as is
clear, Matthew. 18*) Therefore ought we to be so also. Hence the Prophet
professes, 2 Kin. 3. 14. that had it not been respect to Iehosaphat, he had
not stood much on the displeasing of others; or, suppose some profane person
should be displeased, because a man does not drink so much, (although it be not
inconsistent with moderation) and suppose some tender person should think his
drinking thereof inconsistent with sobriety, I say, in that case he should
respect the last, because this offense does flow from a ground of conscience.
Lastly, it would be looked to in such a case, what may be most in the upshot or
event for edification, supposing there should be involvements on all hands; for
some things being compared may be better discerned, than when they are
abstractly considered in themselves; Now, edification and offense do never lie
upon one side: therefore if it be found that such a thing comparatively be
edifying, it is to be done, and what seems to oppose it, is not to be
accounted offense.

CHAP. VIII. Holding forth what is called-for when Offenses abound.
IT may be profitable to enquire what is called for from a Christian living in
the time when offenses abound, and when there is too great a readiness both to
give and take offense? Answ. It is hardly possible to condescend on all
particulars here; yet because the thing is useful, and the Scripture is full
in reference to this matter, in the fourteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, and in both the Epistles to the Corinthians, and elsewhere, We may
hazard to propose these general directions.

1. A man would not only respect his own clearness in conscience as to the
lawfulness of a deed, but would even have respect to the satisfaction of the
consciences of others, as it is, 1 Cor. 10. 29. The neglect of this casts a
door open to many evils; and did this abound, that men were burning with any
offense taken by others, as was Paul's case, 2 Cor. 11. 29. there would be fewer
offenses given. It ought to affect us, as it were a pang or stound at our
hearts, to hear or see of any that are offended. This is a principal remedy
from an inward sympathy to study this, and there will be directions furnished
where that touch is, Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I
burn not? Sooner would we put our head in the fire than hazard to offend any,
if this were.

2. As men would be careful not to give offense, so also not to take offense,
or to stumble even when blocks are cast in the way. It is a piece of our folly
sometimes to be exclaiming against the frequencie of offenses and the givers of
them, and yet not to be adverting, but to be stumbling at these our selves;
either by waxing cold in our love to the Godly, or faint in duties, or ready to
take liberty to speak and to judge of others, even of their state that we
offend at, or passionately to be irritate to some carnal revenge, etc. for,
seldom are many offenses given actively, but many also are offended passively,
as Matthew. 24. 10. and at such time, they are blessed who are not offended in
Christ, it being both a good thing, and a rare thing in such a case, Matthew. 11.
6. for, as it is in carnal contests, often an^ ill reply brings on more
sinful contention; so it is here: And offense taken by one, leads him to
give another, as the result of that, whereas were it our care not to stumble
our selves, we might be kept from giving occasion of that to others, and
brook much more peace, as it is, Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they who love
thy Law: and nothing shall offend them. Sometimes, again, the falls of others
are matter of mocking and mirth, and we are puffed up because of that, as if
there were not such corruptions in us: This was the Corinthians fault, 1 Cor.
5. 2. and many other ways are there of stumbling, and O but watchfulness is
necessary when folks walk thus in the midst of snares* and are so ready to fall
either upon one hand or another!

3. Folks would beware of despising or judging one another, but would ^y all
means endeavor the entertaining and confirming of love* which is in this
respect the bond of perfection. The Apostle gives this direction, Romans 14. 3.
Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats. He that eats is the strong professor, who
is through in the knowledge of what is right and what is wrong; It is the fault
of such readily to condemn and despise the weaker who cannot go along with
them. Again, he that eats not, is the weak, who, wanting clearness in what
the other is clear of, is ready to judge the other as an untender person,
because he does what he cannot do. These evils are rise where offenses abound,
and are the oil which nourishes them: for, if there were not pride and
despising in some, and untendernesse and rash judging and jealousies in others
that are weak, the plague that follows offenses would not be so great in the
world. But these two are most directly opposite to the rule of charity that
ought to be amongst Christians, both in guiding us in doing of our own acts,
and in constructing and judging of the actions of others. And, in a word, love,
that i^ the fulfilling of the Law, is the fulfilling of this precept also. See
1 Ioh. 2. 10. He that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is
none occasion of stumbling in him. Offenses could neither be given not taken if
love to our brethren were fresh.

4. We would beware of moving or fostering needless and perplexed disputings,
these have ever proved exceeding hurtful to the Church, and proportionally
wronged edification, as error and prophanity have done. It is the Apostle's
first direction, Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak receive, but not to doubtful
disputations; for such breed strife, and often waken carnalnesse in the
contenders rather than pure zeal. And in this case, it is better for some to
possess clearness in their own judgment, and to condescend in their practice
to others, than by venting their judgment unseasonably, to confound others,
that is the meaning of the word, Romans 14. 22. Have thou faith? that is,
clearness in such a particular, have it to thy self, that is, make your own
private use of it without troubling others with the same. And we will see, that
this spirit of contention, and the abounding of offenses, have ever been
together in the Church. For certainly such contentions cannot but obstruct the
growth of the weak, and grieve the strong, and stumble all. We conceive
therefore, that at such a time it were more safe to abstain the wakening of new
debates, raising of old, or using of new expressions, than to hazard upon the
offense which may follow upon men's mistaking of them, or taking advantage by
them, which will be more hurtful than any advantage they can bring. We conceive
also that it were fitter to overlook some mistakes in some Writings at such a
time, than unnecessarily to table a debate on every thing that seems
dissatisfying in the writings and expressions of others, which is become too
common, and by this, professed enemies are let alone and have peace, and all
the debates in the Church, are almost amongst men that agree in fundamentals,
because of some lesser differences.

5. There would be an abstinence from things that are controverted either in
doctrine or practice, if they be not necessary things* As we see the Apostle
does in the Epistles to the Romans and Corinthians. The reason is, because it
is the strong who are clear to do, and it is the weak who are doubtful. Now, it
is more just and safe, that the strong should condescend to the weak, because
that is within their reach, than that the weak should be driven up to the
strong, which were to overdrive them.

6. At such a time folks would be much in the study and practice of the more
necessary and material things, which come nearer the life and power of
godliness. We see, when offenses abounded in the primitive times, the Apostle
withdraws them from too much seriousness in more circumstantiall things, to
the working-out of their salvation in fear and trembling, Philip. 2. 12. for,
experience tells us, that offenses rise most, yea cannot rise, but in things
which may be done or forborne, as in eating, and such other things as troubled
the primitive Church. We see also, that where there is most heat in these
things, there is an overvaluing of them, and an undervaluing of faith,
repentance, prayer, communion with God, etc. Hence it is, ( Romans 14. 17.) that
the Apostle corrects this fault, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven (which is the
Gospel in its power) does not consist in meat and drink, that is, in the eating
of, or abstaining from, such meats as were then disputable, much less in the
disputes that were concerning them; but it consists in righteousness, peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost, that is, in material duties. Therefore he adds,
that he that serves God in these (that is, righteousness and peace and the
more material things) is accepted of God, and approved of men.* Which shows,
that they placed too much of religion in these extrinsick things, and in the
mean time slighted the main. For, in necessary things there is no hazard of
offending, and few usually offend at these.

7. At such a time great care would be had to entertain peace, even public
Church-peace, and respect to the Ordinances, particularly to that of
Discipline, because that is the proper remedy for removing offenses, Matthew. 18.
17. and without unity this has no weight. Also offenses of their own nature
tend to make rents, and where unity is preserved many are kept on their feet
which otherwise would have fallen. Therefore, Romans 14. 19. that direction is
given* Let us follow those things which make for peace, and things wherewith
one may edify another. And often union and edification are joined together,
which shows, that it must be a great restraint to offenses, which are so
opposite to edification.

8. When offenses abound, it is often most safe to be least appearing, except a
man's call be the more clear and convincing: For, as in the multitude of words
there wants not sin, So in much meddling there wants not offense. This is
also clear in experience, because offenses come more ordinarily, and are more
observed when something is done, than when something is forborne. Yet this is
not to be extended to the omission of any necessary duty, but is to have great
weight in indifferent things, that are not necessary, specially such as for the
time are most ordinarily the stone of stumbling. Hence we find, that though in
some questions the Apostle is full to dispute down adversaries, as in the case
of Justification; Yet there are some other things that he seeks rather to
have restrained than moved, such as he calls doubtful, Romans 14. 1. endless,
1 Timothy 1. 4. that gender strife, and are not edifying, but foolish and
unlearned questions, 2 Timothy 2. 14, 16, 23. men are to flee, and to shun these,
even when occasion is given. For, though every question has a truth upon one
side, and the searching into necessary truths be edifying, yet as to such,
considering the contention that waits on them, and the difficulties that are
about them, the Church gains more by silence in them, than by too fervent
pursuing of them.

9. Men at such a time would be diligent in the duties of their stations, and
keep themselves within these; and, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7. 20. would
abide in the calling wherein they are called: for, by so doing there is no
occasion of offense. When a Magistrate holds in the duties of a Magistrate,
and Ministers, Masters, Servants, Husbands and Wives, and so all sorts contain
themselves within the bounds of their respective stations, that is a thing
offensive to none; But when they exceed or give occasion to others to think
that they exceed, then it becomes offensive, and makes the Gospel to be
evilspoken of. For which cause, the Apostle commends to Subjects, Wives,
Servants, and all sorts, the doing of the duties of their respective stations*
as that which does adorn the Gospel, and stop the mouths of gainsayers.

10. There would be mutual faithfulness, and a condescending upon their side
who are offended, freely and soberly to admonish those by whom they are
offended; and upon the otherside, a condescending to satisfy and remove any
offense* taken by those who have given it, or at whom it is taken. This is our
Lord's rule, Matthew. 18. 15. etc. There is nothing more needful, when offenses
abound, than these, and yet often there is little or no access to them, or
practice of them when they are most needful, And this makes offenses to
abound the more. And what thing is more unsuitable than for one to take or keep
offense at another, and yet never to endeavor his recovery who has offended,
and by so doing to hazard both their souls? Or, when one has given offense,
and is admonished, to refuse to come out himself, or to keep another out of
this snare?

11. This endeavoring to have offense removed, ought to be followed
convincingly, and that in the several steps laid down, Matthew. 18. and if private
reasoning and admonition prevail not, it is to proceed further till it come to
the Church. But because the Scandal then becomes public, we shall speak of it
in the next branch. Only now it is to be adverted concerning these offenses in
reference to which we are to admonish our brother, and thus to follow them in
case of sleighting* 1. They are not only wrongs done to the person immediately
or directly, but it may be his being stumbled at his seeing a man's miscarriages
toward others, So the injury may be to one, but the offense to another. 2.
This duty is to be gone about, not only without all heat, prejudice, or
contention, but with the spirit of love, as a duty proceeding there from for
his good, even from that same spirit by which we pray for him, they being both
equally necessary duties. And, 3. That this Order of Christ's is not to be
interverted by any, nor the public gone to, till the private ^ay be
effectually essayed.

12. There is a necessity in every thing (especially at such a time) to be
single in our end, having the glory of God mainly in our eye. And that not only
for our own peace, but also for the conviction of others. It is often our
unsinglenesse that makes us careless in giving offense, and also the evidence
or appearance of that, that makes others readily to take offense at our
carriage. Hence we see, that the actions of such who are supposed to be single,
are not so readily stumbled at. And this direction is expressly laid down in
reference to this end, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or ye drink, or
whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God: give none offense neither to Jew
nor Gentile, etc. It were fit therefore at such a time, that a man should
examine his own breast, and try what leads him on such a design, or act; for
often by-ends and motives will steal in, when we seem to our selves to be most
servently zealous: self-interests had need to be much denied in such a time.

13. Much care would be had to keep up the authority of all Christ's
Ordinances; they are the lights and means whereby men are to be directed, lest
they stumble, and to be strengthened and comforted in their spiritual
consolations: and hardly offenses arise, but the Devil seeks to discredit
these, because then men are in the dark, and so cannot but fall when blocks are
in their way. Hence often are the Ordinances of life the very pretended rise of
offenses, as concerning a Ministry, Baptism, the Lords Supper, Sabbath Day,
Singing of Psalms, Constitution of a Church, Discipline, etc. because by making
these to be stumbled at, or stones of stumbling, men can have access to no
other means, either for direction or consolation. On this ground Paul
endeavors so much to vindicate himself from what was imputed to him, 2 Cor.
12. 19. And for this end so many directions are given for keeping up the credit
of the ordinances in the most difficult dark cases, as Song 1. 8. Ephesians. 4. 12*
13. Heb. 13. 7, 8, etc. and 17. especially Mat. 18. 17, 18, etc. And on the
contrary, for eschewing corrupt teachers, and those who cause divisions and
offense contrary to the doctrine learned, etc. Romans 16. 17. Then it is a time
to try the spirits, and to fear snares, and to hate every garment that is
spotted with the flesh; and we find in Scripture, and experience that ever
these two go together, to wit, shunning of those who bring false doctrine, and
the adhering to those who are faithful on the other side.

14. At such a time especially, Christians in their walk toward one another,
ought to be of a sympathizing and condescending temper. This is to bear the
infirmities, of the weak, and not to please our selves, but our neighbor for
his good to edification, even as Christ pleased not himself, etc. as the
Apostle has it to the same scope, Romans 15. 1, 2, 3. Tenaciousnesse and
self-willednesse do often breed offenses, and continually stand in the way of
removing of them, and although there is nothing more ordinary in a time of
offenses than that, to wit, for men to stand to their own judgment and opinion
as if it were a piece of liberty and conscience, not to condescend in a thing
that we judge lawful, yet is there nothing more unsuitable for Christians in
such a time: for, as Solomon says, Only by pride comes contention, Prove. 13.
10. So this self-pleasing humor is the great fomenter of offenses in the
Church. This condescending was Paul's practice in this case, 1 Corinthians. 9. ver.
19, 20, etc. who became all things to all men, for their edification, being in
the use of indifferent things so dependent upon the edification of others, and
so denied to his own pleasing and inclination; yea, even to his own light, as
if he had had none himself. And although this be incumbent to all Christians,
yet these who are more eminent and strong, are especially called to this
forbearance and condescending, as i^ is Romans 15. 1. We then that are strong
ought to bear* etc* Gal. 6. 1, 2. It is a great mistake in Religion, to think,
that in indifferent circumstantiall things, the weak should follow the strong,
and upon that ground to undervalue the offending of them: It is quite contrary
to Scripture, the strong are to carry to the weak as men do to brittle and weak
vessels, using tenderness to them lest they be crushed. What is said in all
the directions, does therefore specially concern the more strong Believers,
that in these they may go before others.

CHAP. IX. Holding forth what ought to be the carriage of Ministers when
Offenses abound.
15. THe last direction is, That then Ministers in a special manner, are
called to bestir themselves for draining this torrent of Offenses, even as they
are to set themselves against the abounding of sins. And indeed we know no mean
fitter and more comprehensive for this end, than that Ministers cordially
interpose for the removing thereof. For, this is a special end for which they
are given to the Church, as was formerly said, and this is a special part of
their charge, to watch over souls in reference to this. Hence we see, that the
Apostle Paul does not insist more in his public doctrine, or in his private
carriage, upon any thing, than upon this, to wit, That the Church may be made
and kept free of offenses, as what has been observed from him out of the
Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, etc. does evince. Nor does he
with any kind of persons deal so much to restrain strifes, contentions,
janglings about words, and such things which do gender offenses, as in the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, charging them, that not only in refere^ce to
their own carriage, but, as Ministers of the Gospel, they would endeavor this
in their charges; and there can be no reason of this, but because the matter is
of such concernment to the Church, and because they by their stations have a
main influence either on the restraint or growth of scandals and offenses. Yea,
does not the blessed Prince of Pastors Himself, often take notice of offenses
in His sermons? sometimes reproving them, sometimes showing the ill of them,
and often purposly insisting in instructions for this very end, that His
Disciples should not be offended, as Ioh. 16. 1. and in His practice,
condescending to prevent the offense, even of carnal men, Matthew. 17. 27. and
does much insist on that doctrine, giving directions for preventing and
removing thereof, Matthew. 18. and particularly He gives direction for the
promoving of mortification, by cutting off the right hand, and plucking out the
right eye, etc. which being given by the Lord, if well studied and practiced,
might be a compend of all other directions, it is so well chosen for that
purpose, as all His directions were. All which shows, that when offenses
abound, much does ly upon Ministers at such a time, and that both in reference
to their own personal carriage, and also in their ministerial stations; and
in sum, in their whole walk, both amongst themselves, and toward others of all
sorts, which we may hint at in some particular instances: As, 1. that their
conversations be then grave, sober, holy, denied, etc. and eminent in all that
is called for from private Christians, at such a time. For, as their carriages
are more observed than others, So do spots upon them more discernably appear,
and when appearing, are more ready to stumble and harden others. It is for
this, that a Minister is to show himself a pattern and as a copy or example to
the Believer, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, etc. as it is, 1 Timothy 4. 12. Upon this ground also are they at such a time to flee youthful
lusts of contentions, strife, and such like, even when these seem to follow
them; and on the contrary, to pursue righteousness, faith, charity, peace,
etc. even when these seem to flee from them, as it is, 2 Timothy 2. 22. Both which
places relate especially to perrillous times, as the scope in the preceding
words does hold forth. And if this be not in Ministers, what can be expected
amongst the people? and without this, can their carriage or public Ministry
have weight to this end? 2. Ministers would be watchful, not only over sins,
but even over offenses, yea, even over passive offenses, lest any by
themselves, or any other be offended, which was our Lords way and the practice
of the Apostles, as in the places cited. For, to be offended, is an infirmity
and sickness, even when the offense is merely taken; and for a Minister not to
be affected with that, does hold forth a most unministeriall cru^ll
disposition; that is spoken of by the Apostle as a great part of the care of
the Church, 2 Corinthians. 11. 28, 29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is
offended, and I burn you? The hearing of a persons stumbling, ought to stound
and will stound the heart of a sympathizing Minister, as if it were a fire in
his bosom. And were this one thing in vigor, to wit, native sympathy with
those that are offended, it would usher-in all other directions: This would
make Ministers pray much to have it prevented, as our Lord does, Ioh. 17* and
Paul does, Romans 15. 5. This would make Ministers sparing to give offense, or to
laugh at the offenses of others, or to despise and slight those that are
offended, much less to spread rumors, entertain contentions, or so to aggrege
miscarriages in others, as thereby the flood of offenses may rather be
increased than dried up by them. And it is found, that seldom offenses have
been in the Church, but Ministers have had a prime hand therein, as if it had
been a part of their duty to promove the same: which says, that especially
they had need to be watchful at such a time. 3. Ministers would endeavor much
unity amongst themselves, and unity amongst Professors. There is no keeping
off of offenses without this; for strife and contention are the fuel by which
this plague of scandal is kindled and entertained, when offenses are abounding
in Corinth: it is the first direction that Paul gives, 1 Epist. 1 chap. ver.
10. I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same things, that there be no divisions among you, etc. And when he
has been large in two Epistles, he does almost close with this, 2 Epist. chap.
13. 11. Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace; and the God of peace shall be with you. And he not only
exhorts to it, But, Romans 15. 5. he prays for it upon the back of all his
doctrine and directions concerning offenses; Yea, it was the way that our
blessed Lord Jesus took, to commend union, and to pray for it to His Disciples,
lest thereby the world should be stumbled and kept back from the
acknowledging of Him, and the beauty of the Church should be obscured, so as
the members thereof should not be known to be His Disciples, as may be at
length seen in the Gospel, and particularly, Ioh. 17. 4. Ministers would study
the diverting of people from these things which ordinarily breed offenses, as
striving about words, and jangling in controversies not material, the judging
and condemning of others, and such like; and they would study to be occupied
themselves, and to have others exercised in these things that come nearer the
power of Godliness and the life of Religion. We see when the rest of the
Disciples offend at Zebedee's children for their suit, the Lord checks that,
and proposes to them the necessity of humility and mortification, and such
like, that he might put the unprofitable question, ( who should be greatest?)
out of their head, as it is in Matthew. chap. 18. 1, etc. and chap. 20. ver. 20,
and 25, etc. And this is frequent in Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus,
whereas upon the one side, he dehorteth from strife, contention, vain jangling,
following of fables, and such like, So he does, upon the other side, exhort to
the exercise of godliness, and to the pressing of good works, as good and
profitable to men in opposition to these, as may be gathered from 1 Timothy chap.
1. ver. 4. 5. and chap. 4. ver. 7, 8. 2 Timothy chap. 2. ver. 14. 15, etc. Titus
3. ver. 8. 9. Yea, the Apostle will have Ministers so serious in this, as to
charge and obtest their hearers (as he did his, 1 Corinthians. 1. 10. and Phil. 2.
1.) to eschew these things, and not to strive about words, 1 Timothy 1. 3. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 14, etc. Especially Ministers would beware of mentioning such things
unnecessarily, as are the bone of contention, or which may foster mistakes of,
or grudges against, others, or make themselves to appear to be carnal, and to
walk like men, But rather they would endeavor to hush them to silence, as they
would have blocks removed out of the peoples way, otherwise they cannot but
lose of their ministerial authority, and discompose the frame of the people,
which by all means should be e^chewed by them.

The considering of three Scriptures will give a view of Paul's carriage in
reference to this, And O how commendable is it! The first is, 1 Corinthians. 9. 19,
20. 21, 22, etc. Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant
unto all, that I might gain the more. And unto the Jews, I became as a Jew,
that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as under the Law,
that I might gain them that are under the Law; to them that are without Law, as
without Law, (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ) that I
might gain them that are without Law. To the weak became I as weak, that I
might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means
save some. Where, his condescending to others, his insinuating by all means to
win the affection of people, his greediness to edify and save souls, and his
endeavoring by his own example to engage others to that same condescending
way, are abundantly holden forth as an useful and excellent copy to be
followed especially by Ministers, who should study edification at such a time
most seriously.

The second is, 2 Corinthians. 6. from ver. 1. to ver. 11. It is a great word that
he has ver. 3. Giving no offense in any thing, that the ministry be not
blamed: (for untendernesse in offenses makes the Ministry obnoxious to
contempt) But in all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God; that
points out a ministerial walk which studieth more the Masters honor, the
credit of the Ordinances, and the good of souls, both his own and others, than
the pleasing of others, and the making themselves acceptable only a^ men, or as
familiar companions to those they converse with. Then follows, In much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in (...), in labors, in watchings, in fastings, By pureness,
by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the holy Ghost, by love
unfeigned, By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of
righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left; By honor and dishonor, by
evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet true; As unknown, and yet
well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed; As
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having
nothing, and yet possessing all things. Wherein, as in so many steps, he
sets forth his ministerial walk, for the preventing of offense, being a most
excellent description of a patient, diligent, faithful, denied, impartial,
single, powerful preacher, driving and pressing the great design of
Reconciliation, as his main scope, as from the close of the former Chapter, and
the beginning of this, is clear. And this is pointed out as his work at such a
time, amongst such a people for such an end, as the preventing of offense.

The third Scripture is* 2 Corinthians. chap. 11. ver. 28, 29. which was formerly
cited, and is worthy to be engraven on a Ministers heart. Beside that which
comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches. Who is weak, and I am not
weak? who is offended, and I burn not? Never man was more serious in quenching
fire in his house than Paul was in removing of offenses, and in recovering such
as were offended. He was not only careful not to give offense himself, nor
only to keep others from giving offense, nor yet only for removing of such as
were taken at himself; nay, nor only to satisfy those that were strong that
had offended, but the very stumbling, although without cause, of the most weak,
ignorant, silly persons, affected him more, than if it had peirced himself. It
is not like that he could have continued careless of men's constructions of
him, of their being grieved and made weak, or of their being offended any other
way, (as, alas, it is like too many do now!) It was no matter of laughing to
him to hear of the sadness of any, that did proceed even from mistakes; and
there was no rest in his mind till such an infirmity was cured. These three
places and others, being soberly considered in their matter and scope, will
give the serious conscientious Minister insight in a great part of his duty,
and (it may be) in no little part of his sin and challenge at such a time. The
Notes also of the Reverend Master Dickson upon the same subject, (worthy to be
taken notice of) do more fully confirm this. Happy were the Ministers that were
of such a frame and of such a practice; And happy were the Church under their
inspection. O that it may once thus be!

PART II. Concerning Public Scandals, or Scandals as they are the object of
Church Censures; and more particularly, as they are practical, or, in practice.
IT rests now that we should speak something of Scandal as it is the object
of Church Discipline; for that is employed here, to wit, That this scandal,
given by the Nicolaitans, was such as ought to have been taken notice of by the
Church Officers: for, the neglect thereof is reproved by the Lord; and in such
a case private admonitions are not sufficient. We may therefore speak a word to
these Questions, 1. When a Scandal is to be esteemed public, that is, to be
taken notice of by a Church-judicatory. 2. What Order is to be observed in
proceeding therein. 3. What is to be accounted a sufficient ground for removing
of such an offense, so as it may ^ist all ecclesiastic Process, or may remove
a Sentence when it is passed. 4. What is the duty of private Christians, when
Church Officers seem to be, and possibly indeed are, defective in reference to
this?

CHAP. I. Showing that every Offense is not public, and when it is so.
COncerning the first Question, we lay down these grounds, 1. Every thing
offensive is not public, or immediately to be brought before a
Church-judicatory. Of this sort are, 1. sins of infirmity, which possibly may
be offensive for the time, Yet the persons way being considered, they are to be
thought to proceed from his infirmity, they being incident to such who are in
some serious manner watchful over their way; and therefore are not the object
of Discipline, which is to curb and restrain the more gross humors of
Professors: Otherwise the exercise of Discipline, in reference to infirmities,
would utterly prove an intanglement both to Officers and Members, and so
occasion more stumbling, contrary to Christ's scope. 2. Offenses that are in
disputable practices, or that flow from miscarriage in things indifferent, are
not properly the object of Church-censure, because there is not solid access
of through convincing the party. Hence we see, that in these disputes
concerning indifferent things, or of practices following thereupon, the
Apostles reprove men's untendernesse in them, but do never make them the ground
of Censure as such, except they be aggreged by some other circumstance. Of this
sort al^o are offenses that may proceed from men's carriage in legal pursuits
and civil contracts which may offend; yet cannot they be legally convinced to
have broken a rule, when the strain of their way is legal, although it may be
sinful before God, and be to be reproved by private admonition where men have
access. 3. Some offenses are gross, and, it may be, known to some to be true;
yet possibly there is no convincing way of demonstrating the truth thereof to
others: in that case, it is more safe and edifying to forbear public mentioning
of that scandal, than to prosecute the same, seeing it may more irritate the
person, and weaken the Church Authority, than edify. 4. Some scandals are
gross, and may be made-out by two or three witnesses; yet are not immediately
to be brought to public, except upon the supposition of following obstinacy,
and not satisfying of those two or three, which especially is to be considered,
if the persons carriage be otherwise cleanly* This is Christ's express rule,
Mat. 18. and to bring it immediately to public, is not consistent with that
love that we ought to have to one another: For, charity requires that he
should be admonished, and also if he hear, that it should sist; Otherwise,
such being satisfied as were offended, it were to waken a scandal, and not to
remove one. But now especially we consider what is a public scandal in respect
of its nature, and afterward we shall enquire when it is so to be accounted
public in respect of its notority; and so when immediately it is to be brought
in public: for, it is certain* that these two may be divided, and so are to be
distinguished, as was formerly hinted. For, a scandal may be public, to say
so, for its notority, but yet not for its nature.

2. Scandals may be of that nature, that it is fit When a scandal is to be
brought to public.
to take public notice of them, and to follow them with Church Censures till
they be removed. This is clear in the Lord's rep^oving the neglect of public
Censure in these Churches; for, His finding fault that they had such, and
suffered such (as in the next Epistle) can be construct^d no otherwise, but
that they did not by Church-censure cut them off from their fellowship, which
is elsewhere abundantly clear. And it is true in these cases, 1. When a scandal
is of its own nature gross and infectious, like a little leaven ready to
leaven the whole lump. 2. When it is clear and in the matter of fact cannot be
denied: the first is requisite to a public scandal for convincing of the
conscience of the evil it self; the second for making application of the
consequents of such an evil to such a person. 3. An offense becomes public,
though it be not of its own nature so at first, if it be afterward aggreged by
such circumstances as obstinacy and contempt of private admonition, frequent
relapsing therein, and such like, as Christ's rule, Matthew. 18. and the general
nature of offense does confirm: Scandals that are so circumstantiated, and they
only, are to be taken notice of by Church-judicatories as the proper object of
Church Discipline. Hence we may see a great difference betwixt offense as it is
the object of private discretion, and as it is the object of Church Discipline.
I call them gross evils and of an infectious nature, which are against a clear
Law of God, and of that influence in a man's christian walk, as any sober man*
acquainted with the Word of God, and reflecting upon conscience, cannot but
acknowledge to be sinful, obstructive to the work of grace where they are, and
tending to the marring the beauty of a Church, and the edification and
salvation of her members if they should spread, such as Sabbath-breaking,
swearing, and what does directly contradict a moral command, these things are
obviously censurable. And upon this occasion, I cannot but much wonder at, and
regrate the unwarrantable expressions, at least, in the matter of fact, of a
Learned man, Mr. Baxter against Blake, page 130. his words are, In some
Countries, where some oaths are grown customary and of no great evil repute, it
is possible for a godly man to be long guilty of them, as it is known that many
well reputed of for godliness are in Scotland, etc. where he does misrepresent
the Church of Scotland in a twofold mistake (to say no more.) 1. as if some
swearing were so customary in Scotland as to abound even amongst the Godly. 2.
As if it were not taken notice of, or of no evil repute or scandalou^: It is
like, this may be his information, but certainly Christian charity would have
pleaded, that such information should not have been received against a Brother,
without some convincing ground; much less to have been vented as a thing known
against a Christian Church, which, however she be otherwise afflicted and rent,
and so obnoxious to much contempt and reproach, yet has a witness both in
Heaven and Earth of zeal against that sin, and innocence in that respect, as
to these that are Godly, even but seemingly, There being nothing more abhorred
by a godly heart, and accounted a greater evidence of profanity amongst us,
than customary irreverent meddling with the holy Name of God, and swearing of
any kind: and although we be many ways guilty before God, even in this
respect; yet we suppose she may hold up her face therein, beside, and with, any
Church on earth.

3. We say, That even among these Scandals that Where offenses are public, yet
difference is to made.
are in this sense publicly to be taken notice of, there is many ways
difference to be made in the prosecuting of them, and that in diverse respects.
1. Some scandals are of such gross nature and publicknesse in the fact, that
they cannot be passed without some public rebuke, at least, even though the
person should seem satisfyingly to resent his deed, because in this, respect is
to be had to the edification of others, and not of the person only. 2. Some
scandals again are such, as by authoritative admonition may be helped: and in
this sense, if a person hear the Church-guides and take their admonition, there
is no further progress to be made. Again, 3. sometimes persons are to be
followed with the highest censure of Excommunication, when open rebukes cannot
do the business, as we see in the case before us, and other practices of
Paul's. And we suppose, that such a scandal as has this Sentence following upon
it, would be in the grosnesse of its nature, and clearness of its proof,
convincingly made out both to the person himself, and to others. Because, 1.
otherwise it may make this great Ordinance contemptible, if upon like, or
disputable grounds, it be drawn forth. 2. Neither can it have weight with the
person to gain its end upon him natively, as a Church-ordinance ought to have,
the first step whereof is, convincingly to argue him to the sense of his fault,
as the word is, Matthew. 18. 15. 3. Neither can it be expected to have such
weight with others who ordinarily carry toward them that are under it, as they
are convinced of the weightinesse or lightness of the ground of that Sentence.
4. The nature of this Ordinance clears this also; for (as Divines say) it is
added to confirm Gods threatenings, as Sacraments do seal the promises; then it
imports, that there must be a clear threatening ere this can be appended; and
there can be no such threatening applied, but where both the sin in its nature,
and the fact in its notority are convincing; and indeed all the precedents of
this Sentence in Scripture are of this nature, to wit, they are both rare, and
also upon most convincingly gross evils. I cannot express it better than it
is done by that Reverend Divine, Mr. Thomas Hooker of New England in his
History, part 3. page 39. Such evils, (the words are his) which are either
heinous and abommable, as fornication, murder, adultery, incest, treason, etc.
or, if not so gross, yet carry the face of evil in their forehead, upon the
first serious and well grounded consideration of reason; and have been
pertinaciously and obstinatly persisted in after the improvement of all means
upon them for conviction and reformation: These only deserve Excommunication by
the rules of Christ, 1 Cor. 5. Matthew. 18. 17. thus far he. Advert, that what we
speak here of a public scandal, is spoken in respect of the nature thereof;
what is to be accounted such, in respect of its manifestnesse and notoritie,
follows afterward to be spoken of.

CHAP. II. Concerning what order is to be kept in the following of public
Scandals.
THe second thing, to wit what order and manner is to be observed in the
following of public Scandal* is not easily determinable, there being such
variety of cases in which the Lord exercises the prudence and wisdom of his
Church Officers: and indeed the gift of Government (to speak so) does
especially kyth in the right managing of Discipline, in reference to the
several humors and constitutions (to say so) which men have to do with. For,
as in bodily diseases the same cure is not for the same disease in all
constitutions and seasons, and as Ministers in their Doctrine are to press the
same things in diverse manners, upon diverse auditories; So this cure of
discipline, is not to be applied equally unto all persons; nay, not to such as
are in the same offenses. For, that which would scarce humble one, may crush
another; and that which might edify one, might be stumbling to another, of
another temper. Therefore we suppose there is no peremptor determining of rules
for cases here, but necessarily the manner of procedor in the application of
rules, is to be left to the prudence and conscienciousnesse of Churchofficers,
according to the particular circumstantiate case. Yet we may lay down these
generals*

1. All public processing of scandalous persons, The ends of Discipline.
or judicial taking notice of scandals, would be done with respect to the ends
for which Discipline is appointed, and so as may attain the same. This, I
suppose, cannot be denied: for, the mids must be suited to its end. Now* the
ends of public Censuring, are, 1. for vindicating the honor of Jesus Christ,
that suffers in the miscarriage of a member. 2. The preserving of the
authority of His Ordinances, and the chastening of disobedience thereunto,
Therefore it is called, 2 Corinthians. 2. 6. The punishment that was inflicted, and
chap. 10. 6. This is said to revenge all disobedience, it being appointed as an
Ecclesiastic whip to keep up His Authority in His House, and thereby to note
those that are unruly therein, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14. 3. It is for the persons
good, as it is said, 1 Corinthians. 5. 5. for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved, that by this, admonitions, reproofs, yea, threatenings,
may have the more weight, for the persons humiliation and up-stirring: and the
constraining of them at least to a more orderly walk in the Church, as the
Apostle has it, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, and 14. 4. It is for the good of the Church,
that the leaven of profanity spread not, and that others may thereby learn to
fear: This reason is given, 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7 etc. and 1 Timothy 5. 20. Now, when we
speak of the end of public trial and censure, respect is to be had to all
these, but especially to the more public and general ends, so as the persons
particular edification be not neglected; and therefore in procedor, particular
and special respect would be had to that manner (whether by m^eknesse, or
rigidity, by forbearing or proceeding) which may most attain these ends.

Hence, 2. we say, that the same offenses, upon All offenses of the same kind,
not always equally to be d^alt with.
the matter, are not equally nor at all times, nor in all persons, and, it may
be, in all places in the same manner, to be pursued and followed; and the
reason is clear, because according to circumstances, that manner which is
edifying at one time, and in one case, may be destructive in another, and so is
not to be followed, because that power which God has given is for edification
and never for destruction, 2 Corinthians. 13. 10. And accordingly, we see Paul in
some cases censuring corrupt men, as Hymeneus and Phyletus, 1 Timothy 1. 20.
Sometimes again, he threatens and yet spares, although the scandal in it self
deserved Censure, as when he says, Gal. 5. I wish they were cut off that
trouble you, and yet does it not, because he found not the Churches edification
so to require. So also, 2 Corinthians. 10. 4. and 6. Having in a readiness to
revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled: which yet he
thought not meet for the time to do, lest it should have irritated to more
disobedience, and have bred some greater rent or schism, or have made the
authority of the Ordinances less weighty, and so have marred his end, which
was in all things (and so in this forbearing) their edification, as he
expresses it, chap. 12. 19. Brethren, we do all things (and so this also) for
your edifying.

When I speak of edifying, I do not speak of pleasing the persons (for, that
may be often destructive to them, and others also) But this is intended, that
it is to be weighed in Christian prudence, whether considering the time and
place we live in, the nature of the person we have to do with, and of those
also among whom we live, it be more fit to follow this way with such a person,
at such a time, or another way? and accordingly as it seems probable, that
this way will honor God most, more fully vindicate His Ordinances, gain the
person from sin to holiness, at least, to a regular walk, and edify others
most; So accordingly ought Church-judicatories to take the way that leads
most probably to that end. And therefore it ought not always to be accounted
partiality when such difference in Church-procedour is observed: yet these
things would by all means be What is to be guarded against, when there is a
different way taken in censuring the same offenses.
guarded against.

1. That nothing be done with respect to persons, or appear to be done so; that
is, for outward, civil, or natural respects, to be more gentle to one than to
another, than which nothing is more derogatory to ecclesiastic Authority, and
stumbling to people.

2. This difference of proceeding, would rather be in the manner and
circumstances of proceeding in reference to some offenses, than in dispensing
with what seems to be material; or, it would be in such offenses where there
is no settled rule, and wherein Church Officers have more latitude: as for
instance, some offenses are of that public nature that usually they are
followed with a public reproof; such cannot be conveniently past-by in any
ordinary conceivable case, suppose it be fornication, or some such thing; yet,
in the manner of citing and dealing with the person, or expressing or timeing
of the reproof, there may be condescending; but to omit it altogether, would
hazard the casting loose of that Ordinance of public reproof, which would mar
the edification of the Church more than advantage any particular party: Other
offenses again, are more occasional* in reference to which, there is no definit
law, or practice; suppose it be speaking, reproachful words of some persons,
Officers, or others, in such there is more liberty to condescend which way may
be most convincing to the party. Lastly, in trying what may be most edifying,
we are not to look to one end alone, to wit, the persons particular good only,
or the public good only, etc. but to put all together, and to try how jointly
they may be best attained.

3. From this also it will appear, that Church Officers How Church officers
ought to carry in Censures.
ought with such tenderness, love and sympathy to walk in public Censures,
as not only they may have a testimony in their own Consciences, but also that
those who have offended, and others that observe their way, may also be
convinced of the same; for, if this be not, what can their Censure gain? and if
it be needful for a Minister in preaching, to study that, it is in some
respect more necessary here: because ordinarily, men out of their corruption,
are more ready to mistake men's intentions in this: and we conceive, that in
this a Church-judicatories procedour, ought discernably to differ from a civil
Court, in that they are not only out of Justice censuring the party, with a
respect to the common body, for whose good in some cases the most penitent
member must be cut off, and cannot be reprived, but as endeavoring the
Churches freedom from offenses, that the offending member may be thereby with
all tenderness restored and cured; and in experience we see, that often
Church Censures have weight, as they are constructed to proceed from love. And
we conceive, that the following of these and such like directions, may have
much influence for attaining of this. 1. That nothing be rashly and hastily
brought to public, but that which is a convincing Scandal in it self, clear in
the matter of fact, and also after private dealing with the person, and trial
of his carriage afterward: if the scandal be not very gross and public*
Hasty bringing to public, irritateth: and if a private admonition of Minister
and Elders might gain a Brother, what needs further? And by so doing, a
person is convinced, that that Minister, or Elder, desires his amendment, and
on that condition to cover his offense. 2. There would be no rigid insisting in
what is personal, in reference to any of the Judicatory, as suppose, they
should sometimes get snarling answers, or unbecoming words, or be met with by
irreverent carriage: in that case, there would be condescending, and what is
offensive beside, would be insisted on, and these personal things forborne. It
is true, the authority of the Ordinances would ever be kept up, yet that is not
always done by a rigid prosecuting of personal reflections; but on the
contrary, it often looks likest Christ's Ordinance, when meekness is most
prevalent, and so in the end, it comes to have greater weight; for, many
cannot discern betwixt Officers seeking their own authority, and the authority
of the Ordinances; and when the rise of the offense is from a miscarriage to
some person immediately, it looks to them to be carnal and vindictive like,
and so has the appearance of evil, and is to be eschewed. This we may observe
also in Paul's carriage, and in the practices of most zealous men, who never
wronged the Ordinances by denying of their own respect in such cases. And
Church Officers would especially advert to this, because often in our hotest
fits, it is rather respect to our own authority, than zeal for Christ that
acts us, which appears by this, that a practical contempt of the Ordinances
in our own hands* will st^r more than many other gross evils, or doctrinall
blasphemies, or contemptuous practices which immediately reflect on others,
although these may be ^ore dishonorable to Christ. 3. For attaining this end,
the rigidity and strictness of law would not be stuck to, as the persons not
appearing at such a day if afterward they condescend; their hastiness in
expressing themselves rashly at one time, or carrying themselves irreverently,
which afterward they may pass from: these and such like, I say, are not to be
stuck to, lest Church Officers seem, under pretext of Church Discipline, to
take advantage of them; and it is an evidence of the contrary, when they are
condescended unto in this. Advert, this is to be observed in practices that
seem to ^low from infirmity; but, suppose the person were some subtle,
deceitful, dissembling one, using his pretexts of repentance for furthering
his design* this condescension may be hurtful to the Church of God, in leting
such an occasion slip, and therefore is not to be admitted. 4. It contributeth
to this end also, that public appearances and public rebukes be not frequent,
nor in cases but such as are in the nature and evidence thereof convincing, and
that also after private admonitions have been fruitlesly given. We suppose that
mid step in Christ's direction, Matthew. 18. does warrant this, Take to thee two
or three before thou tell the Church. Hasty bringing to public reproof, is
constructed by many to be a seeking of their shame, but when it is rare, and
done in the order foresaid, and also with some reasons why a public rebuke in
such a case is just and expedient, seeing other means have failed, and the
condition of others calls for that now, etc. it does much allay that
prejudice; for every man has reason and a conscience, though many often want
the exercise thereof. We find also public rebukes rare in Scripture: And
although sometimes, a public appearing may be thought most edifying to the
Congregation; Yet, 1. If they were very frequent, they would lose their weight.
2. One public rebuke in this manner* and order, will edify more than many
otherwise: for, it is not the multitude of them that edifieth, but the
convincingness of the manner of proceeding. And therefore we conceive it is
never fit to multiply public rebukes, even supposing that scandals were
multiplied, but that some should be pitched-on that might most convincingly
edify, and that private dealing with others for conviction be made the more
weighty, which also is the judgment of the great Augustine. 3. Peoples
offending for the omiting of public rebukes, is, when the scandal thereof does
flow from this, that they conceive it to proceed from carlesnesse, negligence,
partiality, or some such thing in the Officers, whereas, if by custom it shall
be known to a people, that Officers are diligent observers of these things, and
are not defective in dealing with scandalous persons for convincing of them,
and do take this way as the most loving and tender mean of their ^aining, such
manner of proceeding will be more convincing and edifying* than if the thing
were instantly brought to public; for, people generally approve of tenderness
and condescending in Church Officers, as looking like love to the gaining of
souls, and so lay much weight on their Censuring, even of others, when they see
them, as it were, constrained thereto. And on the contrary, there is nothing
more offensive to them than when this tenderness is desiderated. It is to be
guarded here, that this be not made a cloak to negligence and unfaithfulness;
for, diligence and freedom is to be no less used with the parties, yea more,
than if they were brought to public. Only, this forebearance is to be made use
of as a mean for making that diligence and freedom the more succesfull:
otherwise, whether it be forborne or followed, it continues still to be
hurtful. Also, when one of these abounding scandals, or scandalous persons is
rebuked* then especially the Minister would so gravely and zealously agrege
that evil, that in some respect all that are under it may be reproved, and his
indignation at it may be so discernable, that that one reproof may be in place
of many, and yet the forbearance will give access for some to come off the
same.

4. It is also to be remembered, that this exercise of How Discipline is so to
be ordered, ^s it may not mar but further the Word.
Discipline for restraining of scandals, is to be subservient to the preaching
of the Word: which is the main and great edifying Ordinance; Therefore
Discipline would be ordered so as it may not mar, but further that. In
reference to which, these things are to be adverted to, 1. That no censure
would be blindly or implicitly made use of, but both in reference to the
party, and others, there would be instruction, exhortation, conviction, etc. by
the Word, going before, or along with the same. In which respect (though
improperly) Censures may be some way looked upon as Sacraments in a large sense
in these particular cases, because there is in them both some signifying and
confirming use; They being considered with respect to the end wherefore they
were appointed. 2. Church Officers, especially Ministers, would not make
Discipline the great uptaking business, so as it may prove an intanglement
unto them, or diversion from the Ministry of the Word: The great Apostles,
Act. 6. thought not fit to be diverted with the serving of Tables, but
appointed Deacons to be chosen for that end, that they might give themselves
principally, and, in comparison of other duties, fully (or as they say
themselves, ver. 4. continually) to prayer, that is, to the private exercise
thereof; and the Ministry of the Word, that is, the preaching thereof in
public. By which we may see, 1. what a Ministers great task is, wherein he
should be taken up, to wit, secret prayer, (under which are comprehended,
reading, meditation, and other duties meet for his own particular case, and
preparation for the duties of his calling, as may be gathered from 1 Timothy 4.
13, 14, 15.) and the public preaching of the Gospel. 2. We see also, that
though Ministers are virtually both Elders and Deacons, (as the Apostles were)
yet ought they to regulat their exercising of both these, with respect to the
former two. And, 3. that Elders and Deacons ought in governing, and overseeing
the poor, to have special respect to keep Ministers from being burdened or
toyled with these, that they may have freedom to follow the Ministry of the
Word, as the main thing: Yea, even to have much access to privacy and
solitariness, which is both most necessary for, and a well becoming duty to a
Minister; This is a special end of the appointment of these Officers, and in
reference to which they are helps, 1 Cor. 12. 28. both to the people and to the
Ministers. A third thing to be adverted to, is, that contentious and irritating
processes be so followed, as by these there be no prejudice laid before
persons* to make them stumble at the Word, or to render it the more
unprofitable. It is true* sometimes such things are necessary for the good of
the body, and for the vindicating of Christ's Ordinances, yet as much as may be
they would be shuned, and Ministers especially ought to carry so in the manner,
as to keep room for the Word in the affections of the parties. And we conceive,
that multiplying and lengthning of processes (except where there is grave and
weighty cause) and the way of trial of members, penitents, or such as are to
be admitted to Sacraments, which is pleaded for by some, if it were put in
practice, could not but much entangle Ministers, yea, become a more weighty and
intolerable burden to them, than the preaching of the Word: yea, could not but
be obstructive thereto, contrary to the nature of Discipline, as said is.

CHAP. III. Showing that Christ's order and method, Matthew. 18. is to be kept,
and what it does imply.
THe fourth general concerning proceeding in public Scandals, which we would
lay down, is, that Christ's order, Mat. 18. be indispensably kept. Which we
conceive, being compared with other Scriptures, does imply these things, 1.
That offenses whether they be in lesser patticulars, or in more gross things,
yet if they be but known to few, are not instantly to be brought to public,
(except some circumstance necessitate the same for greater edification) and
this order is to be observed both by Officers and private persons. It were not
therefore unfit, when any delation comes by an Elder, or complaint by a
private Professor, to enquire if they had observed this rule with such a party?
and if alone, and with some others, friendly and rationally they have
endeavored to convince them? and if not, that they be remitted to follow that
way, and if they have done it, It would be enquired, if their so doing have had
no weight? Or if the person has continued in the offense notwithstanding? If
none of these can be said, there is yet no ground for public tabling of a
scandal: and this we suppose would cut off many needless processes, and prove
more edifying. 2. It is clear from that place, that the offenses to be
complained of, are not injuries or wrongs to us under that notion as such, but
what is offensive in its nature and under that consideration, whether any wrong
be intended to us in it or not. It is not suitable to a Church-court to have
only persons complaining of wrongs done to themselves, as if they be cursed,
de^amed, etc. and yet not to take notice of what is offensive, as wronging the
honor of God, reflecting upon the profession of the Gospel, and really laying
a stumbling block before themselves and others. This is to neglect scandals,
and to take notice of slanders, which, as we said, differ from these. Hence,
such persons ordinarily follow their complaints with much bitterness, and never
seek to convince the party privately. We conceive therefore, that such direct
complaints, so circumstantiate, ought not to be admitted, at least, upon that
consideration; lest the Ordinance of Christ be made subservient to men's
particular passions and interests. It is therefore more fit when such offenses
arise, that they be taken notice of abstractly from such complaints, and that
in the order that other scandals are to come in, whereof now we are speaking.
3. It is clear from that order, Matthew. 18 that when the person offending, does
accept of the admonition, there is no mention further to be made thereof; yea,
it would not be so much as reported privately, if it be not otherwise known.
4. If that private admonition prevail not, then is the person to take two or
three with him before it come to the Church, and this is not to be done
superficially, and for exoneration merely, but convincingly, and for the
persons edification. Therefore we suppose, that this is not to be astricted to
one time, either in private, or before these two or three: for, once speaking
may be but little useful; and seeing the Church is to continue in dealing with
the person before they give him over and proceed, and before they can account
that he hears not them, So ought it to be in the preceding two steps, seeing
the words are the same. Again, I say, this would be done convincingly, they
would argue (as the word is) with the offending brother, and not rest satisfied
with some passing word or admonition. Further, these two or three would be
chosen, so as may be most fit for that purpose, and may have most weight with
him, (we think some Elder, one at least, or two, were not unfit) and this would
be done purposly, gravely and seriously, as the words, Take with thee, etc.
import. All this is to preceed the bringing of a scandal to public, which is
to sist here if this prevail. Whence, 5. also we may see, that every scandal
which is known to two or three, is not to be accounted a public scandal, and
at the first instant to be brought to the Church, because it is supposed, that
these two or three may have knowledge of the same scandal, and yet may it
warrantably never come to public, if the person hear them. It looks unlike
this way to bring scandals to public, wherein scarce two witnesses can be had.
Indeed, after the fault noised and flagrant, and the presumption is great, and
the party suspect like, such things are publicly to be taken notice of, though
the proofs be not so pregnant. 6. If this do not the business, but the person
continues obstinate, although to the conviction of those two or three
assessors, the fact be gross, and the party guilty, then it is to be brought
to public* either immediately by the person that was stumbled, or by an Elder,
(for which cause, we said, it was not unmeet that one of these should be among
the former witnesses) When it comes to the Church, we conceive, that with the
parties, it were meet to call some one, or more of those who were witnesses of
the private admonition, that the Judicatory may be informed by them of the
case, seeing probably they may be more impartial than the other. And it will be
conduceable for attaining clearness in the thing, to know what has preceeded*
and where it left; and this would make private admonitions and witnesses
therein, to have the more weight with men; for, knowing that their carriage at
such a time would be made manifest to others, it would have influence to make
them at first more rational and sober, if they knew that what they said then,
would afterward be repeated to them before two or three; and what they spoke
before those, were to be again impartially reported to the Eldership* And we
conceive, it is for this cause amongst others, that Christ calls them
witnesses, and such witnesses, as may establish the matter, which must be
rather in their testifying to the Church, than in private accompanying the
offended party. For, when a person brings such an offense to a public
Judicatory, he must make out these two, 1. That such a person has actually
given offense, 2. That he has effectually admonished him* and he has not
heard him, not satisfied him. Now, though the first be made out by other
witnesses, yet the last cannot be made out but by such as were called by him;
and therefore with respect to that, they are called witnesses by our Lord, as
is said.

When this is done, the convincing and recovery of the party is yet to be
essayed; and for that end, pains are to be taken, with all patience,
gentleness, and long-suffering: if that prevail, there is no further procedour
called-for; if not, then public admonitions and rebukes are to be added. If
nothing prevail, the Sentence of Excommunication is to be added, the ground
being convincingly scandalous in its nature, and clear in its evidence, as was
formerly said; and it will not be found often in a Church where that progress
is kept, that it will come to this.

If the offenses be of that nature, that a public rebuke be necessary, in
respect of the circumstances and aggravations thereof, it is not to be
neglected: Yet, it is not necessary that every offense that comes to the
Eldership, yea, even these that are known to many, should at all times be
brought to a public rebuke. For, if the Sessional or Elderships admonition
have weight with the party, what needs more in reference to him? And if there
be no hazard that others be infected by that deed, or provoked by that example,
there is no necessity always in reference to them, especially, where it is
known that such offenses are not passed. For, that is one end of public
rebukes, 1 Timothy 5. 20. That others may fear. Yea, much more we conceive, that
many offenses may be brought the length of public rebukes, which yet are not
to be drawn out unto Excommunication, even though complete satisfaction seem
not to be given. Because, 1. that Sentence is not to proceed, but upon weighty
convincing causes, as is said, 2. Because, if the cause be convincing, the
person offending may be expected sometimes upon after thoughts to admit of
conviction, though distemper or prejudice may for a time keep it off, as
experience does prove.

But where the case is such as hazardeth infection to others, and the persons
such as are contemptuous and ready to spread their leaven, as was both in the
case of the doctrine and deeds of these Nicolaitans, the Sentence is to
proceed, and that more summarily: I say, more summarily in comparison of what
is pas^, yet not altogether summarily; for, Paul allows an Heretic to be
once and again admonished, Tit. 3. 10. And in this Chapter, the Lord gives
Iezebel time to repent: and here, those corrupt persons are exhorted to repent
before He come to fight against them with the sword of His mouth, ver. 16.
which (as we take it) looks to the same Sentence. We will not be peremptory
to deny what may be done when the crime is atrocious, the evidence palpable,
the scandal great, the contemptuousnesse of the party, by their former and
present carriage, rendering all hopes of recovering so desperate, that there is
not so much as access to get a hearing, and a following of convictions, and
the hazard of the scandal not admitting of delay: I say, in such a case, we
will not deny what may be done for the Churches edification more summarily; yet
we are sure, ordinarily the way laid down is to be followed.

CHAP. IV. Holding forth the frame wherewith Church Officers should proceed in
Censure, and helps toward the same.
IN the last place, the manner of proceeding in all this, is especially to be
looked to, without which all the rest will be weightlesse. Therefore in all the
procedure, the Church Officers especially would have a zealous, serious, grave
and authoritative manner of carriage, having weight and authority in their
least looks and words, with all gravity: For, can that admonition have weight
with others, that appears not to have weight with those that give it? Or, can
the scandalous be serious in hearing, when there is no conviction on them, that
they are serious and affected that speak? Ministers therefore especially, as
also Elders in their place, would endeavor seriously and zealously with all
tenderness to the person, to express their indignation at, and abhorrency of
such deeds; as it is commended in Ephesus, ver. 6. that they hated the deeds of
the Nicolaitans. And certainly, a Court of Christ's ought to look like Him, and
like that business entrusted to them, and to have a different stamp from other
Courts. And there is nothing that weakneth the authority of a Sentence more
than the want of this. For helping therefore to it, we propose, 1. That the
conversations of such as take notice of Scandals in others, should be shining
themselves, There can be no weightinesse without this; because the weight and
authority that is to be studied here, is that which may be convincing to
consciences, rather than compulsive to the outward man: and upon this ground,
it is not the most honorable and rich that give Church-judicatories most
authority, But those who are most shining and convincing in their carriage,
particularly in reference to this trust: For, though outward place may gain
more outward respect, yet this cannot but have more weight upon the conscience,
which is especially to be affected by this Church Authority. 2. We would beware
of founding this authority upon carnal grounds, or to lay the weight of it
there, such as the power and authority of men; yea, or upon our own place,
parts, or weight: and upon that account (as it were) to boast, rather than to
persuade or convince. This sometimes may have weight as to some outward
conformity, but does ever lose more of its native weightinesse: Therefore
Ministers and Elders in the prosecuting of this, would lay the weight here,
that it is Christ's Ordinance, and that they act in His Name. 3. They would
even in that procedure aim especially to deal with consciences to convince
them, rather than to wrangle with corruptions, or to throw the outward man. 4.
The Masters honor would ever be respected, yea, reverently and frequently
mentioned, that all of them may be put and kept in mind that it is His
Ordinance, and appointed for such an end: and the more room He get in the
meeting, the more weight will their procedure have. 5. Ministers, and Elders
particularly, would pray for the blessing to Discipline, as well as to the
Word; and for the persons offending, even those that appear to be most stuborn,
this becomes their ministerial authority well to acknowledge Him, and is the
way to have His presence in the midst of them, without which they can expect no
weight; and the more He be seen that is the Master, the more authority will
they have who are the Servants. 6. It helps this also to have the matter and
proofs convincing. Therefore particulars that look self-like, or siding with
interests, or such as are involved in civil debates and contests, are to be
shunned, or at least, not to be insisted upon: for, readily a convincing
weighty matter, will have some impression of it self upon consciences. Hence,
we will find in Scripture that generally (if not always) public processes are
tabled upon scandals that flow from commissions, and that of such nature, as is
said. It is true, where an omission is owned, as suppose one should refuse to
pray, or where palpably defended, and is not of infirmity, as idleness was in
Thessalonica, 1 Epist. chap. 3. such are by their circumstances rather indeed
commissions, and so to be accounted after admonition, and upon just ground are
convincing. 7. There would be weight, gravity, impartiality, self-deniednesse,
and affection kything in every circumstance, that they may look like the
servants of Jesus Christ, who are seeking thee good of His people; and so
foolish sporting and laughing, idle and trivial questions, passionate words,
heat, or particular and personal reflections, and the like, are most
derogatory to the authority of a Church-judicatory, and do mar the weight of
any Sentence upon a conscience, as is evident in daily experience, where
sometimes Censures in their giving and receiving, are, upon the matter, an
irreverent taking of the name of the Lord in vain. 8. There would be in all
this, an holy boldness* and an undauntoned fearlesnesse in respect of men.
When it comes to any difficulty, minding the authority of Him whom we
represent; yet so, as in this boldness, conscience of duty and zeal may both
in our own consciences, and to the conviction of others, be the ground, end and
motive thereof, and not any carnal flash of passion or pride, or fit of
natural courage, which may make Church Officers look like men, but not like
their master; for, as His Kingdom is not of this world in these respects, so
ought His Officers to administrate the same otherwise than a wor^ly authority
uses to be; our weapons are not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty through
God, and therefore as such should be used.

The last general direction concerning this, is, that Church-processes would be
carriedon with expedition.
when Scandals are thus to be taken notice of, this proceeding ought to be with
expedition: my meaning is not, that we should precipitate contrary to the
former directions; But, 1. That after notice of an offense, with all
convenience, the first steps of this procedure would be essayed. 2. That there
would not be long intervals betwixt these steps, although they may be
frequently repeated. 3. That persons would not be kept long under process,
especially they would not have their appearances multiplied, except when it may
be for good use. The reasons of all these, are* 1. Because when offenses are
fresh, then often the parties offending, and offended, as also others, are most
affected therewith; whereas, if a long time interveen, that edge wears away,
and whatever the close be, it proves not so edifying to any. 2. Men weary, and
so fall from that zealous, serious manner of carriage in it that becomes, for
our spirits are soon out of bensall, and that deroga^eth from the weight of the
thing. 3. It proves irritating and burthensom to the parties offending, rather
than convincing, and so the end is missed. 4. It has also influence upon the
confusing and burthening of Officers when processes are multiplied and
lengthened, and it comes some way to look like men's civil Courts, and that in
such things as they use to be grievous unto these who are necessitate to wait
on them.

To close this, we conceive it were fit for the authority of
Church-judicatories, the weight of admonition, and the edification of persons,
that there were some specially set apart for government, although they were
fewer: And, O that this might be attained! for, ordinary conversing of Elders
in common and ordinary Callings, does not a little obscure the weight of that
Ordinance to many, except the conversation of the Elder in such things be
singularly convincing: And until this be attained, there is the greater need
for Church Officers to be as little in common business and discourses with
those over whom they are set, as conveniently may be, that there may be the
more access to converse with them as becomes Officers; and when necessity
calls to it, there is need of gravity and circumspectnesse, that it mar not
their weight in the duties of their office at any other time. And also
Church Officers in their meetings amongst themselves, would be always grave
and serious, as being about an Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. V. Concerning what is to be done, when offending persons give no
satisfaction.
IF it be asked then, what is to be done, supposing persons not to give any
satisfaction, even when they are brought to public? This is indeed a
difficulty, and will, no question, pusle any conscientious Church Officer; Yet
we suppose, we may class such offenses that are brought to public in these
three sorts, and then answer. 1. Some offenses are in matters that are less
horrid and scandalous, and come nearer to sins of infirmity, which yet are
scandalous, being continued in suppose officious lying, angry passionat words,
and such like, where these are repeated, the persons are to be rebuked in some
cases; yet if they be not contemptuous, or the ills otherwise aggreged, we see
not how there can be proceeding to Excommunication upon such grounds, because
Excommunication is a chastisement for some singular offenders, and is not for
offenses that are so common, as has been formerly said. Of this sort may be
the sparingnesse of charity in Church Members, in giving little to the poor, or
less than proportionally they should, though they do not altogether shut their
bowels* This may be the object of admonition, but we think hardly of
Excommunication, except it have gross contempt with it, and so hazard of
making void, by evil example, the course that Christ has appointed for
overseing the poor in His house, for which He has appointed Deacons: and if
public charity upon any pretext were restrained* that were to no purpose:
which certainly highly reflecteth on Christ, and is a grievous scandal. We find
the Reverend Master Hooker, part 2. chap. 2. page 57. lay these two
conclusions, 1. That the Church is to stint her Members, and determine the
quota of their charity and free willofferings, and that of her self. 2. That if
after the Deacons private diligence, this be not given in, he is to follow the
action before the Church. Although we think defect of charity, in this respect,
a great sin and an offense, and may be justly reproved, and the person
admonished that is defective palpably in that which is proportionable to his
ability; yet, that such a particular stint should be made by Church Power, and
exacted under such certification, we cannot yet find to be warrantable.
Although we give the Magistrate that liberty, and where he exerceth it not, we
acknowledge mutual condescension may do much. And we are sure, that if any
such like thing should be found in the Presbyteriall way, it had been charged
with tyranny, and encroaching on the place of the Magistrate long ere now: yet
it may be (when it is well managed) no great corruption in a Church.

A second sort of offenses are such, as are of themselves gross and public;
yet not atrocious, or aggreged with contempt, such as fornication, some acts of
drunkenness, and such like. The party* I say, not being obstinate, but
seriously acknowledging his fault, and promising to abstain and amend, in that
case there is no ground to proceed to the highest Censure, though there may be
a public rebuke; yea, though their acknowledgment be not altogether
satisfying; yet, if after the public rebuke, the person abstain these evils,
and renew not the offense, the process is to close, and to proceed no further:
Because, 1. In that case it cannot well be said, that he has refused to hear
the Church when that abstinence follows. 2. The end of a public rebuke is
not always to be an evidence of the persons full recovery, But, 1. to be a
mean to recover him. 2. It is in it self a public acknowledgment of the fault*
and a virtuall engagement to abstain. And 3. it has a warning force and
certification with it for the party offending, if he continue in his offense:
Now, if he continue not, it cannot be said that he has incurred the
certification, or made the rebuke altogether ineffectuall: And therefore in
such cases, a public rebuke being accepted. it puts a close unto such
processes: for, such public rebukes are not an exercising of the ke^s for
letting-in any to the Church, that was not a member formerly; and therefore
there is not such exactness required here, as in the first admission of
heathens, yea, or in restoring of Excommunicate persons* who have been bound
and shut out, but it is the warning of a member to prevent his being cast out.
Seeing therefore this rebuke louseth nothing, there can be ^o necessity alleged
here of searching into his acknowledgements or profession; and we make no
question, that offending persons being rebuked before all, and abstaining from
such offenses afterward, were still to be accounted Churchmembers, capable of
all privileges, notwithstanding of the former offense. For, although he was
offensive before that rebuke, yet was he not actually bound or excluded from
any Church privilege by that offense (because offense gives ground to
exclude, if contempt follow, but does not actually exclude of it self) neither
does the rebuke bind and exclude any if no further Censure follow and be added
thereunto, but is intended to prevent both, And therefore, I say, that a person
merely rebuked for such an offense, and not continuing in, or renewing the same,
has right to all Church Priviledges, seeing he is by no Ordinance of Christ
excluded; and that way of public rebuking, is appointed to prevent the falling
of others, by that occasion.

A third sort of offenses are such as of their nature are gross, and in their
evidence clear, suppose drunkenness, fornication, gross swearing, corrupt
errors, etc. and the person offending, after much pains, does yet continue
obstinate, refusing to hear the Church; in that case the rule is clear to
proceed with the Sentence of cutting off, If no accidental thing call for the
suspending thereof, for respect to the Churches good.

If it be asked, when a person is to be accounted obstinate When is a person to
be accounted obstinate.
and guilty of not hearing the Church? We answer, It may be in these four
cases, 1. When the persons do contemptuously refuse, or decline appearance,
that is, either to hear private admonition, or to answer for removing of their
offenses before the public Judicatory. This indeed is not to be astricted to
once or twice refusing, even when no reasonable excuse can be given: for,
sometimes offenders are ticklish for a time, while their distemper continues;
and Church Officers would be favorable in admitting of excuses, and in their
condescending to them, (as edification may be most furthered) as Mothers and
Nurses will do to children: which similitudes the Scripture sometimes uses.

2. It is contempt, supposing a person to appear, and yet either to justify
his offense, as if it were no wrong; or to deny an evident fact, or to refuse
any way to remove an offense given etc. yet in such cases there i^ both for
bearance and gentleness for a time to be essayed, and the offense is to be
made inexcusable both to the conscience of the party, and to the consciences of
others.

3. Contempt may appear in this, when persons offending appear, and do not deny
the offense, yet by such proud carriage, haughty reflecting, irreverent
expressions, and such like, do bewray contempt in the manner of their carriage,
and there by do give more offense than by their former miscarriage, or than if
they had not appeared at all: Because, that does reproach the Ordinance of
Christ more, as it were in His presence to affront Him, and like the soldiers,
to say, Hail, King of the Jews, and to mock Him.

A fourth thing that may be judged contempt, and not hearing of the Church* is,
when a person appearing, does with some seeming reverence acknowledge the
fault, suppose drunkenesse, slander, fornication, etc. and yet does
notwithstanding continue in, or frequently reiterate the same offense for these
cannot be judged sins of infirmity, especially when they are so frequent, and
that after admonition; for, the Churches admonition does not only tend to draw
forth an acknowledgement of the offense past, but to prevent the like for time
to come; and where that is not, it cannot be said that Christ's Ordinance has
had weight. And in such a case, the accounting of verbal acknowledgements
enough, where there is a continuance in some seen evils, were to make the
Ordinance of Christ obnoxious to reproach, and to frustrate it of its end,
which is to remove and prevent offenses, (for in that case they abound more)
and it would strengthen men that could dissemble, to continue in their
profanitie, seeing by that they might ever escape the Sentence of
Excommunication, and so profane persons might abound in Christ's Church to the
dishonor of his Name, and the reproach of the Gospel, and yet there be no
access to His Officers by His Ordinances to purge them out. And seeing this
would be ridiculous in any humane Court, to account such a man a receiver of
admonitions, it were absurd to assert it here.

If it be asked, what is to be done in cases where What, when an offense is not
gross, yet has contempt with it.
the offense is not of a more gross nature, and comes near to a sin of
infirmity, and yet has contempt added thereto, in one of these respects? Answ.
1. We have said already, that it is hard to ground Excommunication upon such a
rise: Therefore, 2. Churchofficers would warrily deal with such offenders, so
as there be no seeming occasion given them to contemn; and much forbearance,
and even a kind of overlooking (so far as is consistent with faithfulness) is
to be exercised in such cases, in reference to some persons, for it has
prejudice with it to take notice of such Scandals, and thereafter without
satisfaction to pass from them, and it is difficult and not always edifying
to pursue them: we conceive it therefore more fit, not to take Judicial notice
(at least) of them all, but to continue a serious and loving dealing with such
persons in private, because possibly more rigid dealing might wrong them and
the Church more than edify* Yea, 3. If it come to public, frequent trials
would be taken of them before it be judged contempt, that so if it be found
needful to proceed further, the contempt may be so aggreged, that it may be
seen, that edification requires the same to be prosecuted, and then it is the
contempt that bears the weight of the Sentence, and not the first offense;
Therefore this would be so manifest* as it may be convincing to the consciences
of all to be insufferable.

CHAP. VI. Concerning what is to be accounted satisfaction, or satisfying.
THe great Question is, when a person does appear and acknowledge his offense,
and submit to a public rebuke, what is to be judged satisfying here, so, as a
Church-judicatory may sist Process, and rest satisfied* and admit the person
to Church Priviledges, as if the former offense had not been? In answering of
this, we shall, first, show what is not sati^sying. Secondly, what is not
necessary to be enquired after by a Church-judicatory, for this ecclesiastic
satisfaction. Thirdly, we shall show what is necessary and satisfying. Then,
answer a Question or two, for absolving of this.

1. We say, every verbal acknowledgement of a fault, even though it have a
promise of amending, is What kind of satisfaction is not sufficient for making
a Church-judicatory to sist their processes*
not sufficient; for, that may be in two of the cases formerly mentioned, to
wit, in a person that does, in his so doing but mock the Ordinance; or in a
person that has often relapsed after such a profession, or for the time does
continue in that or some other gross evil: in* that case to account such a
profession of repentance satisfying, were to fall in the former
inconveniences, and would prove a manifest taking of the Nam of the Lord in
vain, which we may gather by this. Such a circumstantiat profession ought not
to satisfy a Brother in a private admonition, so that notwithstanding thereof
(yea, the rather) he ought thereafter to take two or three with him, as being
more offended* and if they meeting with the same, may put it to the Church, as
not being well satisfied with such mockings; then much less ought the Church
to be satisfied therewith, because they do more formally represent Jesus Christ
and His Authority, and therefore mockings and contempt to them, is the greater
offense. And that place, where the Lord speaks to Peter* Luke 17* 3. of
forgiving his brother seven times a day, and elsewhere* seventy times seven
times a day, is not to be understood to speak principally of such gross
public offenses, or of such discernable counter feit turning (for that is not
turning at all) but of private offenses, or of the first sort formerly
mentioned, and also where there seems to be ingenuity in the person,
otherwise it were to remove one offense by another; and in that the Lord
orders men in reference to their private carriage, for they ought to forgive
wrongs, and does not regulate Church-actings, as judicious Calvin does give
warning upon the place; Beside, the chastening, and bumbling of the offending
party, the making of others to fear, and the turning away of the reproach that
comes to Christ's name by offenses, being the great ends of Church-censure, by
admitting of such a profession as satisfying, all of them would be utterly
enervated and overturned, which were most absurd.

If it be asked, how this dissembling, mocking profession How may dissembling
be discovered.
may be discovered? Answ. 1. By somewhat palpable in the very present gesture,
words, expressions, etc. which evidence the same, and leave no room for
charity; as when men (as it were) with a word, say Hail to Christ, and at the
next, spit in His face, it is easy to say, that their Hail was not serious. 2.
By comparing it with a persons former carriage in such a case wherein so much
has been professed, and yet he afterward has been found to be mocking even in
the time of his profession* his former carriage calls men, at least, not to
be soon satisfied* if no difference be. 3. By some words or expressions in
other Societies and Companies, which being vented during the time of this
public profession, and that contrary thereto, cannot but evidence it to be a
mocking. And, 4. When the fruit appears to be contrary thereto in a habitual
way, as has been said. Indeed if there be not convincing evidence of this
mocking, but it be doubtful; or, if a person that at one occasion is
irreverent, should afterward appear more sober, we conceive in* that case,
determination is to be suspended, till after carriage give more ground of
clearness, either to the one hand or the other.

CHAP. VII. Showing what is not necessary to satisfaction.
TO the second thing, to wit, what is not necessary, or to be enquired for, by
Church Officers to be an ecclesiastic satisfaction for removing of an offense.
We answer, That the saving grace of repentance, or godly sincerity therein in
the person, is not to be enquired into, as the alone ground upon which they may
rest satisfied. For, 1. That would put a Church-judicatory so far as they could
to determine of the state and graciousnesse of every offending person before
they were satisfied, which were absurd, that not being the object of
Churchdiscipline, and it is nowhere to be found that men are called judicially
to determine of the state of another. 2. It would lay this ground, That none
should be after any offense recovered and admitted to privileges, except they
were thought really to be gracious; which would infer, that none should be
admitted to the Church, but such; yea, that none should be continued in the
Church, but such; because readily there are none, but in less or more give
offense, so far as may be the ground of a private admonition, which does once
table them* and if nothing can be satisfying but what gives ground to account
them gracious, it would come to that, that men are to be excommunicated because
they are not thought to be gracious, and cannot give evidence of that. 3. So
every person that were received after an offense, would have a Sentence of a
Church-judicatory standing to prove them to be converted, which certainly would
prove offensive, and a stumbling to many who are too apt to ground presumption
on a lesser occasion. 4. It would put Church Officers upon the rack, and prove
a tortour to them: For, 1. There is no evidence given in the word whereby one
may know the gracious estate of one another infallibly; And shall that be only
satisfying to us, which by no means we can know? 2. God has not given men
dominion over consciences to search or censure them in their ends, motives,
etc. but as appears in their outward actions, and there being nothing that
can evidence soundness in the outward action it self, because Hypocrites may
come that length, it cannot be that that must be their task, to decide where
there is no possibility to attain to a satisfying decision. If it be said* that
they are to proceed as in charity they judge the person to be sincere, Then we
oppose, procedure in Church-judicatories must be according to such rules as a
person that judges wrong may be convinced that he judges wrong, if a wronged
party should complain; But if the man's own thoughts and charity of such a man
were the rule, whereby he is to judge, then suppose some Judicatories
unwarrantably to admit, or to debar some, there were no way to convince them
that they had judged wrong* because none could judge their singleness. Again,
if it be said, that that may be gathered from evidences, Then we desire to know
what evidence is to charity a sufficient ground to make a man to be accounted
gracious, and without which he is not to be accounted such? If there be no such
evidence, then the decision lies upon the persons judgment and inclination,
which falls in the former inconvenience: If there be such evidences, 1. It
will be hard to condescend upon them. 2. They are either such evidences as may
be judicially demonstrated to be in such a person, or not to be in him: If they
may be demonstrated to be in him, then it is not charity that decideth, but a
law, which we will acknowledge when it is discovered, if they cannot be
judicially demonstrated to be in such a person, or not to be in him; then the
redressing of any corrupt decision is still made impossible* and there is no
more but the conjectures of such men's charity in such a case; Then, how can
these absurdities be answered? As* 1. What if such Church Officer, should be
partial? in that case their charity will either be too narrow, or too broad,
and can that be the rule of procedure in Christ's House? and yet
Church Officers are men subject to such infirmities. 2. What if the person
should think himself wronged by their accounting him not to be gracious, would
that be sufficient to convince him, because they thought so? and yet it cannot
be said, that according to Christ's order Church Officers should Sentence an
o^ending party, and not be able to convince him; and he cannot demonstrate it
to them so as to convince them, and so it is for ever undeterminable, which is
most absurd* What if he appeal to a supreme Judicatory? how could they defend
their Sentence? Or, what if the superior Judicatory judged him to be sincere?
how could one of these Judicatories convince the other, if charity only were
the rule? And yet it cannot be thought, that by Discipline and Censures, which
are appointed by Jesus Christ for entertaining of union, that such inevitable
grounds of division should be laid? Again, could it be but irritating to a
person judicially to be declared unregenerate, and would it not afterward both
make such Sentences, and those that pronounce them to have the less weight? 3.
Suppose in the same Judicatory some persons charity should be larger nor
others, what is to be done in that case? There is no possibility for one of
them to convince the other; yea, can it but stir up new offenses? for, the one
of them is ready to judge the other, either unacquainted with spiritual
conditions, or untender; for, the judging upon the sincerity of grace,
requires the exercise of a christian and spiritual discerning; and therefore
accordingly as it is exercised differently, so are men ready to account of
others to be at best Christians of different siezes: and we suppose that in
nothing a man's grace has more occasion to vent than in his uptaking and
judging of the gracious estate of another, because this supposes acquaintance
and sympathy with, and experience of sincere grace, more than is either in
preaching, prayer, or such exercises. And this certainly would be no little
stumbling to Church Officers, to be so frequently put to give trial of their
own graciousnesse, whereas if we walk by settled rules, there is no such
occasion to stumble. 4. Do not we see that one man's charity does differ from
another, and so diverse men in the same extrinsick action of judging in a
Churchcourt, should have diverse rules to judge-by in the same act, possibly
leading them to judge contrarily, which were absurd. 5. Does not oftentimes the
same one man's charity differ from what it was at another time, and he will be
more and less in extending it according to the frame of his own spirit, the
dullness or confusion of his mind, or possibly accordingly as he has some
relation or obligation to, or prejudice at the person, which may steal-in on
his judgment, and (as it is said) blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the
understanding of the just, and he really think himself single in judging? And
can such afle^ting unconstant rule be that which Christ has appointed in His
Church to order the removing of offenses? 6. Do we not know, that often men's
charity, in such cases, is swayed much by the judgment of some one or other who
is esteemed of? and so this way which pretends to give most liberty, does in
seed bind up most: For, men either in that case satisfy themselves, that such
a man is sincere, or not, because such another says so, and so he goes on
implicitly, not doing what he does in faith; or, he has his own suspicions
that others do not determine rightly of such a person's sincerity, and then he
is at this strait, either to contrary his own light, and go on with the other,
or to judge otherwise, and by so doing to give out his own spiritual
discerning to be beyond that others* and therefore to judge him for mistaking
in it. And contradiction in this, is not as in other cases, where only men's
moral light and understanding do vary; but here, as we said, it is in a thing
that is most purely spituall, and peculiar to the People of God only, whereof
natural men and hypocrites are not capable.

What the Reverend and most convincing Writer, Mr. Wood, has in his
Examination of Mr. Lockiers Little-stone, to prove that sincerity of true grace
is not to be enquired for, as the constitution or complexion (as Mr. Lockier
speaks) of visible members in the visible Church, does fully make out this
also; for, there is the same reason against the enquiring after the sincerity
of grace, in respect of the impossibility thereof in this case, as in that; and
there needs nothing further to be adde^ for confirming of this, till those
his pregnant Arguments be answered.

CHAP. VIII. Holding forth what may be satisfying.
THe answering of the third Question, to wit, what is to be accounted
satisfying, and what is to be rested on in such a case by Churchofficers, will
clear and confirm this more. Before we answer, we premit, 1. That a difference
is to be made between what is satisfying to a Church-judicatory, so as to admit
an offending person to all privileges, as if the offense had not been, and
what may be satisfying to sist further procedor, and prevent Excommunication.
For, I suppose, a persons satisfaction may not be sufficient as to the first,
which yet may be sufficient as to the second, as (for instance) it may be
thought of Simon Magus, Act. 8. 24. who, after Peter's rebuke, carried so, as
he did not proceed to cast him out, yet may he well be esteemed of,
notwithstanding of such professed conviction, not to have had the full
privilege of a Churchmember instantly; and this may proceed either from the
grossness of an offense (such as that was) or the unsatisfyingnesse of a
persons satisfaction, or both; in which cases edification requires some time
of trial, before there be a proceeding either to an off-cutting, or to
admitting to the former liberty. 2. We would distingish (which is sib to the
former) between that which is not fully satisfying, and that which is
altogether dissatifying; for there may be a mids, as suppose, that a man by
silence should accept a reproof; or in words and carriage express something
which neither does speak seriousness, nor mocking, We suppose it is hard
instantly to judge that person either to be obstinate, or yet to have full
access to all Ordinances.

To the Question then we answer that for full satisfaction, so as to have
access to all the privileges, there is requisite a sober, serious
acknowledgement of the offense with the expression of an unfeigned-like purpose
to walk inoffensively, especially in reference to these former offenses; and
where this is we say, it is sufficient. When we speak of a sober, serious
acknowledgement, we speak of it as it stands contradistinguished upon the one
side from sincere grace; for, one may have this, and not have that: And, as
upon the other side, it is distinguished, not only from gross contempt and
profane mocking, but from gross dissimulation appearing to be such, or from
carnal indifferency and unseriousnesse. By Divines, this is called moral
seriousness, or sincerity, (as it is distinguished from that which is
gracious) and usually is in subtle legal hypocrites, and sometimes may be in
some gross persons in fits. It cannot be better expressed, than it is by the
forementioned worthy Author Mr. Wood, part. 1. page ^0* that is, That which is
not openly and discernably simulate, histrionick, scenicall, and hypocritical
in that hypocrisy which is gross: but all circumstances being considered, by
which ingenuity is estimate amongst men, giving credit one to another, there
appears no reason why the man may not and ought not to be esteemed, as to the
matter, to think and purpose as he speaks from whatsoever habitual principle
it does proceed, viz* whether from a saving principle, or whether from a common
operation of the spirit only, Thus far he.

If it be asked, how this seriousness may be discerned. How moral
seriousness may be discerned.
It may be again enquired, How uses a man to be thought serious in his pursuit
after any thing? I grant, this is not only to be gathered from his words, or
carriage possibly at one time, But, will not seriousness, even in a
particular, kyth in a man's manner of urging it? 2. It kyths in a man's using of
fit means for attaining of it, which are suitable to that end. 3. By his
carriage, abstaining from such things as may any way make his profession to be
suspectlike. And* 4. not doing this for a day, or upon a particular occasion,
but for a time continuing constant and instant therein, with such
affectionatenesse and earnestness in the circumstances that are necessary,
that whatever be the motive that swayeth such a man* yet that he appears to
be morally serious and through in the thing, cannot be denied. So in this case,
(...) (...) may be a conviction that persons are serious, and are affected so,
that we may expect they will endeavor really the preventing of such an
offense, and yet we may not be able to judge them so convincingly sincere,
because to that there is more required, to wit, a new decision whether that
seriousness, be moral only, or gracious, according to the principles, ends,
motives, etc. which cannot be so evidenced externally, as seriousness in the
general may be.

I^ any say that charity ought to judge such a man If always charity should
judge a person to be sincere, who is thus morally serious.
sincere seeing it can have no more? Ans. 1. What may be a persons p^vat
thoughts upon these grounds we are not to determine; we only say, that this
acknowledgement comes not to be judged by a Churchjudicatory upon that
account. And, Secondly These who desire more for the constituting of Church
members, require beside this, evidences of the work of grace upon the heart,
and expressions and narrations to that purpose. And indeed if the accounting of
a person ^o be gracious and sincere, were the alone account, upon which a
person were to be admitted or restored to an actual right to the Ordinances,
such a serious profession would not be sufficient for the convincing of
Church Officers of a persons graciousnesse even probibly; for that which is to
be accounted a probable sign of saying grace, must be that which though it
does not always hold and be convincing, yet for the most part does so; for if
it does more ordinarily fail than hold, it cannot be called probable: but
experience in all times will confirm this, that more frequently such a
profession fails, and afterward the person is found not to be gracious;
therefore it cannot be a probable sign, nor are we to account it such: we
suppose, that if all the Churches of Christ that have been gathered, and all
the penitents that have been received, were compared together, it will be
found, that there have been many more hypocrites than sincere Believers, yet in
these cases this serious profession was called for. And, though it might be
pleaded, that charity may construct the best of a person, where the case is
doubtful, yet (to speak abstractly of a sign) to account that a probable
sign of sincerity, and such which ought to sway charity to account a person
gracious, when yet it is clear in reason, that such a sign is ordinarily but an
indicium or evidence of moral sincerity, but not of saving grace, were against
reason; for, even in bodily diseases, that cannot be counted a probable sign
of health, to ground a judgment of such a persons liveliness, with which many
more do die than recover. Nor can it be called uncharitablnesse, because the
profession is not so accounted; for, it is charity here to account the person
serious, and to think as he says, and not be dissembling therein, although it
be not impossible for a dissembler to come all that length in outward evidenc^s
and prof^ssion. But to believe that he is indeed so, as he says, or thinks,
is not a thing which charity is bound positively to conclude, but, at the most,
by judgeing nothing to the contrary to forbear any judgeing of the party till
time evidence more afterward. And, I suppose, there are few who have
experience, but know that there are many cases wherein they are fully satisfied
to judge the person serious, and yet dar not determine of their sincerity and
graciousnesse, yea, even as to the probability thereof, although they dar not
deny but it is possible; yet durst they not found a Sentence of absolution upon
that as such, to their own satisfaction, although upon the former account they
can: which evidently shows that these two considerations may be separated.

Hence, the first does follow, that whatever be a private persons account of
such a profession, yet it is not considered by the Judicatory as the evidence
of sincerity in their being satisfied with it: Because, 1. It can be no
evidence thereof, as is said; and we would be necessitated then to say, (if
sincerity were the account upon which a Church-judicatory were to be satisfied)
that either they behoved to have that evidence proven, and made ^vident to
them, or they behoved to proceed, without any certain, yea, or probable
evidence: for, certainly, that which gives a Judicatory warrant to proceed to
declare a person to have right to any privilege, must both be a thing that is
relevant in it self, and evident in the proof thereof, in reference to that
party; But, none of these can be said: Therefore the judging such a thing to be
sincere, is not the account on which they proceed. This cannot be said to be a
certain proof of sincerity, yea, none will deny but it is difficult, if not
impossible, for one to have infallible proof of an others sincerity: Then it
must be said, that it is but a probable proof that can be given of sinceritity.
To which we reply, 1. That this profession formerly described, cannot be called
such, as has been shown, So it would follow, that a Church-judicatory does
account a man sincere, and does admit him to such privileges as they ought to
admit only such unto, and yet it was not made so much as probable to them that
he was such. 2. Although it did probably evidence him to be such, yet that were
not enough, if that were the alone account upon which they were to proceed,
because no judicial procedour in determining a man's right, will go upon
probabilities, because the Law decideth not upon a probable, but upon a real
right: and indeed, if in this case sincerity were the ground of procedour, no
man could judge but doubtingly and upon conjecture, and so could he not have
peace afterward, because it was still uncertain to him whether he had
determined warrantably or not: yea, if it should be said, (which yet will not
be sufficient) that it may give a man peace, if in his charity he account the
person sincere, although indeed he be not so: this will not quiet the mind,
because I put no question but experience will teach any that are tender, that
there are many cases, that if they were put to it, they durst not, even
according to their own charity and opinion, determine of a persons sincerity,
so as to take upon them a decision in that, either by determining of the person
to be sincere or not, and so of his admission or seclusion to, or from
Church-ordinances and privileges.

2. The account upon which we admit, and the proof thereof also, must be
proportionable and opposite to the account and proof upon which we debar: for,
binding and loosing are both of the same nature, acts of the same power, in
reference to the same end, and the one of them answers to the other. Now,
when we bind a man for a Scandal, 1. It is not accepted as a ground of binding,
until it be proven and made evident, and not probably only, Therefore nothing
can be the account upon which we can loose but that which may be evidently
proven also; for, it looks not suitable-like to bind a man upon clear
evidence, and to exclude him from a right, and to admit him again, only upon
probabilities and presumptions, much less where the proof does not amount so
high. Again, 2. When a person is shut out, he is not shut out upon the account
that he is unrenued, or upon the account that such an act was not sincere, or
that he appeared to be such, But he is shut out, because it was scandalous to
others, and unbecoming the Gospel, even though the persons sincerity should not
be questioned: Therefore, by the rule of contraries, it follows, that it is
not sincerity which is the account upon which Church Officers are to loose.

If it be asked then, under what notion, or upon what account that moral
serious profession is to be accepted as satisfying? We answer, upon this
account, as it is apparently serious and edifying, without determining whether
it be sincere or not, but as convinced that by such a profession the prejudice
and offense that came by the former miscarriage, and left a blot upon the
Church, and a stumbling block before others, may be removed. So, that as it was
unbecoming a Churchmember to commit such a scandalous sin, So now by such a
serious profession, that blot of making Christianity to be accounted a
fostering of profanity is wiped away, that stumblingblock of his example is
taken out of the way, so that this profession may be edifying to prevent the
stumbling of any other upon his Scandal, and the accepting thereof may look
like a hope^ull mean of edifying the person for the time to come, and
recovering of him from that snare he was into; and so as his scandalousnesse in
these respects was the account upon which he was actually, or was to have been
Sentenced, So oppositly thereto this serious profession having a proportionable
edification, or of it self a tendencie to edi^ying, in all the respects
mentioned going along with it, it is the account upon which it is accepted as
satisfying, without determining of the sincerity thereof, leaving the person to
answer before God for that, and before men to bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, which was John's way in dealing with such as came to his Baptism,
Matthew. 3. upon whose sincerity we think its clear that he did no way decide;
but of this enough: We come to confirm our answer.

For confirming of this, to wit, that such sober and serious profession of
repentance, is sufficient without That this moral seriousness is sufficient,
confirmed.
further enquiry after the graciousnesse of the sincerity thereof, We may
consider these grounds, 1. If such a profession be sufficient for admitting
members to the Church, Then such is also sufficient for the (...) of offending
members and continuing them in their former privileges; for, no reason can be
given why there should be greater rigidity for r^admitting to the actual use
of Church Priviledges, a Christain after he has fallen in drunkenesse,
fornication, etc. than was requisite for the admitting of a Heathen, possibly
guilty of these same sins beside; But the first is true, as is irrefragably and
convincingly demonstrated by the forementioned worthy Author Mr. Wood. Ergo,
etc.

2. It may be supposed, that a gracious man, of whose graciousnesse there is no
question in the charity of any, does fall in some Scandal, what is to be
accounted satisfying in him, must be satisfying in others. Now, it is not any
conviction of the graciousnesse of his state that can be satisfying in this
case, nor yet is that the account upon which we can proceed, because that is
never questioned even when he is under the offense. If it be said, it must be
the sincerity and graciousnesse of his particular act of repentance. Answ. 1.
It is difficult to give judgment of the state of the person, but more
difficult to give judgment of the graciousnesse of a particular act. 2.
Suppose such a person had a particular acknowledgement so circumstantiated as
is formerly described in this moral sincerity, would not that be sufficiently
satisfying? And if it be satisfying in one, in reference to a particular
offense, why not in another? Because, 1. There is one rule given by Jesus
Christ to all. 2. The removing of (...) offense relates to the offense given,
and not to the state of the person who gave it. Therefore if that satisfaction
be sufficient to remove that particular offense in one, it must also be so in
reference to another, because the question (...) (...) not what may be
sufficient to evidence a person to be gracious, but what may be sufficient in a
person to remove such a particular offense? If it be said, that it is accepted
of that gracious person as satisfying, because he is accounted to be gracious,
it may still be urged, The Question is not, whether the person be gracious, but
whether that act of repentance of his be so, or not? for, it cannot be denied,
but a gracious person may have acts of hypocrisy, and in particular acts be
carnal: either then such a person must be excluded though he be gracious, and
in this respect seriously does profess repentance, which were hard to do; or,
he must be upon that profession admitted, and so that must be sufficient for
Church-satisfaction, as is said.

3. That which ought to satisfy a Brother in private, or after his taking of
two or three witnesses with him, and which may be accounted a hearing of a
private admonition; that sort of repentance ought to be satisfying to the
Church Officers: Because, tell the Church, succeeds to the contempt of
private admonition, and therefore they are to obtain by their interposing of
authoritative rebukes, what the other did not obtain, and so they are to rest
satisfied when that is obtained, as the gradation, Matthew. 18. is clear, hearing
of the Church, being in respect of the effects, that same which hearing of the
private admonitions is, to wit, the obtaining of satisfaction. But the former
is true, to wit, a Brother ought to rest satisfied with such a sober serious
profession and acknowledgement as gives him ground to judge him really
affected for his offending, and under a purpose to abstain and amend for the
time to come: and who will say, that a Brother in such a case can rationally
complain of an other, as not having had his admonition? So, neither can the
Church procee^d further, when her admonition has that weight, seeing there had
been no (...) for her judicially to have admonished, if so much had formerly
been obtained: and if it may be said, that such a private admonition so
succesfull, did gain the offending Brother, Is not that same to be said of the
Churches admonition having that success? and when he is gained, are not they
to rest satisfied? and yet we suppose, that none will say, that by gaining in
that place, real conversion is intended, and that a private Brother should
insist to the uttermost, till he be satisfied in that.

4. We may argue thus: If such a profession, and a persons amendment in the
manner spoken, be the hearing and gaining that is intended, Matthew. 18. Then are
Church Officers to be satisfied therewith; But the former is true, as appears
thus, The Churches satisfaction must be in respect to her speaking, her
speaking to the party must be with respect to the complaint made to her by a
particular person; that complaint, again, must have respect to what offended
him, which is some particular act having offense with it; and it was not the
ungracious state of the person, (for so the word, If thy brother offend thee,
etc. imports) Now, from the first to the last, such satisfaction as is
described, may be satisfying in reference to such a particular offense, and be
sufficient for removing the same, and restoring the person to the esteem and
condition which formerly he was into, And therefore it is to be accounted as
satisfying by the Church. And if more were to be enquired for, it were to make
the satisfaction beyond the offense, which were unjust.

5. That which may be accepted as a satisfaction from an Heretic, as the
satisfying fruit of a public admonition, cannot be refused as satisfaction in
other cases; for, if circumspectnesse and rigidity be to be used in any case,
it is in this: But a serious acknowledgement of an error* and an abandoning of
it indeed, is to be accepted for Church-satisfaction from an Heretic, and as
the fruit of an public admonition, and he in that respect is supposed to be
gained: Ergo, etc. That this is to be accepted from him, may be gathered from
Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an heretic, reject after the first and second
admonition. Where these things are clear, 1. That an Heretic that continues
so, and hears not the Church, is to be rejected. 2. That an Heretic
renouncing his errors after admonition, and not continuing such, is not to be
rejected, and so is not to be accounted an Heretic or under that scandal of
heresy, and therefore his disclaiming of it, is to be accounted satisfying as
to the Church Officers; otherwise, it would follow, that although he renounced
his heresy in that serious and morally sincere manner, yet were he still to be
dealt with as such by the Church, except they were satisfied in the sincerity
of his grace, which is contrary to Paul's direction, and the end of that
public admonition: which is not given him because of his unrenued state, but
because of his heresy. Now, that being taken away and satisfied by his
submission, the admonition must be acknowledged to be satisfied, and so he is
neither to be dealt with as an Heretic, nor as obstinate, but as one who has
heard the Churches admonition.

6. From the 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14, 15. we may gather the same: for we have these
things clear, 1. That there were some there who walked disorderly as to some
particular acts. 2. That the Apostle accounts that disorderly walking to be
scandalous, and judicially to be taken notice of, if it be not removed. And, 3.
what that satisfaction is which removes the same, is expressed by him, ver.
14. If a man obey not our word by this epistle* etc. So that it was actual
amending of what was scandalous, and thereby giving obedience to his direction,
which was so to be accounted. And in that case, a brother offending, was
neither further to be noted, nor to be esteemed scandalous, without any further
enquiry to be had of the graciousnesse of his state, or the principle ends or
motives of his obedience.

7. It may appear thus, That which may remove reproach from the Ordinances, and
offense in reference to these that are without, is to be accounted satisfying,
because that is one of the ends of Discipline to stop the mouths of such as are
without: Now as it is not any thing within, or the want of sincerity which does
offend them, and open their mouths, So this morally sincere and real change,
(to speak so) is sufficient to satisfy them, at least, it cannot be said that
they can reach further. This argument alone we acknowledge might not seem to be
cogent, yet considering, that what is offensive, is some external thing having
a proportionable offensivenesse, both to those that are within, and also to
those that are without, and a thing is offensive, because it is apt to offend
such, There ought therefore also a proportionablnesse to be between what
removes an offense in reference to both.

8. If we consider the proper object, nature and Differences between the key of
Doctrine and Discipline.
end of the key of Discipline, as it is abstractly considered, as
contra-distinct from the key of Doctrine, we will find that no more by it can
be expected. For, 1. its proper object is somewhat, that is scandalous, and so
it reaches only to restrain, regulate, and judge the outward man, or somewhat
in the outward conversation firstly, though the fruit of that has a further
look mediately. The key of Doctrine again, or the Word reaches in, and
becomes a judge of the thoughts and intents of the heart; and to make
Discipline judge the inner-man, in this respect, were to confound these two
keys which the Lord has made distinct: and therefore, if Discipline have any
influence upon the inner-man savingly, it is but mediately by condemning his
outward practices, and him as such, or making of directions, reproofs, etc. in
the Word* more weighty. 2. The key of Discipline does only shut from outward
privileges* and does not shut from any spiritual interest in Christ, but as
it concurreth to confirm some threatening in the Word, which debarreth many from
saving promises and the things contained in them, which Discipline may admit to
outward privileges. 3. There is a difference in respect of absolution also, to
wit, the Word when it absolveth, it does absolve from the curse of God, and
gives access to the promises, and a title to the things promised; Discipline
again, does but absolve from outward Censures and restraints, and does but give
right to Church Priviledges. 4. There are different conditions and
qualifications upon which these two keys bind and loose: for, the Word opens
to none but upon condition of sincere faith and repentance, and absolveth none
but real Believers, pronouncing all unbelievers to be under the curse; Again,
Discipline (as such) cannot shut out men from external privileges, because
they are not regenerate, and sincerely gracious; and so in that respect, it
must have a different condition of shuting men out, or it must consider them
upon another account, in excluding them from Church Priviledges, than the Word
does in excluding them from saving promises, to wit, it considers them as
scandalous, and unbecoming the Gospel whatever their state be, and so it may
censure Believers, as the key of Doctrine may shut out the most subtle
hypocrite which the other cannot reach. Therefore also must it be a different
account upon which Discipline does admit, or restore men to outward
privileges, and absolve men from outward Censures, than that upon which the
Word does admit to saving privileges. And seeing this last is sincere faith and
repentance, the other must have somewhat different from this, upon the account
whereof it does give right, which can be no other thing than the moral
sincerity mentioned. 5. Upon these differences follows another (which does
confirm all the former) to wit, a diversity that is in the manner of binding
and loosing by these two keys; for, when a Minister uses the key of Doctrine,
he does exclude from heaven and saving privileges but conditionally, and he
can warrantably exclude no particular professor absolutely; So no Minister can
absolve absolutely, by the key of Doctrine, but conditionally, to wit, if the
person believes that he speaks unto; for, it runs on these terms, If
thou believe, thou shall be saved. But, again, in the exercise of the key of
Discipline it is not so, no Church-judicatory does debar a man from privileges
conditionally, if he believe not, but absolutely he is debarred because of some
present scandal; and although the person were or should become a real Believer,
yet he continues bound from outward privileges by the key of Discipline,
until that scandal be removed: So when they receive any into Church Communion,
they do not absolve them from their former Censure, and give them right to
Church Priviledges upon condition they believe, but absolutely that Censure is
removed, and they are admitted unto these privileges.

If it be asked, What is the reason of this difference betwixt these two keys?
Answ. It is, first, because the ground upon which we loose and bind with the
key of Discipline, is something obvious to men's view, wherein they may
warrantably judge and proceed, and therefore that is done absolutely: But in
the key of Doctrine it is not so; for, men cannot tell who really believe, and
who not, and it cannot by judicial proofs be made-out, Therefore they cannot
bind or loose but conditionally. Secondly, God has committed the outward man
to be the object of Discipline, but the inner man and conscience is reserved to
the Word and Doctrine, and men have not gotten authority over consciences and
hearts; Therefore what concerns the outward man, and outward privileges, may
be determined absolutely, But what concerns the conscience and inner man only
conditionally, because He has reserved the absolute decision of that to
himself, Therefore there is a sixth difference also. The word may and does bind
indefinitly, that is, persons so and so qualified, without making application
in binding or loosing to individual persons, and does not so bind or loose but
conditionally, as is said; But Discipline strikes at individual persons, and
as such, does not otherwise affect: for, suppose an indefinit Sentence of
Excommunication, against persons so qualified, to be pronounced, it does debar
none from Church Priviledges, as it is such; and for what influence it has
further, it is as it comes under the key of doctrine, which does bind or loose
such, but not as it is under the key of Discipline, and that for the reasons
mentioned.

From these grounds we may see how warrantable and necessary it is to put
difference betwixt saving grace, which is the condition upon which the key of
Doctrine absolveth, and serious profession, and a fair inoffensive carriage,
which is the condition upon which the key of Discipline absolveth: And we may
see also what absurdities would follow the confounding of these. And indeed we
see no other way how these two keys may be kept distinct, but this.

To sum up this from what is said, we may, ninthly, conclude, If every simulat
profession be not sufficient, and if gracious sincerity be not to be enquired
for, Then this moral sincerity and amendment is to be accepted as satisfying,
and that which properly Church-judicatories are to enquire in, for a fourth
cannot be conceived. But the former is truth. Ergo, etc.

Lastly, That which was satisfying for giving access to the Ordinances amongst
the Jews after uncleanness, must be satisfying now for removing of offenses;
But such a serious profession was satisfying then: For, 1. it cannot be denied
that there was a separating of some for uncleanness from the Ordinances; and
it is at large and strongly made-out by that learned vindicater of
Church Government and Discipline, Mr. Gillespie, that there was separation for
moral uncleanness; But however, ceremonial uncleanness did then prove ground
enough of exclusion, because so the Law of God had appointed it, even as now He
has appointed other grosle sinners to be cast-out. 2. It is clear. That there
was some satisfaction required, as washing, offering of sacrifices, and such
like, before they could be admitted. 3. It cannot be said, that a mocking,
palpable, irreverent manner of performing these things would have been accepted
by the Priest, but would have been more offensive; nor yet can any say, that
enquiry was made after their end* principles, or graciousnesse of their act; So
the assumption is clear: Neither can the connection of the minor be denied, if
we consider. 1. That there was no less moral holiness called-for from the
Jews, than from us. 2. That there was as great external strictness for
keeping-up the sanctity of external Worship. 3. If we consider that their
Ordinances and ours are materially the same. 4. If we consider that Christ,
even in respect of the external administration of His Kingdom and Discipline,
is not more rigid or restricted in His admitting to privileges now, nor then,
yea, that He is even in that more condescending to us under the days of the
Gospel. 5. If we may reason from the Lord's manner of admitting unto His Church
then, to His admitting unto the Church now upon the same qualifications that
were satisfying then, Then we may also conclude from what was satisfying then
for the admitting of persons excluded, unto the admitting of them now; and this
is fully made-out, beside others, by worthy Mr. Wood, in that forecited solid
and learned Treatise, and before him, (to which he relates) by learned Mr.
Baxter, in his dispute with Tombs.

CHAP. IX. Concerning what is to be done, when men appear neither serious nor
obstinat.
IT may be now asked, What is to be done in reference to those who, after some
grosle offense, can neither be counted thus serious, nor yet obstinat? Ans.
Such cases may be frequent; Concerning which we say, 1. That it is neither fit
altogether to absolve them, as being fully satisfied, nor yet to proceed to the
highest Sentence with them, nor to leave them altogether without a rebuke. But
in the second place, we say, That it is fit to proceed to rebuke them according
to the direction, 1 Timothy 5. 20. Because, 1. This rebuke may be a mean, through
God's blessing, to humble them, and to restrain such an offense. And, 2. it is
also useful in reference to others, although the man's own carriage and
acknowledgment be not every way satisfying; for, the Apostle's direction to
rebuke him openly, does respect more the offense past and the fruit that may
follow to him and others, than any present satisfying frame in the person to be
rebuked.

When it is found meet thus publicly to rebuke, How is a public rebuke to be
given.
the circumstances and manner are to be adverted to, 1. Although the designing
of a particular place be not in it self necessary, nor in every case expedient,
yet for the solemnity of the reproof, it is not unsuitable, it being such as is
rather accommodated for the edification of the whole Congregation, than
otherwise pointed at as a place of penance or punishment, or yet as a mark of
reproach, and such like, which wrongeth the nature of Christ's Ordinance; And
circumstances would be so ordered as the appearance of that may be eschewed. 2.
It would be gone about with much gravity and reverence in respect of all that
are concerned. The Minister especially is to carry weightily and
authoritatively, having words fitted for the edifying of the Congregation, the
humbling of the person, the convincing of both, and for the credit and weight
of Christ's Ordinance before all; The party rebuked would mind whose Ordinance
it is, and be suitably affected as the receiving of a particular rebuke from
Jesus Christ does callfor; The on-lookers also would be grave, having respect
to Christ's Ordinance, tenderness to the person offending, but indignation at
the offense; and this would be testified by their carriage, so as thereby the
authority and solemnity of all may have the deeper stamp upon the person. And
for attaining of this, something would be gravely spoken to the hearers, as
their use thereof, according to the case; and it may be, that some address to
God in prayer together, in reference thereto, before or after the rebuke, would
not be unusefull for that end.

If it be asked, if speaking in public by the person If it be always
necessary that the offender speak.
rebuked be always necessary? Answ* 1. Although it may be often useful and
expedient, yet in ordinary rebukes, for ordinary scandals, where no contemp^
has preceeded, we conceive it not simply necessary, 1. Because, though the
rebuke be clear in the Word, yet is not this by the same evidence, always
required. 2. Their appearing to receive it, has an implicit assent to, and
acceptance of it. 3. The effect of the rebuke is rather to be gathered from
their after carriage, for it has with it an obliging weight to them, and a
virtuall certification before the people, whether they express any thing or
not. Beside, every one cannot edifyingly speak, and in that case, the Ministers
rebuke is appointed to edify others, and to remove that offense from them.

Yet there are two cases especially wherein we think this is expedient and
necessary unto edification* 1. When either by the attocity of some offense, or
continuance in contempt, a person* has be^ process toward Excommunication;
or, when there is a relapse after a former rebuke: in such cases it is for the
edification of the people, to know upon what grounds the Eldership does fist
from proceeding; And engagements publicly and explicitly taken on before a
Congregation, are often more weighty to the person. And if there be a failing,
there is the greater evidence against them for after proceeding.

2. Suppose there has been some Sentence binding or shuting out the person
formerly, in that case, we conceive, speaking in public to be necessary for
confirming the people in their love to him again, which was hazarded by his
former evident fall; and an implicit accepting of a reproof is not sufficient
in such a case.

There may be also other cases, as suppose one has been carried away with
error, which he has frequently vented before men, or in some such case where
it may be edifying to have it from the parties own mouth, especially if the
person be in such a frame, or of such ability, as by so doing he may edify.
But this is to be decided by the prudence of the overseers.

If it be asked again, how is he to be accounted of How is an offender to be
reckoned after a rebuke.
after this rebuke? We answer, Even as by some competent continuance of time,
he does discover the seriousness, or unseriousnesse of his profession, So that
if he relapse, he is the more inexcusable, and to be proceeded with in due
manner: but if he take up himself, and carry to the view of others seriously,
he is not to be accounted as scandalous, because it cannot be said, that he
has refused to hear the Church in that public admonition: and a public
rebuke does not of it self bind any and shut them out as scandalous, (yea, it
gives not ground for it, if obstinacy follows not) but if it be hearkened
unto, and received, it does prevent that, it being a right satisfying ^rt of
Christianity to admit of, and to improve a rebuke. Yet we think it incumbent to
Church-judicatories, after some competent time, to enquire in the after
carriage of such, and so accordingly to determine, whether they have
satisfyingly accepted of the admonition or not. And that therefore the person
so rebuked, ought to have such a Sentence before he can plead full admission to
all privileges, if at the time his profession was not satisfying. This is
useful for the persons behove, when he knows he is still to be looked upon
in a special manner, as a sickly member of the body. And it is also agreeable
to reason; for, if when a private person gives an admonition he be to judge of
the fruit of it, whether it be satisfying; and if the Church-judicatory, when
they admonish judicially, be to weigh, whether the effects be satisfying or
not: So by the like reason, when an admonition is publicly given, ought they
to enquire what has followed, and if that be satisfying or not.

If it be asked, if in no case an offender may be If an offense may at first
instant be brought to public.
brought immediately to public, but by the former steps, and upon supposition
that these be fruitless? Ans. It may be in these two or three cases, 1. When
the offense, being of a gross nature, is public and open, so that many are in
hazard to be infected, in that case a private rebuke would not be sufficient:
Because, respect is to be had to the good of others. And so in some cases, even
though as to the persons own conviction and carriage, a Church-judicatory may
be satisfied; yet there is a necessity for the reason foresaid of a public
rebuke. Yet every offense that is known to more than one, is not to be accounted
an offense of this nature: Because from that word of Christ's Take with thee two
or three witnesses, etc. it is evident, that even after those are made acquaint
with the scandal, it is not public, except obstinacy follow. Yea, it would
appear, that such a scandal might be known to others, when yet one private
person might only admonish; and if the admonition were accepted, might fist.
And in case the fact be denied, then he is thereafter to bring two or three
conjunct witnesses, who may convince the party offending of the truth of the
fact as well as of the nature thereof, by their joint testifying, that the
party offended had reason to seek satisfaction in such a thing: Otherwise, if
that were only a private offense which is known to one* supposing the party
offending to deny the fact, there were no access to an offended brother to
pursue the same, and by witnesses to make it out, if his private admonition
should be rejected. And this may be one reason also why those two or three are
called Witnesses, whose part is to confirm the matter of fact, as the Law cited
there to that purpose does evidence. Nor is it always necessarily thus public
when it is made known to a Churchofficer or a Church-judicatory, because in
that case, even they may find it more edifying to admonish privately than
publicly; And it is their part rather to hinder the spreading of a scandal,
than to make the same needlessly more public. An offense then that When an
offense is to be accounted public.
is to be accounted public, that is* which is so in respect of its notority or
publicknesse, and such as is not the object of private admonition, but whereof
a Church-judicatory is immediately to take notice, may be considered in respect
of its first instant o^ in respect of some following circumstance; for what is
required in the nature of the sin it self has been spoken to already. It is
public in the first respect, 1. When it is done before so many as probably
cannot be satisfied with private admonition, so that thereby there is a hazard
to many to be scandalized. 2. It is public, when it seems to be done with
contempt and an high hand, as if a person were owning the same; Thus a scandal
that has fewer witnesses, may be accounted public, when another, it may be,
actually known to as many, is not to be accounted such, because in this case
there is no access to private admonition, the person being like a swine, ready
to turn on the admonisher. Thus suppose Absolom's incest had not been actually
known to many, yet the very circumstances of his doing it openly, and purposly
that it might be known, made it of a public nature: Thus sometimes it is more
necessary to take notice of an offense committed in a public place, though, it
may be, few know the same, than of a thing done more privately, because as to
them it might have been public to many; and it shows an humor and
corruption that is beyond private admonition, when a thing is so
circumstantiated. 3. Sometimes offenses will have an horror, and an
indignation wakened against them, even in respect of such circumstances, as to
be drunk, lascivious, and such like, are offenses; but to be so in a
Marketplace, or in public streets, even supposing it to be in a day when few
do actually see it, does waken an indignation in the hearts of sober men, as
being an affront to Religion and Order, and inconsistent with Christianity and
Civility, much more than if it had been in a private place, or privately; for,
that is before the Sun to do so, as Zimries act was, which provoked Phineas's
zeal. 4. An offense is public, when it is generally accounted to be a certain
truth, and not a suspicion only; as being a thing in its evidence known to so
many (beside what is reported to others) that it cannot be supposed that an
ingenuous mind can have access to deny or shift the same, without some
indignation in the hearts of those that know it. 5. Sometimes an offense is to
be accounted public when, though it may be, many are not witnesses thereof,
yet when many are in hazard to be infected thereby; as suppose those witnesses
to be such as cannot rest quiet in a private satisfaction, but they have either
spread it, or are in hazard to spread it, and, it may be, long afterward they
make it a ground of reproach: In this case it becomes a scandal not only to
the first witnesses, but also to those to whom it is reported; So that although
it was not at first public, yet it becomes so by the rumor thereof. This
infectiousness may also proceed from the time wherein it is committed, the
person who commits it* the nature of the fact that is committed, (which may
more readily insuare others than facts of some other nature) from those also
before whom it was committed; Therefore in such cases it is necessary that
public notice be taken thereof.

Therefore, in the second place, we said that some offenses not very public in
respect of the fact, yet may, by some concurring circumstances, be such as the
bringing of them in public, may be necessary for the edifying of the Church at
such a time, then that way is to be taken; As suppose, 1. that such a sin is in
some places scarce counted a sin; Or, 2. if it be secretly and frequently in
use among others; Or, 3. if the person found guilty be generally suspected of
loose and untender walking in such things, although particulars be not public;
Or* 4. if they be under false pretexts of tenderness, ready to seduce others
to something sinful, or in the like cases. In which, though the fact be not so
public, yet the scandal, or hazard, and the benefit of a rebuke are public;
and therefore that way is to be followed, Because they are necessary for the
edifying of the Church, which is the end wherefore public rebuks are
appointed. The same may be said of atrocious horrible crimes, which being but
known to few, yet are not to be, nor cannot be past with a mere private
admonition, such as witchcraft, incest, etc. which are defiling sins, the
bringing whereof in public does honor God the avenger and discoverer of such
works of darkness, suppose also, that the evidencing of somewhat, may serve to
remove some former prejudice, as if it had been thought that an innocent person
had been father of such a child, or actor of such a murder; if God bring it
about, that those who truly are guilty be discovered, it is not to be kept
close, because it is the removing of a former stumbling block, and may keep
others from sinning in mis-judgeing an innocent, and it also glorifieth God
whose wise way is to be observed in such dispensations.

2. Although a fact be not public, yea, in some cases although it be not true
that there has been any ground of offense given: Yet, 1. If the report of such
an act be publicly rumoured; Or, 2. if such presumptions thereof be public,
which are ready to leave the impression of the thing; Or, 3. if the fame or
brute of such a thing be come to such an height, that either it be believed by
many to be true, (and that by such who are neither too simply credulous without
all presumptions, nor malicious or infected with prejudice in reference to the
person) Or, suppose that a person is accounted to be habitually in secret
evils, the riping up whereof might be edifying; in such and such like cases, a
Church-judicatory is at the first instant to meddle with, and enquire in the
same: because, although possibly there may be no ground, yet the offense is
great, and may stumble many as if it were so: and the neglecting thereof cannot
but be offensive, whereas inquiry therein is useful, whether the fame be
grounded or not. But in this there would be great tenderness and prudence used
in considering, both upon whom, by whom, and upon what occasion the report is
raised and entertained, and whether dipping therein be edifying or not.

3. Upon supposition that private persons be defective in giving admonitions,
or following of them before a Church-judicatory, and yet there be pregnant
presumptions of miscarriages in such and such persons, although they be not
public; or, suppose, through fear, ill grounded affection, or other carnal
respects, others should concur to keep from public view the offenses of some
person, to the stumbling of themselves, in becoming partakers of their sin, and
to the prejudice of others: I say* in such like cases, a Church-judicatory is
to enquire into the carriage of such a person, and to put others to declare and
testify therein, although they be not complained of, and although the Scandal
be not so every way obvious: Because admonition is needful both for the good
of the person offending, and of others also: and when private persons become
defective, Church officers are bound rather to interpose immediately than to
suffer such a person to continue under sin, to the hazard of himself and
others; for, they must either do it, or it is to be left undone, which would be
a stumblingblock to many, and strengthen wickedness exceedingly, in case
untender men fell only to be accessory to the knowledge of the offenses of each
other (as often it is) yet though it be necessary for a Church-judicatory to
interpose, it is not always necessary to bring the matter to a public rebuke,
but as from consideration of the thing, person, or, other circumstances it
shall be thought sit to rest in a private admonition or not.

From which we may see the necessity of processing parties, and leading
witnesses (in case the matter be denied) without any particular accuser or
delater: because in such cases, either public Scandal of the thing, the nature
of the Church Officers oversight, or the edification of the body, which they
are to prefer to every thing, do require that such a thing or person be put to
trial.

CHAP. X. Clearing whether in Church-processes an Accuser be always necessary.
IF it be asked, concerning an accuser, Whether it be necessary in all
Church-processes, that one, under such a consideration, be fixed, before there
can be proceeding against any party, in reference to trial. We answer in these
assertions.

Asser. 1. It is not always necessary in every case that there should be a
formal particular accuser, as may appear from the cases formerly instanced;
for, that any offense or offender should pass without being taken notice of,
(especially if offenses be continued in) is contrary to the end for which
Church Censures are appointed, and yet neither de facto is there always an
accuser where there is an offense; nor de jure can any be constrained to be an
accuser: therefore it is necessary that in some cases there must be a process
without an accuser, in this way of enquiry.

Asser. 2. Where an offended Brother follows Christ's way in pursuing of an
offense, he is not to be accounted an accuser formally, as the term of
accusation uses properly to be taken: Because, 1. To accuse often is a thing
that may be omitted, but this kind of pursuit is laid on as a necessary duty.
2. To accuse, respects some paticular wrong and injury usually, and the
following thereof* imports a prejudice and hurt to the party accused. But
this which respects offense without any particular injury, proceeds from
love, tends to the advantage and recovery of the party, and so properly
cannot be called accusation. Yea* 3. When a person has followed the second
step, and made out his private admonition by two or three witnesses, when he
comes to the Church with them, neither of them can be accounted accusers more
than when he did privately speak to the person, or after that to those
witnesses, because all is duty, and a piece of that Christian mutual
communion, that brethren and members of the same body, owe one to another, and
to the body in common; yet is he who so enters a complaint, obliged to make
it evident to the Judicatory; and if he has rightly performed the second step,
and made it appear before two or three, there is no hazard or difficulty in
this; but if he has failed in that, he ought not to have proceeded to this.

Asser. 3. We say, that to have a formal accuser, seems not so well to agree
to the nature of ecclesiastic processes, and looks liker a civil Court. For,
1. If the offense be public, there is no accuser needful, as is said. 2. If
it be private, no accuser is to be heard, but in the ordinary method, because
Christ's Ordinance is not to be subservient to men's passions, or to be the mean
of their seeking revenge for injuries: And therefore in some cases, though an
accuser would undertake the pursuing of some process against a person, where
neither the Scandal is flagrant, nor the party accused, after private
admonition and conviction, obstinate, in that case the accusation might be
rejected; because so the accuser looks not like a Brother, that is stumbled,
seeking the gaining of the other, and his own satisfaction upon that account,
but rather like a person that is irritate, vindictive or malicious, to whose
humor Church Officers ought not to give way; neither does such an accusation
become Christ's Court. Yet, if the thing be indeed scandalous, Church Officers
are to enquire therein, and not to slight any mean of evidence which may be
had, lest profane persons mouths be opened; but that rixal and contentious way
of following of processes by particular accusers, against particular persons,
as uses to be in other Courts, we conceive no way becoming the gravity and
convincing way that ought to be in this; And we suppose in experience is not
often found to be edifying, but rather does engender hatred, prejudice,
contention, and such like, which is altogether contrary to Christ's scope.

Again, on the other side, there may be no particular accuser against the
person and yet it be necessary that he be tried, as has been said.

Asser. 4. The^e may be some cases in which it is expedient to admit an
accuser, and not to admit a process without one. As suppose one were under no
ill report, and yet some gross scandal were imputed to him, which were not of
such fame, or had not such presumptions, as to give ground for a
Churchjudicatory immediately to interpose, and the scandal being of such a
nature as the trial thereof could neither be omitted, not closed in private; in
that case, suppose one should complain of the Churches negligence in the same,
asserting the evidences to be clear, and offering to make them out; In such a
case, I say, the Church can hardly refuse to hear him, lest they be thought
partial; nor is there ground, nor is it fit for them immediately to pursue it:
Therefore an accuser is expedient, that so, upon the one side, the Churches
impartiality may be vindicated, in refusing the complaint of no sober man, nor
the uttermost of any trial, that in well grounded reason they may expect; And,
on the other side, that the mouths of some needless and too importunate
complainers may be stopped, and they themselves found censurable, if either
without cause they traduce the Church Officers as negligent and partial, while
there is access to make out before them such a truth if it be truth; or if
precipitantly and inconsiderately (if not maliciously) they have tabled a
scandal against another as a public scandal, which they cannot make out, and
so have needlessly troubled a Church-judicatory in such a matter, and sinfully
wronged their neighbor.

For, a process in such cases where it cannot be made out, is scandalous:
therefore if a person rest not* satisfied, so as to abstain till he have trial
put to the utmost, he is to be dealt with as a scandalous person, lest men take
liberty, under the pretext of pursuing offenses, to defame others, and abuse
the Ordinance of Christ. And though it be just in such a case, that he be
materially dealt with as unjust accusers use to be in civil courts, yet this
does not only flow from the consideration of such a persons being a formal
accuser, but from the nature of the deed which is scandalous in such a meature,
and that publicly, and therefore is to be restramed, whether the person take
on him that formal consideration or not, lest yet, upon the matter, he
continue publicly and importunately to press the pursuit. And we conceive,
the imposing the title of accuser in such a case, or the making of it
necessary, that one take on him that formal no ion, is rather for coveniencie
to restrain men's inordinatenesse, and stop their mouths, and to add weight to
the matter of the sentence, if they fail, than as being simply necessary for
making such a person to be accounted scandalous, if he come short.

CHAP. XI. Concerning what is to be done when the complaint is of some enjury
^one to the complainer.
THere is one case yet to be enquired in* viz. how to account of a particular
person his complaining or pursuing an offense which carries with it a
particular enjury unto himself? As suppose, that such a person did calumniate
him, calling him false, covetous, hypocrite, thief, or such like, or did
imprecate curses unto him? Answ. 1 If the way laid down were followed, and a
public complaint made the last step, it may be, there would be few of these
complaints. Of this we have spoken already. 2. Although such enjuries have with
them a spiritual hurt also, and so indeed are real stumbling blocks to the
spiritual state of the party enjured. Yet, 1. it is hard for men enjured,
singly to abstract the scandal given them from the enjury done them, and so to
follow the offense with respect to their own and the others edification, as to
entertain no thoughts of revenge in the pursuing thereof: for certainly, often
it is the reparation of a wrong, and to vindicate folks own name and credit,
rather than edification, which in such cases is aimed at: Therefore we find
ever the most irreligious, carnal and proud persons, hotest in such a pursuit,
and with greatest difficulty to be satisfied; and the satisfaction intended by
them, is not any Chistian gaining often, but some public shame, or such like:
And therefore if that follow, although the person fall over again in many other
scandals that are worse, or others shall sin more grossly; yet that stirs
them not, neither are their complaints in such cases heard of. 2. We find, that
such a case has often great difficulties with it, and readily much heat and
carnalnesse; yea, in things that are personal between parties, it is more
difficult for them to abstain from carnalnesse, or the appearance thereof, and
also for Church-judicatories to walk so as not to be thought partial to one of
the sides, and so by intending the removal of one offense, more may be given.
Therefore we would suppose such a procedor to be suitable to Christ's order and
ordinance, 1. That as much as may be, these personal things may be waved by
private persons themselves who are so (...). Certainly men lose not by
condescending in their particulars, and it may afterward tend more to the
convincing of the party and others, and to the vindicating of themselves that
they forbear (at least, till the fervor be abated, both in them and in the
offending party) than by kindling of their own passions by the passions of
others, to hazard upon more sin and offense. 2. When such things occur, its fit
that Churchofficers should endeavor to compose and to remove them privately;
yea, if any complaint come in a persons heat, that yet notwithstanding, means
be used to compose and allay the same; and if that fail, that the scandal be
brought to public, rather by the Eldership it self, than by the party
offended, because so the thing, as scandalous, may be more abstractedly
considered* the person easilier convinced, and the heat of parties prevented,
which often mar the beauty of the Ordinance, and so there is nothing overseen
that ought to be redressed. 3. If persons will needs enter their own complaint*
Then it would be enquired, 1. Whether it be really the enjury to their name, or
outward condition that swayeth them? or, if it be the offense, that is, the
stumbling block that goes along there with, and (...) is ready to hurt their
spiritual estate, that does move them? This question is fit for curbing of
carnal humors, and keeping the Ordinance of Christ from being abused, and
made subservient to men's sinful passions.

If it cannot be hid that it is the injury which affects them* Then would they
be admonished for that, and remitted to follow their injury otherwise, and to
pardon it, as to any vindictive humor; yet the thing as it is scandalous,
would be still followed without them. 2. It would be enquired, if they followed
the private steps? And, 3. what sort of satisfaction they aim at, and if it be
the parties gaining that they seek with their own satisfaction?

Sometimes there arises a new difficulty in such What, when a calumniator
complained of, offers to make it out.
cases, as suppose one complained of for calumniating another, should offer to
make good his word, or what he has said; In such a case it is difficult for a
Church-Judicatory to carry rightly, if probation be refused, the slanderous
mouth is not stopped, And to admit it, it seems neither pertinent nor
profitable to any Church-end. This sometimes is one of the evils of making
Church-judicatories the stage of men's passions: Yet in such a case we say, 1.
That whether the thing be true or not, the casting of it up at such a time, and
with such circumstances, was offensive; and therefore no following probation
can exempt the offender from being accounted scandalous, because the end of
bringing forth that, was really the hurt of his brother, and neither private
nor public edification. 2. Some manner of offered probation is indirect, (as
also some sort of slandering) as, suppose one would complain of another as
guilty of theft, or some other sin, and give for the ground thereof some
instances of corruption or deceit in their trade of merchandising, or taking
some advantage by law or other ways, to the hurt of another. These are causes
and matters wherein properly Church Officers are neither fit nor called to
decide; and the event thereof does depend upon some civil contest, therefore
are not meet to be admitted as the ground of a complaint or probation in a
Church-judicatory. Again, some manner of probation is more direct, as suppose
one would prove by witnesses direct theft upon another* Yet considering that
Church-judicatories are not to be sub-servient to men's passions, as has been
said, and also, that their end ought ever to be edification, and there being no
probable ground to expect it in such a process, we conceive it were fit
altogether to wave such contests. For, though there be a shaming of offenders
allowed in Church Discipline, yet it looks harsh-like to make it the mean of
bringing civil shame and infamy upon any; Because such a blot, as to be
accounted or declared infamous, even as to civil things, is a civil punishment;
and therefore is not to be the effect of a Church-judicatory, properly,
Although we will not deny but by accident, these may be sometimes necessarily
joined.

It may be asked, What if an offending party appearing, What if a profane
offending confessing party refuse to give satisfaction.
profess repentance for their fault, etc. as has been desired, and should yet
refuse to give obedience to such things and in such manner as is thought fit to
be done by the Church Officers for the removing of the offense? Answ. 1. It is
not like that any who are serious in their profession of rep^ntance, will stand
on such a thing; and where that is, it is too probable-like an evidence of
their dissembling, if some convincing reason cannot be given by them for
swaying to that refusal. 2. Their disobedience is either in material things,
or such as are but circumstantiall. Again, it is either done with contempt, or
with professed continued ^espect and a desire to satisfy. As for instance,
some may refuse to receive a public rebuke where edification requires it, or
to acknowledge their offense to an offended party, or they may be willing to
appear, and willing to acknowledge their offense, but differ as to the time,
place, manner, etc. For the first, Though a Church-judicatory may wait for a
time, yet can they not in some cases dispense with them, because otherwise,
they are not heard, nor is the end obtained; and therefore may process
proceed, especially if that disobedience look contemptuous-like: For the second
sort of disobedience, to wit, in the manner or circumstances of giving
satisfaction, although in this also, those that are serious to have offenses
removed, will not readily stick, yet if it be, there is difference between this
and the former, if there be no discernable evidences of contempt in it; and in
this, no question, Church-judicatories have a greater latitude to do as may
edify: wherein they are especially to take notice of these things, 1. That by
too much rigidity in circumstances, they seem not unnecessarily to wrong them,
or to lay too much weight of satisfaction upon such formalities. 2. That by too
easy passing from such, they do not strengthen any to follow that example for
the time to come. And, 3. that even in circumstances there be an equality in
reference to these same scandals in all persons. And if there be hazard in
reference to any of these by condescending, to alter or forbear a circumstance
in a public rebuke, we conceive it is safer to abstain from that forbearance,
and not to yield it; and yet not simply upon that account to pursue a process,
but to continue dealing with the person, while either he be convinced and
brought, for the good of order and edification of the Church, to yield, or
there be more clearness to do otherwise.

CHAP. XII. Concerning what ought to be done by private persons, when
Church Officers spare such as are scandalous.
WE come now to the last Question proposed, to wit, supposing that
Church Officers should be defective in trying and censuring scandalous persons,
what is the duty of private Christians in such a case, and if notwithstanding,
they ought to continue in the communion of such a Church, or to separate from
her?

This Question has troubled the Church, and been the occasion of many (...) in
many ages, the devil thereby under pretext of indignation at offenses, has
made them to abound in the Church, as the Churchhistories and Writings of the
Fathers, in what concerns the Novatians, Donatists, and such like, do fully
evince; And although we have great ground to acknowledge Gods mercy, in the
sobriety of His people amongst us, so that we have unity, with purity; yet,
seeing in order this does follow, we shall answer shortly, in laying down these
grounds.

1. It cannot be denied, but such a case may be, and often de facto is, that
Church Officers are defective in the exercising of Discipline upon scandalous
persons, what from negligence, what from unfaithfulness, what from fainting,
or some other finfull infirmity at the best, as may be gathered from the second
and third Chapters of the Revelation.

2. Though this be true, yet possibly it is not always their fault when it is
charged on them: as suppose, 1. That no private person, or, possibly even the
complainer, has admonished such persons as are counted scandalous, nor have
given-in sufficient proofs of their scandal to any Church-judicatory; or, it
may be, many are counted scandalous who cannot legally and judicially be found
to be such; for it is more easy to assert a scandal, than to prove, even often
when it is true: and it being rather a ground of irritation than edification,
when a process is entered, and not convincingly made-out, Therefore often in
duty some proces^es are abstained. Sometimes also Church Officers may be
faithfully dealing with persons to recover them from scandals, and yet not find
it fit for edification to proceed to high Censures; In such cases,
Church Officers cannot reasonably be blamed, and those who complain would pose
their own consciences, if they have exonered themselves and done their duty,
and have put it to the Officers doors, before they account it their fault: And
it is most unbecoming for persons to charge others and to be defective in their
own duty, which necessarily infers the other. And if it were as difficult
and weighty a task to calumniate and groundlesly to charge Church Officers with
this, as it is, faithfully to follow private admonition, there would not be so
much of the one, and so little of the other. And if it be rightly looked to, it
will not be easy to charge them with gross defects (and if they be not
gross, the matter is not so to be stumbled at, they being in the exercise of
Discipline as in other things) for, that must be upon one of these accounts,
either, 1. Because such scandalou^ persons, after refusing of private
admonitions, were complained of to them, and that evidence of the fact was
off^red, and Church Officers refused to put the same to trial: Or, it must be
because when they did try, they did determine such a thing to be no scandal or
not to be p^oven, or that (supposing it to be proven) they did not c^nsure it;
or, at least, when scandals were open and obvious, and palpable, they did not
take notice of them. Now, is it probable that such a Church-judicatory will
frequently be found that will fail grossly either of these ways? And if they
do, then there is acces^e to convince them, by an appeal to a superior Court,
which in that case is a duty. If it be said that their failing and neglect* is*
in some covered manner, so carried-on as there is no access to such legal
complaints. Answ. 1. We suppose if the things be that gross, and the fact so
clear and frequent, as that there be just ground to complain then there will be
also access to such a proof. 2. If it be so carried and not owned, then it may
be their sin before God; but it is not to be accounted a proper Church-offence
in the sense before-m^ntioned, seeing they could not be convinced judicially
even before the most impartial Judge. And as in such a case we cannot account a
private brother ecclesiastically scandalous, although the general strain of his
way may be dissatisfying to us, So ought we not to account this; for, there is
a great difference, betwixt that which may be offensive to a persons private
discretion, and put him possibly in a christian way to desire satisfaction, and
that which is to be noised as a public Church-scandall.

Asser. 3. Upon supposition that the defect be true, yet private professors are
to continue in the discharge of the duties of their stations, and not to
separate from the Communion of the Church, but to count themselves exonered in
holding fast their own integrity. It Is true, it cannot but be heavy to those
that are tender, and, if it become scandalously excessive, may give occasion to
them to depart and go where that Ordinance of Discipline is more vigorous; and
concerning that, there is no question, it being done in due manner; Yet, I say,
that that can be no ground for withdrawing from the Ordinances of Christ, as if
they or their consciences were polluted by the presence of such others. For, 1.
That there were such defects in the Church of the Jews, cannot be denied, and
particularly does appear in the instance of Elie's sons, who made the
Ordinances of the Lord contemptible with their miscarriages; yet that either it
was allowable to the people to withdraw, or faulty to join in the Ordinances,
can no way be made out. If it be said, there was but one Church then, Therefore
none could separate from the Ordinances in it? Answ. 1. This does confirm what
is said, to wit, that the joining of scandalous persons in Ordinances does not
pollut them to others; for if so, the Lord had not laid such a necessity upon
those that were tender, that they behoved to partake of polluted Ordinances, or
to have none; and if it did not pollute them then, some reason would be given
that does evidence it now to do so. 2. If there be an unity of the Church now,
as well as then, then the con^equence must be good; because, so where ever
folks communicate, those many that communicate any where, are one bread, and
one body, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 10. 17. compared with chap 12, 13.
And so by communicating any where, we declare our selves to be of the same
visible Church and politic body, with those who communicate elsewhere, even as
by Baptism we are baptized into one Church, and into communion with all the
members of the body any where. And therefore, if this be considered, it will
not be enough to eschew pollution (if the objectio^ be true and well grounded)
to separate from one Society, or one particular Congregation, except there be a
separation from the whole visible Church; for so also Jews might have separated
from particular Synagogues* or have choosed times for their offerings and
sacrifices distinct from others. Famous Cotton of New England, in his Holiness
of Churchmembers, page 21. grants that there were many scandalous persons in
the Church of the Jews. 2. He says, that that was by the Priests defect, for
they ought not to have been retained. And, 3. though he say that that will not
warrant the lawfulness of admitting scandalous persons to the Church, yet he
asserteth, that it may argue the continuance of their Church Estate
notwithstanding of such a toleration; and if so, then it approves continuing
therein, and condemns separation therefrom; and consequently a Church may be
a Church, having the Ordinances in purity, and to be communicate in,
notwithstanding of the form^r fault. 3. What has been marked out of Learned
Writers, for paralleling the constitution of the Church under the Gospel, with
that under the Law in essential things, does overthrow this objection; for now
separation is as impossible as formerly.

2. This defect is to be observed in several of the Primitive Churches, as we
may particularly see in the second and third Chapters of the Revelation, yet it
is never found that any upon that account did withdraw or were reproved for not
doing so, even when the Officers were reproved for defect: Yea, on the
contrary, these who kept themselves pure from these Scandals, though
continuing in that communion, are commended and approven, and exhorted to
continue as formerly. Now, if coutinuing in communion in such a case be of it
self sinful, and personal integrity be not sufficient to professors where
the defect is sinful to the Officers, even though in other personal things
and duties of their stations they were approveable, How can it be thought that
the faithful and true Witness should so sharply reprove the one, and so fully
approve the other at the same time?

3. The nature of Church Communion does confirm this: because such influence
has the scandalousnesse of one to make another guilty, as the approven
conversation of the other has to make the Ordinances profitable to him that is
scandalous, for we can no otherwise partake of the evil than of the good of
another in Church Communion; But it is clear, that the graciousnesse of one
cannot sanctify an Ordinance to one that is profane; and therefore the
profanity of one cannot pollute the Ordinance to one that is tender. And, as he
that examineth himself, partaketh worthily in respect of himself and his own
condition, but does not sanctify communicating to another; So, he that
partaketh unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, and not to
another: and for that cause, is both the precept and the threatening bounded,
Let a man examine himself, etc. For, he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself; for, upon doing or omitting of duty
in himself, does follow worthy, or unworthy communicating to him. And if in the
most near conjugall fellowship, the company of a profane Husband may be
sanctified to a gracious Wife, even when hers is unsanctified to him, (because
that depends upon the persons own qualification and way of usemaking of Gods
Ordinance of marriage) much more may it be here: this last might be a distinct
argument of it self.

4. If continuance in communion with such persons be sinful, Then it must
either be because communion with such as are profane indeed, whether we know or
think them to be so or not, is sinful; or, it must be because we know them, or
think them to be such; But neither of these can be said: Not the first, because
so to keep communion with an hypocrite, or a Believer in a carnal frame, were
sinful, although we thought them to be sincere, which cannot be pleaded: nor
can it be said, it is because we know them to be so, Because, 1. If we knew a
man to be so, and another knew not, in that case, the Ordinances were pollutted
to one, and not to another, at the same time, though possibly both were
exercising the same faith, and having examined themselves, were in the same
frame, which were absurd. Yea, 2. If it depended on our knowledge of it, Then
our very supposing it to be so, although it were not so, would pollute the
Ordinance; and what confusion would be there, may be afterward hinted. Nor can
it be said, it is because we think so, because, supposing some to think
otherwise, it would be still an ordinance to them, and a duty to continue in
it, and not to us, which is the former absurdity; and this does not flow from
the binding nature of an erroneous conscience (which may be alleged in other
cases) but from the difference of persons light, charity, or other
apprehensions of things, whereby one is induced to esteem that scandalous,
which another does not.

5. If communion with profane persons that are such to our knowledge be
sinful, and polluteth Ordinances, Then these things may be enquired, which
will inf^r diverse absurdities, 1. Ought persons to try all those that they
keep communion with, whether they be profane or (...)? For, if any profane
person be in that communion which they might have known if they had tried, then
their ignorance cannot excuse. 2. It may be enquired, what degree of trial and
search does sufficiently exoner, because possibly a further trial might have
discovered some to be profane? 3. It may be enquired, what evidences may
demonstrate persons to be scandalous, and make them to be so accounted of? If
only something seen by themselves, or if something reported by others; and that
whether it be judicially made out or only asserted? and how manies report is to
be taken for proof; or if any that be so reported of, be so to be accounted? 4.
What sort of sca^dals are to be enquired-in to make a person such as polluteth
the Ordinances? If it be any kind of scandal, or but scandals of such a nature?
If one scandal be sufficient, or if the^e must be many? and how many are to be
laid weight upon in this? and some satisfying grounds how, and where to fix the
difference, are to be laid down? 5. It may be asked, if one scandalous person
alone does pollute the Ordinances? or if there must be more? and if so, How
many? 6. Suppose such a scandal were known to us alone, charity, and Christ's
command do say, it is not to be published; conscience says in that case, the
Ordinance is polluted, time straits either to communicate doubtingly, or with
offense to abstain and hide the cause, or contrary to charity to signify the
same. These and many such like things are requisite to satisfy one, upon this
supposition, that communion in such a case is sinful, Therefore it is not to
be admitted.

6. If the Ordinance be polluted to one that is clean Then it is either the
deed of the Church Officers that does pollute it, or the deed of the scandalous
person that does communicate; But neither of these can be said: Not the first,
for that would suppose that all the Ordinances were polluted, although no
scandalous person were present actually, because they were not actually
excluded, and though they were absent, yet there being no impediment made to
them by Church Officers, as to their guilt, it is the same. Nor the second,
Because, supposing a person not to be debarred, it is his duty to communicate;
and can it be said, that he in doing of his duty upon the matter, should make
that not to be a duty to us, which lies on by a joint command, which requires
eating from him and from us, as it requires praying?

7. The Lords ordering it so in His providence, that He admits unsanctified
Officers to administrate His Ordinances, and yet withal, accounting them
Officers, and the Ordinances in their hands to be His Ordinances, and that even
when they are known to be unsound (till in His own way they be removed) does
demonstrate this, that pollution in joint worshippers does not pollute the
Ordinances to others. For, if any did pollute them, Then most of all scandalous
Officers; But these do not. Ergo, etc. We may see it, first, in the
scandalousnesse of Priests under the Law; for we must either say that there
were no scandalous Priests, or that the people did then offer no sacrifice and
join in no worship, or that sinfully they did it: All which are absurd. 2. We
see in Christ's time, the Scribes and Pharisees were pointed out by Him as
scandalous, Mat. 23. v. 3. Yet even there does He require continuance in the
Ordinances administrate by them, notwithstanding. 3. Does not Paul speak of
some that preached out of envy, Philip. 1. 15. which is a most gross scandal,
and of others who sought their own things, and not the things of Christ, Phil.
2. 21? Both which are gross, and clearly evidenced by his testimony, yet is he
content that people continue, yea, he supposes that they may profit in
communion with them, which he would not, had the Ordinances been polluted by
them to others. And the same may be said of several Churches in these second
and third Chapters of the Revelation, where both grossnesse of Ministers, and
of many Professors, is notified by Christ to the Church, yet it cannot be
supposed that that might have been made the ground of separation afterward from
them, more than not doing of it was reprovable before.

8. If known evil in any that does communicate, pollute the Ordinances in
themselves, Then how can a Believer communicate with himself? Because, 1. he
has corruption. 2. He has as full knowledge of it as of any other man's, yea,
that which may make him think it more than what he knows of any other man. 3.
That corruption is as near him as the corruption of any. 4. The Law does more
particularly strike against corruption in him as to himself, than that which is
in any other. Yea, 5. this corruption does certainly, in so far pollute the
Ordinance to him, and make him guilty. Now the same grounds that say he may
communicate with a good conscience, notwithstanding of his own corruptions,
will also say, he may communicate notwithstanding of that which is in another,
much more: because the sins that follow his corruption are his own sins, which
cannot be said of the sins of others. And if repentance for his own sin,
resting upon Christ, protesting against the body of death (which yet are but
the acts of the same person, in so far as renewed, differing from himself as
unrenued) If, I say, such acts may quiet his conscience, and give him
confidence to partake, notwithstanding of his own corruption, and that even
then when he as unrenued may be accounted guilty, may they not much more give
him confidence in reference to the sins of another, which are not so much as
his deeds.

9. In that directory which Christ gives, Mat. 18. this is implied, because he
does warrant an offended brother to bring obstinate offenders to the Church, as
the last step of their duty, and as their ^ull exoneration, Tell the Church,
says he; and no more is required by him after that, but conforming of his
carriage to the Churches Sentence in case of obstinacy. And none can think,
upon supposition that the Church did not their duty, that then they were from
that forth, not to join in that Church, but to separate from them as from
heathens and publicans: because so a particular person might Excommunicate a
Church, whom yet Christ will not have to withdraw from communion with a private
member, till obstinacy and the Churches censuring interveen; Yea, by so doing,
a private person might account another a heathen and publican without any
public Censure, which is contrary to Christ's scope, which subjoyneth this
withdrawing of communion from him to the Churches Censure. This will bind the
more if we consider that Christ's words have an allusion (as is commonly
acknowledged) to the Jewish Sanedrim, which being but one, could not admit of
any separation from its communion, though there had been defect in this: What
may be done in abstaining of personal communion in unnecessary things, is ever
to be acknowledged; yet if separation in such a supposed case, were called-for
as a duty, that direction would not be a sufficient direction for an offended
brother, because it leaves him without direction in the last step: Yet Christ's
progress so particularly from one step to another, says, that it is
otherwise intended.

Who would have more full satisfaction in this, may look the Learned Treatises
that are written against Separation, which will hold consequentially in this;
and therefore we may here say the less, And shall only add the consideration
of one Scripture.

For confirming of this Assertion then, we may take A particular consideration
of 1 Cor. 11. 17, etc.
more particular consideration of one place, which seems more especially to
relate to this purpose, That is, 1 Corinthians. 11. from the 17. ver. foreward:
Where it does appear, first, That there were divisions amongst that people,
even in respect of communicating together at the Lords Table, so that some of
them would not communicate with others: for that there were divisions is clear.
Now, these divisions are expressed to be in the Church when they came together
to eat the Lords Supper, ver. 18, and 19. and some did communicate at one time,
and some at another, without tarrying one for another, as is expressed, v. 33.

Secondly, We may also gather what might be the reason of this divided
communicating, or, at least, what some might allege why they would not
communicate jointly with others: For, it is like, they fell in this
irregularity deliberately, as thinking they did well when they communicated
apart, and not with others. So much is insinuated in the Apostles
expostulation, ver. 22. What, shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. Now
these reasons might be alleged, to justifi^ their divided communicating, 1.
That the Ordinances were not reverently administered, nor with that gravity and
discerning of the Lords Body, as was fit. 2. That many unworthy persons were
admitted to communion, even such as were drunken, ver. 21. etc. and therefore
it might be alleged by them, that joint communicating with such was to be
abstained.

Thirdly, It is evident also, That notwithstanding of these grounds* the
Apostle does condemn their practice, and presses them to joint communicating,
as appears from ver. 22. and 33. From which, this clear argument does arise,
If the members of the Church of Corinth, who did separate from the Ordinances,
because of the sinfulness of these that did jointly partake with them, were
condemned by Paul, and required to communicate jointly, and if it be made clear
by him how they might do so and not be guilty, Then separation in such a case
cannot be a duty but a sin: But the former are true. Therefore* etc. I know
nothing can be objected against this argument, but either to say, That the
Apostles scope is in that eating together, to regulate their love feasts, and
to condemn their practice in these; or, that he commends joint communicating
simply, but not in such a case, because it is not clear whether any of them did
scruple upon that ground or not: for, the removing of these, we say to the
first, That the main scope of the place is to regulate them in going about the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: And therefore it is that the Apostle does so
clearly and plainly insist in clearing the institution thereof, thereby to
bring them back to the way that was laid down and delivered to him by the Lord.
And for any other sort of eating or drinking, the Apostle does send them to
their houses* v^r. 22. and more expressly he repeateth that direction, that if
any man hunger and desire to eat his ordinary meat, Let him do it at home, ver.
34. So that no direction for the time to come can be interpreted to belong to
common eating in the Church, or in the public meetings thereof, but such as is
sacramental only.

To the second, to wit, if the Apostle does dip in this question, with respect
to that objection of the impurity of joint communicants, we do propose these
things for clearing of the same,

First, We say, that whether they did actually object that or not, yet there
was ground for them to object the same if it had weight, as the Text clears:
Neither could the Apostle, knowing that ground, and having immediately
mentioned the same, have access to press them all indifferently to
communicate together, if his direction meet not the case; for this might still
have stood in the way, that many of them were such and such, and therefore not
to be communicated with; and if it be a sufficient reason to keep them from
joint communicating, then the case being so circumstantiated, it would also be
a sufficient reason to keep him from imposing that as a duty upon them, at
least, so long as the case stood as it was.

Secondly, We say, that it is not unlike there was such hesitations in some of
them; and that (whatever was among them) it is clear, that the Apostle does
expressly ^peak to this case, and endeavor to remove that objection out of the
way, to wit, that men should not scare at the Sacrament, because of the
profanity of others: and that therefore they might without scruple as to that,
communicate jointly, and ^arry one for another, which is his scope, ver. 33.
This will appear by considering several reasons whereby he presses this
scope, for that, ver. 33. Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together, tarry
one for another, is the scope laid down as a conclusion from the former grounds
which he has given. Now, when he has corrected their first fault, to wit,
their irreverent manner of going about the Ordinance, by bringing them to
Christ's institution, ver. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. He comes, in the last place, to
meet with this objection, What if others be present who palpably cannot discern
the Lords Body, and so cannot communicate worthily? Can it be safe to
communicate with such? Or, is it not better to find out some other way of
communicating apart, and not together with such? The Apostle gives several
answers to this, and reasons, whereby he clears, that their division was not
warrantable upon that ground, from ver. 28. And so concludes, ver. 33. that
notwithstanding thereof, they might tarry one for another.

The first reason, is, ver. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat. Which shows, 1. That a man's comfortable preparation for this duty, is to
examine himself; and that the fruit may be expected, or not expected,
accordingly as it shall be with himself: Otherwise, it were not a sufficient
direction for preparation, to put him to examine himself. Again, 2. these are
knit together, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat. Which is in sum,
this, when a man has in some sincerity looked upon his own condition, and has
attained some suitableness to the Ordinances, as to his own private case,
then, (says the Apostle) Let him eat, without respecting the condition of
others. Otherwise, a man having examined himself, yet could not eat, though
his own disposition were as it should be, if the case of others might hinder
him in eating. And we conceive, it is a main part of the Apostles scope, by
knit^ing these two together (to wit, a man's eating with the examining of
himself) purposly to prevent such a deba^e.

The second reason which he gives, will confirm this also; for, says he, ver.
29. He who eats and drinks unworthily, he eats and drinks unto himself
damnation* or judgment. Which is, in ^um, this, a man that has examined
himself, may eat of the Sacrament, though many persons communicate unworthily
with him, because (says he) he that eats unworthily, does not bring
damnation or judgment upon others, nor is his sin imputed to them that
communicate with him, but he does bring it upon himself, and therefore no other
has cause to scare at the Ordinance because of that, if he has examined
himself. This reason he again confirms from experience, ver. 30. For this
cause (says he) many are sick, and many among you are weak, etc. that is, not
because they did communicate with those who are scandalous being in good case
themselves; but for this cause, says he, many are sick, etc. and have brought
upon themselves great plagues, because by not examining of themselves, they did
communicate unworthily, and so, by their own sin, brought these strokes upon
themselves.

He gives a third reason for making out of his scope, ver. 3^. For, if we will
judge our selves, we should not be judged, that is, men need not be anxious in
this case, whether others judge themselves or not; for, says he, Gods
absolving or judging of us, does not depend upon what they do* but upon what we
our selves do. And therefore presses them still to look to themselves, because
the judging and humbling of our selves before God, is the way not to be judged
by Him, even in reference to that Ordinance, whatever others do.

Now, when he has fully cleared the reasons, and, as it were, made out this
proposition, that if a man be right in his own frame, the sin of another joint
communicant, cannot be hurtful to him, or b^ ground to mar him in eating, and
when by an interserted parenthesis, he has obviated a doubt, v. 32. he
concludes, ver. 33. Wh^refore, says he, my brethren, (seeing it is so) ^arry
one for another, and be not anxiously feared to communicate jointly; Now, seeing
all along the Apostle has been giving such grounds as may clear a conscience
in that case, and does in these words lay down the direction of tarrying one
for another, or of joint communicating, as a conclusion drawn from the former
grounds, It cannot be thought, but that purposly he intended these reasons to
be grounds for the quieting of consciences, to obey that direction in such a
case; and that therefore it cannot be warrantable to separate upon that ground.

CHAP. XIII. Showing more particularly what it is that private persons are
called to in such a case.
IF it be asked then* What is that which private persons ought to do in such a
case? Answ. They are certainly to contain themselves within their station, yet
so, as some things are called for at such a time more than at another time; As,
first, There is need of much circumspectnesse in our own personal walk and
watchfulness, in observing of opportunities wherein we may edify others, as
Heb. 3. 13. Secondly* There is need of more frequency, and of a more weighty
circumspect manner in giving private admonitions and exhortations, etc.
Thirdly, There would be much exercise of prayer, and even fasting there with
(though in a secret inoffensive manner) both for the restraining of offenses
which dishonor God, and for zeal to Officers to perform their duty; if in this
respect, rivers of tears were running down our cheeks, because of the abounding
of offenses, there might be much more solid peace (we are ^swaded) in keeping
communion with others, than without that to separate with much, at least
seeming pride and uncharitable cruelty in giving of offense to them, and
thereby confirming them in their profanity. Fourthly, It is private persons
duty to represent such offenses, with their evidences, to Churchofficers, or
Church-judicatories, thereby to put them to the removing of such offenses.
Fifthly, They may freely, though humbly and reverently, expostulate with
Church Officers, when they are defective, and endeavor to convince them of
that offense: The force of that precept, If thy brother offend thee, go and
tell him, etc. warranteth so much; and this the Colossians are to say to
Archippus, that he be not defective in his Ministry which he had received,
etc, Col. 4. 17. This decently and convincingly done, is useful. Sixthly, If
all that prevail not, private persons may communicate it to other
Church Officers; and no redress following, it is their duty to follow it
before the competent superior Judicatories: for, Christ's direction, Tell the
Church, imports and warranteth the same.

If it be asked, What further is to be done, if that fail? Answ. We know no
other public redress; Christ has left it there, and so may we also. Neither
can it be insttucted from Scripture, that Christ has appointed separation to
be the next step of a private persons duty for removing of offenses, much less
to go before these. Indeed the Scripture calls for withdrawing from
personal communion with gross, scandalous persons, as a thing necessary; as
also from communion in the corrupt designs and courses of any, though they may
have a form of godliness, as 2 Timothy 3. 4, 5, etc. which does belong to, and is
comprehended under the first particular direction. And if these be faithfully
observed by private Christians, we are hopeful that either there would be
less ground of complaint for the defect of Church Officers, or more acces^e to
remove such as continue unfaithful, and more peace to the consciences of
particular private Christians, and less offense and more edification to all,
than any other way whatsoever.

That it is thus necessary for private persons to acquiesce Why it is necessary
to acquie^ce in the Churches Determination as to practice.
in the Churches determination, in manner as is said, may appear from the
unsetlednesse and confusion, both in private and public, which otherwise would
follow: For, either there must be a sisting in this determination of the
Church, or, there must be some other period to fix at, or, there must be no
fixing at all. Neither of the two last can be said, Therefore, etc. Not the
last, to wit, that there is no fixing at all; for so a particular person that
were offended, would not know what were duty, or what to follow; and it would
infer a defect in the Lord's Ordinance in reference to His Peoples direction
and peace in such cases, which is most absurd.

If the second be said, viz. That there is some other thing to fix on for
quieting of consciences in such a case, as to their exoneration beyond that
public decision; We desire to know what that is which is called-for, and by
what rule we are to proceed in it? If it be said, that in such a case the duty
is to separate from that Church, where the plurality of Officers do admit such
as are accounted to be scandalous; Then we ask, 1. What is next to be done? it
must either be to continue as no member of a Church, which is both impossible
and absurd. It is impossible that there can be any particular visible baptized
member, and not belong to the visible body, at least, being considered, as the
Church makes one integral visible body. It Is absurd, because it would say,
That either Christ had no visible Church, or, that He has an ordinary way of
edifying by external Ordinances without His visible Church, or, that a person
might be regardlesse of, and without His Church and Ordinances, and be approven
of Him* and expect the benefit; yea, upon this supposition* the unfaithfulness
of Church Officers in not casting-out of scandalous men, would infer the actual
unchurching of those that were not scandalous, and so the sin of the one should
be the punishment of the other, which is absurd.

If it be said that another Church of more pure members is to be gathered, in
which persons in such cases are to join for obtaining of pure Ordinances; Then
we ask further, What if such a Congregation cannot be had? Then, what is duty
in that case? Is there a necessity of living without a visible Church State,
wanting all Church-ordinances to our selves, and Baptism to our children? What
can be the fruit of that? Is it not a more uncontrovertible hazard to put our
selves without all communion of Churchordinances, than to enjoy them where they
are pure, though some joint partakers be offensive? Is not the other the way to
make our children heathens, and for ever to be without Baptism, seeing
warrantably they cannot be entered where we cannot a bide? Does not this also
make way to make all the Ordinances contemptible, and to be undervalued by the
profane, seeing such persons do so conten^edly live without them?

Further, we ask* What if other persons and we cannot agree upon jo^nt members;
for, if it be left to men's particular discerning, that rule is uncertain and
various, being involved in many difficulties, as was formerly hinted: in that
case, either there must be no separated Church, or diverse separated Churches,
according to the latitude of diverse persons charity. This being certain, that
one will think a person scandalous, which another does not esteem so; and one
will approve that, which another will condemn.

Again, we ask, What if such persons that withdraw and seek to enter a more
holy society, should be refused? Then, how could they evidence their own
holiness, and convince these refusers that they were graciously qualified, and
so to be admitted if that were stuck upon, for whatever profession were made,
it behoved still to be tried by no other rule, but by folks particular
discerning and charity?

Again, suppose this difficulty to be overcome, and such a congregation to be
settled, Is it not possible that even some of those members should become
scandalous? Then, supposing that by the plurality of that Church, such persons
were not accounted scandalous, or not cast out, what were to be done? According
to the former grounds, these who suppose themselves only pure, could not
continue in communion, but behoved again to separate; and if so, then upon the
renewing of the former supposition, there behoved still to be a separation in
infinitum. For, there can no Church be expected on earth, in which these cases
are not supposable and possible. And so now we may resume the conclusion,
Either a private person must acquiesce, as being exonered when he has followed
the action before the Church, or he shall have no ground of peace any where,
till he be out of the world, or out of all visible Churches. And so also there
can be no other way of keeping public order and ordinances; and of eviting
scandal and confusion.

This truth is fully made out by those three worthy and pious Divines of New
England, Cotton, Hooker, and Norton: The last whereof, by many reasons evinceth
this in his answer to Appolonious his last question, page 162, 163. and does
from the Church of Corint^ in particular confirm this: There (says he) was
impurity or corruption in worship, for women taught in the Church; There was
corrupt Doctrine, many denied the Resurrection; in manners, she was most
corrupt, there being so many fornications, sects, palpable love of the world,
etc. Yet (says he) the Apostle did not command those that were worthily
prepared to abstain from the Supper, but, rectifying abuses, he did command
every one to try himself, and so to eat, etc. And many other things has he
excellently to this purpose, and lays this for a ground, that per alios
indigne accedentes non polluitur communio, licet minuitur consolatio, that is,
the communion in worship is not polluted, though the consolation be diminished
by such joint worshippers.

The second, to wit, Mr. Hooker does confirm this Maxim fully, part 1. chap.
9. page 119, 120. and does call it irrational, that the fewer should be judges
of the deed of the plurality: and elsewhere, that to admit separation in such a
case, were to lay a ground for separation in infinitum. Only, we may add these
two observations thereon, 1. May not this be allowed to the Presbyteriall
Church where the plurality of Churchofficers think fit not to cast out? 2. That
the Presbyteriall government is upon this consideration, unjustly loaded with
an absurdity, as if necessarily upon their grounds, the minor and better party
being overswayed (suppose a particular Congregation were wronged by the
plurality of a Presbytery) could have no redress; for, according to his
grounds the same would follow upon the congregationall way; for, suppose the
plurality of the Congregation should wrong some officer, contrary to the vote
of the minor and better party, there can be no other redress there, than for
men to keep themselves free: For, it still recurreth, if the minor part should
claim to have their Sentence weighty, because it is upon the matter right,
which the other is not, he has already determined in the place cited, that
that is, contrary to all orderly proceeding and rules of reason and lays open
the gap to endless dissension, and the annulling of all public proceeding;
for, men in such cases, being their own judges, are ever ready to think
themselves in the right.

By the first, to wit, Mr. Cotton, it is laid down as an unquestionable agreed
ground, with this note upon the back of it, By hasty withdrawing, Reformation
is not procured but retarded. Thus he, page 2. of the bolinesse of
Church Members. And has not experience confirmed this? Might not Discipline
have been more vigorous in many Congregations, if this had not been? And what
can be expected of Reformation in the body of the Christian world, if to the
offense of the rest, those who suppose themselves to be more tender, should
instantly withdraw from them.

CHAP. XIV. Clearing whether the Ordinances of Christ be any way polluted by
corrupt fellow-worshippers.
BUt yet two things are to be satisfied. 1. It may be said, But are not the
Ordinances of Christ someway polluted by the unworthiness of such scandalous
partakers? and if so, can polluted Ordinances be partaken of without sin? Answ.
We may consider polluting of Ordinances in a threefold sense. 1. An Ordinance
may be said to be polluted, when the essentials and substantials thereof are
corrupted, so as indeed it cease to be an Ordinance of Jesus Christ: Thus the
Mass in Popery, is a fearful abomination, and a corruption of the Sacrament:
in this respect, the Ordinance (if it may be called an Ordinance after that,
for indeed it is not an Ordinance of Christ) is polluted, and this may be many
ways fallen into, and communion in this, is indeed sinful and cannot but be
so.

2. An Ordinance may be said to be polluted, when it is irreverently and
profanely abused, though essentials be kept: Thus the Lords Sabbath may be
polluted, which yet is holy in it self; So was the Table of the Lord polluted,
Mal. 1. And in this sense the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was indeed polluted
by the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. when some came drunk or otherwise irreverently
to the holy Ordinances; in this respect, an Ordinance may be said to be
polluted to him that so goes about it, because to the unclean all things are
unclean; but it is not polluted in it self, nor to any other that examine
themselves, as the former instance does clear, because that pollution comes
from nothing in the Ordinance, (it being in its essentials complete) but does
arise from the sinfulness of such and such persons, and therefore must be
commensurable with them.

3. An Ordinance may be said to be polluted, upon this extrinsick
consideration, to wit, when by some circumstance in it, or miscarriage of those
that are about it, it is made common-like, and so wants that luster and
honourablenesse that it ought to have; by such a fault the Ordinance is made
obnoxious to contempt, and is despised by others, contrary to the Lords
allowance. Thus the Priests of old made the offerings of the Lord vile and
contemptible, which was not by corrupting them in essentials, nor making them
cease to be Ordinances, bu^ by their miscarriages and corrupt irreverent way of
going about them, they did lay that stumbling block before others, to make them
account these Ordinances contemptible. This may be diverse ways fallen into,
As, 1. when the Officer, or Minister, has a profane carnal carriage, So he
makes the Ordinance of the Ministry, and every other Ordinance vile in this
sense: Thus, if an Elder or any other^ should take on them to admonish while
they are in drunkenness or passion, or such like, they do pollute that
admonition, yet still these Ordinances are Ordinances, and that admonition an
admonition. 2. It is fallen into, when an Officer does indiscreetly and
indifferently administrate Ordinances to precious and vile, as if they were
common things. Thus a reproof may be polluted when a manifest known contemner
is reproved, because, so a pearl is casten before swine, which is derogatory to
the excellency thereof. Thus a Minister may profane or pollute the most
excellent promises or consolations of the Word, when he does without discretion
apply the same indifferently; or, without making difference between the tender
and the untender and profane; yea, even between the hypocrites and the truly
godly. This is not to divide the Word of God aright, and is indeed that which
the Lord mainly accounts to be Not separating of the precious from the vile,
when peace is spoken to them to whom he never spoke (...) This is also
committed, when grossly scandalous persons are permitted, without the exercise
of Discipline upon them* (...) live in the Church, or are admitted to
Sacraments, because so Gods institution is wronged, and the luster thereof is
lessened, and men are induced to think less thereof. 3. This may be also by
the irreverent mann^r of going about them, when it is without that due
reverence and gravity that ought to be in His worship. Thus one may make the
Word and Sacrament to be in a great part ridiculous; and so suppose, that at
the Sacrament of the Supper, in the same Congregation, some should be
communicating at one place, some at another, some should be palpably talking of
other things, some miscarrying by drunkenness, etc. as its clear was in the
Church of Corinth. All those may be said to pollute the Ordinances, as they
derogate from their weight and authority, and miscarry in the administration of
them, and are ready to breed irreverence and contempt in others where the Lords
Body in the Supper, or the end of His instit^tion in other Ordinances, is not
discerned and observed: yet all these do not pollute the Ordinance in it self,
or make it to be no Ordinance, nor do pollute it to any that does reverently
partake of the same, and does not stumble upon the block that is laid before
him: Because an hearer that were suitably qualified, might comfortably receive
and ^eed upon a sweet promise, even when it might be extended in its
application beyond the Lord's allowance; yet does not that alter the nature
thereof to him: So may worthy Communicants that have examined themselves, and
do discern the Lord's Body, partake of that Sacrament with His approbation, and
to their own comfort; Because they might discern Him and by that come to get
the right impression of the Ordinances, although many blocks were lying in
their way: for, it is not others casting of snares before them, but their
stumbling at them, that does pollute the Ordinance to them. Hence we see, that
though all these were in the Church of Corinth, so that there was neither (...)
in the manner, nor discretion in respect of the Receivers (for, some came
drunken, and some came and waited no: on others, some came hungry, and others
full) yet was it still the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and unpolluted to
those, who by examining of themselves, and discerning of His Body (which others
failed in) did reverently and duly partake of the same.

Besides these ways of pollution mentioned, we cannot conceive of any other
(for now legal and ceremonial pollution, such as was by touching a dead body,
etc. and was opposite to ceremonial holiness, is not in this case to be
mentioned) yet we see the first cannot be alleged here, and none of the other
two ought to scare tender persons from the Ordinances of Jesus Christ.

If it be said, That communicating in such a case* does seem to approve such an
admission, and to confirm those in some good opinion of themselves who are
admitted, and so there is a necessity of abstaining, though not upon the
account, that the Ordinances are polluted, yet, for preventing the foresaid
offense, which might make us guilty. Ans. If weight be laid upon offense, we
make no question but it will sway to the other side. O what offense has this
way given to the Church of Christ! how has it hardened those that had prejudice
at Religion? How has it opened the mouths of such as lie in wait for something
of this kind? How has it grieved and weighted others? how has it made the
work of Reformation, profession of Holiness, exercise of Discipline, etc. to
stink to many, and so to be loaded with reproaches, as has marred much that
access to keep the Ordinances unpolluted in the former respect, which
otherwise might have been? 2. Is not reverent and exemplary partaking of the
Ordinances at such a time, a more edifying and convincing testimony against
such untendernesse, than by withdrawing to give a new offense? 3. The Lord's
precept in such a case, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, does not
leave the thing indifferent upon that ground; And therefore that objection is
not here to have place, as the grounds formerly laid down do evince: For, we
are not to be wise or holy beyond what the Lord has commanded.

CHAP. XV. Showing if any thing further in any imaginable case be allowed to
private Christians.
2. IT may be yet further moved, Can there be no more allowed in any supposable
case? Answ. It is most unsuitable, in a matter of practice, when folks are not
contending for curiosity, but for direction, to suppose cases hardly or rarely
possible in a constitute Church, which is worthy of that name, or, upon that
ground, to found a contest in dispute, or schism in practice, in cases palpably
different; At least, union should be kept till such a case come about. And is
it likely, where the order formerly laid down* is observed, that there can be
habitual admission of notoriously or grievously scandalous persons, though, it
may be, there be lesser fa^lings of several sorts: Yet, supposing that any out
of infirmity or affection, not having such knowledge, or otherwise, should
stick to join in the Ordinances at some times, or in some places, upon such an
account, who yet do not love separation, or the erecting of a different Church,
We say further,

1. That, in such a case, such persons may remove from one Congregation to
another, where such grosnesse cannot be pretended to be; and the persons being
otherwise without scandal, can neither be pressed to continue (they being so
burdened) nor yet refused to be admitted where orderly they shall desire to
join, seeing this could not be denied to any. And, we suppose, few will be so
uncharitable, as to think there is no Congregation whereunto they can join, or
yet so addicted to outward respects, as to choose separation with offense to
others, disturbance to the Church, and, it may be, with little quiet^esse to
themselves, whenas they have a remedy so inoffensive allowed unto them.

2. Although separation be never allowable, and secession be not always at an
instant practicable; yet we suppose, in some cases, simple abstinence, if it be
not offensive in the manner and circumstances, if it be not made customary, and
if the ground be so convincing, and the case so gross that it will affect any
ingenuous hearer, and so evident that there is no access to any acquainted in
such places, to deny the same, or that there be a present undecided process
concerning such things before a competent Judge; in some such cases, I say, as
might be supposed, we conceive abstinence were not rigidly to be
misconstructed, it being for the time the burdeen of such persons, that they
cannot join; and, it may be, having some public complaint of such a thing to
make-out, and in dependence elsewhere: Although we will not strengthen any to
follow this way, nor can it be pretended to, where the case is not singularly
horrid; yet supposing it to be such, we conceive it is the safest one way for
the persons peace, and the preventing of offense together; yet, much christian
prudence is to be exercised in the conveying of the same, if it were by
removing for a time, or otherwise, that there appear to be no public
contempt; but we conceive this case is so rarely incident, and possibly that
there needs be little said of it, much less should there be any needless
debate or rent entertained upon the consideration or notion thereof. And
certainly, the case before us of the admitting of the Nicolaitans and Iezebel,
considering their doctrine and deeds, is more horrid than readily can be
supposed; and yet it would seem, that though this defect should still have
continued, the Lord does require no other thing of private professors, but
their continuing-in, or holding fast of, their former personal purity, which is
all the burden that He does lay upon them.

To shut up all, we may see what evils are to be evited in the prosecution of
public Scandals, and what a commendable thing it were to have this in the
right manner vigorous; if private Christians were zealous, loving and prudent
in their private admonitions; if Officers were diligent, single, grave, and
weighty in what concerns them; if offending persons were humble and
submissive, and all reverent and respective of the Ordinances, and studious of
private and public edification, How beautiful and profitable a thing would it
be? Certainly this manner of procedure, would be more beautifying to the
Ordinances of Christ, more convincing to all onlookers, more sweet and easy
both to Officers and People, and more edifying and gaining to all, and, by
God's blessing, were the way to make the mistaken yoke of Discipline to be
accounted easy and light. And if all those ends be desirable, and the contrary
evils be to be eschewed, then unquestionably the right manner of managing this
great Ordinance of Discipline, is carefully to be studied and followed both by
Officers and people.

PART III. Concerning Doctrinall Scandals, or Scandalous Errors.
CHAP. I. Holding out the expediency of handling this matter.
ALthough somewhat has been spoken in reference to practical Scandals, (to
call them so) Yet there has been little or nothing at all spoken of Doctrinal
Scandals, and what may be called for in reference to them.

It is true, that these cases are so various and difficult, that there can
hardly be any thing particularly spoken to them; also what has been said, may,
for the most part, proportionably be applied to them: yet considering that this
place does look so directly to such Scandals as are in Doctrine; and that the
case of these times does call for some consideration of such, lest what has
been formerly said, be altogether defective as to this, it will not be
impertinent to insist a little on it also, although already this Tractate has
drawn to a greater length than was at first intended.

We may in prosecution of this, 1. consider some general Doctrines. 2. Some
general Questions. 3. More particularly speak to the several duties according
to particular cases and remedies that are called for. 4. Show the necessity of
orderly Judicial procedour here, in reference to such Scandals, as well as in
reference to Scandals in practice formerly mentioned.

For Doctrines, we find here. 1. That Error, vented by these that are
corrupted therewith, is no less scandalous, and no less to be accounted so,
than gross practices; for it is as ready to be an occasion of stumbling, and
to mar the spiritual edification and well-being of the people of God, as any
scandalous practices: Which is confirmed, 1. By the consequents of Error, it
destroys the soul, 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. yea, it brings on swift
damnation, 2 Pet. 2. 1. overthrows the faith of many. 2 Timothy 2. 18. perverts
the Scripture to men's destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. deceives many, Matthew. 24.
Therefore for this cause, it is called also, 2. Pet. 2. damnable, pernicious,
and such like: which shows, that really it becomes a stumbling block where it
is.

2. This will appear if we consider the titles that the holy Ghost usually
gives to such in Scripture, as are promotters of corrupt Doctrine: there are
not titles bearing greater indignation and abomination, given to any, than to
such, as they are called dogs, evil workers, Phil. 3. 2. wolves, yea, grievous
wolves, Matthew. 7. 15. Act. 20. deceitful workers, ministers of Satan, as if
expressly they were commissionated by him, 2 Cor. 11. 13. deceivers, liars. Rev.
2. ill men and seducers, that wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13.

3. Consider the many threatenings and woes that are in Scripture against them,
Matthew. 23. the many warnings that are given to Ministers to watch against them,
Acts 20. the plain directions that are to censure them, Tit. 3. 10. the
particular examples of censuring them recorded in Scripture, (as after will
appear) Christ's commending it where it is, His reproving of it where it is not,
as in these second and third Chapters of the Revelation is manifest: these and
such like, do evidently make out how exceedingly scandalous the venting of
corrupt Doctrine is* which Rev. 2. 6. the Lord says, He hates, and therefore
it cannot but be loathsome and abominable.

4. Consider the many warnings that people have to eschew such, and that upon
this account as being offensive, as Romans 16, 17. Act. 20. Phil. 3. 1, 2. 2.
Ioh. 10. which evidently shows the scandalousnesse thereof.

5. Consider the nature of Error more particularly. 1. It is contrary to the
truth of God, and therefore is a lie, as scandalous practices are contrary to
the holiness of God: now Gods truth and veracity is no less an essential
attribute than His holiness. 2. This is not only to lie, but it is to attribute
that unto the most High, by fathering these lies upon Him; and saying, thus
says the Lord, when He has said no such thing but the contrary. 3. It
teaches others to lie, as it is, Matthew. 5. 19. and that more forcibly and
impudently than any practice can do. 4. It has its original from the devil,
who was a liar from the beginning, and the father thereof, Ioh. 8. 44. And
spreaders of corrupt Doctrine, have special influence on the upholding and
spreading of his kingdom. 5. It is a fruit of the flesh, even as murder,
adultery, witchcraft; and seeing it is so ranked by the Apostle, Gal. 5. 19, 20.
can it be but scandalous?

6. The effects of it will evidence this. 1. It spoileth the vines, Cant. 2.
15. for, there is a wronging of purity where it is. 2. It spoileth Government
and order, it has confusion with it. 3. It spoileth unity, and it has ever
contention with it, and (as it is, Gal. 5. 15.) a biting and devouring one of
another; and contention cannot be eschewed but by harmony in evil, which is far
more desperate. 4. Which follows on all, it destroys souls; and infecteth
more speedily, dangerously and spreadingly than other practical Scandals;
never has the Church been so defaced, nor so many souls destroyed by any
scandalous practice, as by the venting of corrupt Doctrine; and however we take
scandal, as in the general was laid down, as that which is apt to stumble
others, and occasion their fall, or to weaken the confidence and jumble the
peace, and disquiet the minds of some, or as it grieves the hearts of others,
or, as it makes the ways of God to be ill spoken of, it will be still sound,
that such kind of errors, are still to be accounted scandalous; and that
nothing opens mouths more against Religion than that, See 2 Pet. 2. 2. By all
which it appears, that gross error is not only a sin, but a scandalous sin,
and that of a most gross nature.

CHAP. II. Concerning the spreading of Error; Gods displeasure at the
suffering thereof, and the fainting even of good men in restraining the same.
BEside this, there are three things considerable, which from this and other
Epistles we have occasion to observe and enquire a little into, before we
propound any particular question.

The first, is, concerning the spreading and increase of Error, and that of
the most unreasonable and absurd Errors, even in the Primitive times. The
second is, anent the Lords detesting of it, so that the very suffering of the
spreaders of it, is hateful to Him in His Angels and Churches, that otherwise
are approvable for their own particular carriages, as in Pergamos; and their
not enduring thereof is commendable, even when their own inward condition is
not altogether approvable, as may be seen in Ephe^us. The third is, how that
sometimes there may be fainting, as to zealous restraining of Error, even in
men that are not the worst.

For the first, Can it but be thought strange that delusion What height
delusions of this kind may come unto.
should come to this height so soon: and it may make all to tremble at the
impetuousness thereof, 1. It is a most foul absurd error, this of the
Nicolaitans, even against natures light. 2. It spreads and increases in
several persons and Churches: and Churchstory does show that it abounded, and
no less is insinuated in these Epistles. 3. That it spreads not only among
heathens, but in the Church, and among Christ's Servants, who are seduced
therewith; which shows, that even some of note were carried away with it. 4.
This is in the Churches most pure times, some of the Apostles (at least John)
being yet alive when this was vented. 5. It is carried-on by despicable
instruments in comparison of others, a woman calling her self a prophetess,
some fellows calling themselves Apostles and new lights, that men would think,
should rather have been counted distracted, than to have been so reverenced. 6.
This is done against the testimony of their own faithful Ministers, and in such
Churches where God had witnesses keeping themselves from that evil, yea, where
many Professors were in that respect pure, yet others are following that
error, receiving and reverencing these seducers more than any faithful
Pastors. 7. This is done where there neither wanted light nor authority to
convince them; for, no question, both were, as may be gathered from the trial
of these in Ephesus; yea, John writes from the Lords own mouth to confute
them; and though there could be no exception against the application of his
Doctrine, yet it was adhered to for many years after that. 8. John or some
other Apostle was the instrument to convert them from Paganism to Christianity,
yet, now can he not recover them from a foul error in Christianity when they
are bewitched therewith: and though no question his authority and arguments had
less weight with them now than before they were Christians; yet what can be
thought of more force for their conviction and reclaiming, than these
considerations? The like was often Paul's case, who at first had an easy work
with people, when they were heathens, in comparison of what he had with the
same when they became Christians, and tainted with false doctrine, or listeners
to corrupt teachers, as in the Epistles to the Corinthians and Galatians is
clear. Which does show, 1. The unreasonablnesse and power of a deluding Spirit,
that nothing can convince, when once people come to like that way they go on,
deceiving and being deceived, and, as Peter says, 2 Pet. 3. 16. pervert the
Scripture to their own destruction; And as may be gathered, they do so by
corrupting, first, that which does appear to be more obscure, and then they
mould other Scriptures so as may consist with their fancies, that they have
conceived to have ground in the former, and so they, first, form notions out of
obscure places, and thereafter conform the more plain Scriptures to these,
whereas the just contrary is most safe; and when the ignorant and unstable
shall account themselves the only learned in the mysteries of God, what wonder
is it that they be thus given up? and when they think the plain truths, and
duties wherein there is no shadow of a ground of stumbling, are below them?
and thus they may attain so much dexterity to wrest the Scriptures, even the
plainest (as is implied there) as may be judicially subservient to their own
destruction, and to prevent their being convinced, which might put them to
shame; and occasion their abandoning of that. 2. We may see, that it is no
easy thing to recover a misled people into error; that peradventure, 2 Timothy
2. 25. is not accidently put in, but to show that it is a hundred to one if
such get repentance, whereby the Lord would scare all from that evil, and the
more gross their error is, often men are the more unreasonable in the defense
thereof, and obstinate in adhering thereunto, because there is most of a
judicial stroke seen there, in giving up men to such foolries, it is not
credible that otherwise they could fall in them, and so being smitten of God,
is it possible that any reason can prevail with them, while that plague lies
on? Was there any error like to that of worshipping stocks and stones? it
being even against sense and reason, that men should burn a part thereof, and
make some common work of another portion, and of a third make a deity and fall
down and worship it, as the Prophet does expostulate, Isa. 44. 19. which upon
consideration might be found to be absurd: this is premitted as the reason of
such blockishnesse, ver. 18. For he has shut their eyes that they cannot see,
and their hearts that they cannot understand. 3. The unreasonablnesse of this
Spirit in men, would not be thought strange in any of the former respects, even
although no person could stop their mouth, but they should seem to themselves
to triumph in the bringing-in of unheard*of senses of Scripture; the more they
abound in that, it is the more judicial to them, even as the more they carry
after them, and the more they be forborne by others, it works the more to
their destruction: men would keep a distance from these infections, none can
tell what they may turn unto if once entered in a giddy unstable soul, carried
with the spait of a spirit of error, and being given-up of God thereto for
itching after it, and not receiving the love of the truth, may come to the most
horrible things, and that without shame or remorse, ere there be any end; and
on-lookers would acknowledge The suffering of gross error is a most displeasing
thing to Christ.
God's justice in such strokes, and learn to reverence and fear him the more.

The second cannot but be clear from this: for, if error be such an evil that
thwarteth, 1. both with Gods holiness and truth; And, 2. that hazardeth so
many souls, (for, never a plague has so destroyed the face of the visible
Church, nor carried so many souls to hell as error has done) Then the
suffering of it cannot but be hateful to Him who loves His Church. 3. There
is no way by which the devil reproacheth Ordinances and the Word more than
this, by turning them to the quite contrary end, as if he would out-shoot the
Lord in His own bow, (which is abominable to mention) and invert His own means,
and turn His own weapons on Him; and suffering of this, is a conniving at his
design. 4. There is no way by which the devil may so win in on Christ's
Servants to seduce them as by this, as in the Epistle to Thyatira is clear. And
can there danger come so night to Christ, and He not be displeased with what
strengthens their snares? 5. This does equal, yea, in some respect, prefer
the devil to Him, so far as in us lies, and so cannot but provoke His
jealousy; for, so the devil has liberty to vent his lies with Truth equally;
and there being many lies, though there be but one Truth, he has by this more
doors opened to him than the Gospel has. 6. This does make even the Truth,
Ordinances, and Religion it self to be thought light of; when all these have
toleration, it is, on the matter, a proclaiming an indifferency to be in these
things, than which nothing can more reflect on the jealous God, who in His Word
puts such a difference, and shows such detestation at indifferency. 7.
This brings hudge confusions on the Church. For, 1. If these errors and
corrupt teachers prevail, they carry souls after them, and destroy them; and
ought that to be thought light of? 2. If they prevail not, yet they cross,
afflict and offend them, and so prove a snare and burden to them of whom the
Lord is tender. 8. Toleration does either account little of error, as being no
hurtful thing, and so there can be no esteem of truth; or, it does account
little of the destruction of souls* both which must be abominable. 9. Error
does not only break God's Law, but does teach others to do so; and suffering
thereof, must be a maintaining of Teachers to teach Transgression and Rebellion
against the Lord.

The third thing observable, is, That though zeal in Sometimes those who want
not affection, are yet too condescending to erroncous Teachers: and why?
a Minister, especially against error, be exceedingly commendable; yet oftimes
is there fainting, even among Ministers who are not of the worst: and the Angel
is here reproved for sparing of these Nicolaitans, at least in being faint and
defective in pursuing them in a ministerial way, as Antipas is commended for
his faithfulness, and the Angel of Ephesus for his not fainting in prosecuting
of this trial; the Lord has put these two together, the faithful and wise
Steward; and when they are carried equally on, O how commendable are they! yet
in the reckoning, the one is but mentioned, Well done thou good and faithful
servant, not to give a dispensation in reference to the other, but to show the
necessity and excellency of this, that there by Ministers may be put to it,
lest, under pretext of prudence, they incroach upon that freedom and
faithfulness which is called-for from them, whether in undertaking, or in
prosecuting of this charge, in which there will not want many difficulties,
that will be ready to occasion fainting, if they be not boldly in the Lord's
strength set against, as we may instance in these respects, 1. In respect of
the time: there are some evil times, wherein it is hard to know what to say,
for which the prudent may be said to keep silence, and often that pretext may
be the occasion of fostering too much fainting, when the Lord calleth-for
faithfulness. 2. It may arise from a man's sensiblenesse of his own
infirmities and unequalnesse for that charge, as seems to be in Jeremiah, Ier.
1. when a man's own self, or thoughts of himself, without respect to his call,
is made the rule whereby he proceeds. 3. It may arise from the message which
he is called to carry: sharp messages are heavy and burdensome, that makes
Jonas to shift for a time to undertake that denunciation against Niniveh,
especially considering that these Messengers ordinarily are not acceptable to
hearers; and that there are with all usually not a few who sew pillows under
arm holes; and are ready to destroy, in that respect, what others build. 4. It
may arise from hearers, and that of diverse tempers; some are ready, like
swine, to turn back on the Carriers as if they did hate them* as Micajah was
met with by Ahab, 2 King. 22. who yet had four hundred flattering liars in
request. Some again, are of an itching humor, and do not abide convincing
doctrine and faithfulness, such are ready to breed a separation from them that
do faithfully reprove, at least much to cool their affections to them, which
(as it is, 2 Timothy 4.) is no little piece of trial to a Minister: Many also that
are affectionate, are yet hasty, and cannot abide plain dealing; and it is no
less difficulty to win to be faithful to these, than to others who are openly
profane. 5. There is a fainting that arises from distrust of God, as not
being confident of the performance of His promise, and of their being
countenanced in His work; and so seeing it impossible in themselves and in
their own eyes, they give it over as if it were so simply. 6. There is a
fainting that arises from supposed events, either as thinking there will be no
fruit of such a thing, or, that some inconvenience will follow it: It is like
that Moses was not free of the first when he says. Israel does not, or, will
not hear me; And what will Pharaoh do? And the last is common, when once flesh
and blood are admitted to consult of duty from the supposed inconveniences
that will follow, then readily it decideth, that it is not duty at all. It may
be somewhat of that was here, that the Angel feared the disquieting of the
Church, or some schism that might follow on it; and the Lord's threatening to
take another way of fighting against them with the sword of His mouth' does
insinuate this: for, a carnal shift, to prevent some inconveniences, often
draweth-on that which men feared, the more speedily. Other grounds of it also
may be given, which yet are not approvable before God.

CHAP. III. If any of the People of God may be carried away with gross
delusions.
FRom these Doctrines several Questions may be moved. And, 1. If any of the
People of God may be carried away with such abominable errors in doctrine? We
shall answer in these Assertions.

Assert. 1. There is no error so gross materially, It is not simply
impossible but some may, in a great measure, for a time, be carried away.
but Believers may fall into it: For, although they have a promise that error
shall not separate wholly betwixt Christ and them, nor that finally they shall
be carried away therewith; yet, seeing they have corruption that is capable to
be tempted to all sin, and so to this among other sins, they cannot be exempted
from this, neither is there any promise by which they can expect absolutely to
be kept from heresy, more than murder or adultery, which are fruits of the
flesh with this: yea, except the sin against the holy Ghost and final
impenitencie, there is no absolute exemption to the Believer from any sin;
which the Lord has wisely ordered so, to keep the Believer from security, even
in reference to such tentations: Beside, in experience it is found, that grace
exempteth not from error in judgment; for, it is like, that Solomon, if he did
not actually commit idolatry himself, yet became too inclinable that way, as we
may gather from what is in Scripture recorded concerning him; Neither can we
altogether, as to their state, condemn these in Corinth, in Galatia, and in
other Churches, who were drawn from the Truth after their conversion, as if
none but unregenerate professors had been so. Yea, it is possible, if not
probable, that some of these, whom the Lord calls His Servants, and yet were
seduced in the Church of Thyatira, were not still in the state of nature.

Assert. 2. Although we dare not altogether say it is Yet not so easily as unto
gross practical evils.
impossible, yet we think that it is more rare for a Believer to fall in gross
errors, and for any considerable time to continue therein, so as to be
accounted an Heretic, than in other scandalous practices. For, 1. The
Scripture does more rarely mention this, than other sins of Believers, which
are more frequently recorded. 2. There are very special promises for preserving
of the Elect from being seduced by false christ's and false teachers: and though
it do not hold universally in all particulars, except in as far as reaches
their everlasting state; yet it may be extended in some good measure, even to
seduction it self; and we suppose may be more clear from these considerations,
1. Becoming erroneous in such a manner, does not proceed from some sudden
surprising-fit of tentation, as gross practices oftentimes may do; but it
implies a deliberatenesse therein, which is not so readily incident to a
Believer, and it cannot so well be called a sin of infirmity; and therefore the
Scripture does ever set out such teachers of false doctrine as most abominable,
to wit, as not serving the Lord Christ, but their own bellies, Romans 16. 18. as
being enemies to the cross of Christ, Phil. 3. 19. as being ministers of
Satan, 2 Cor. 11. 15. Other men (as it were) that are unrenewed, are common
subjects and servants to the devil; but corrupt teachers they are apostles to
him, and prime officers in his kingdom: These titles, and such like, cannot
well be applicable to Saints in respect of their infirmities; and therefore, we
think, that (at least) it is more rarely incident to them, to be carriers on
and promoters of corrupt doctrine. 2. It appears from this, that an Heretic
is said to be self-condemned, Tit. 3. 1^. because ere one can be so
denominated, there must be a rejecting of admonitions, which stands not so very
well with the nature of a Saint. 3. This consideration will also make it
evident, that the Scripture speaks of repentance of, and recovery from
corrupt doctrine, as a very rare and uncertain thing, Gal. 4. 10 the Apostle
fears he did bestow labor in vain in this business; and 2 Timothy 2. 25. the
Apostle does put a peradventure upon this, If peradventure God will give them
(to wit, those that oppose themseves) repentance unto the acknowledging of the
Truth. There is not such a peradventure put to any kind of sin: which shows
that it must be more difficult to be recovered from it, than from other sins;
and that therefore Believers, ordinarily at least, must be in a special manner
preserved from it. 4. Which does confirm the former, This delusion is a main
spiritual plague; and is often the punishment not of former sins of infirmity,
but of not receiving the love of the Truth, and of hypocrisy and proud
presumption; and although the Lord is not to be limited and bound up from
chastening His own with this rod, yet we may say from experience in the Word,
and from the nature of the plague, and other grounds, It is neither the
ordinary spot nor rod of His Children; and if at any time it be, it does speak
out readily much spiritual pride, self seeking, lightness, security;
wantonness of spirit, ignorance and conceitednesse joined with it, want of
exercise, or some one thing or other of that kind. And, as we hinted, when they
are overtaken, When any believers fall in such evils usually the Lord lingularly
(...) ^emsor the same.
we will not readily find in Scripture that such are heads to promote and carry
on the design of error.

Assert. 3. When a Believer falls in such an evil, the Lord usually
chasteneth him, either with more gross out-breakings, or with some sharp way
of restoring, or with removal under a cloud, without much seen evidence of
recovery, as we see in the case of Solomon, who became some way guilty of this
ill, of whose recovery the Scripture is very silent, even though his sin be
fully recorded, and the remainders of his idolatry are marked to be standing in
the days of Hezekiah; and indeed there is but little on record in Scripture of
the recovery of those that have been carried so away, though we may judge
charitably of some of them in the general: The Lord wisely orders this,
partly, as a chastening to them, partly, as a warning to others, and to make
all men, especially Believers, to fear, and to take heed lest they fall;
because, recovery is not so easy, and even they that are spiritual may be
tempted, Gallat. 6. 1.

Asser. 4. These that are spreaders of error, do most Usually corrupt teachers
set more upon professors to withdraw them than others that want profession*
although such may also be set upon.
frequently set upon these who have some profession of Religion, more than upon
others who walk not under that name. For, the spreading of gross error,
although it do not carry away many really godly, nor finally any at all, yet
does it often prove the most searching trial to them, and does prove
exceedingly strong and successful against many unhumbled Professors.

There are two things comprehended here, 1. That this tentation to error does
often prevail more among Professors, and does prove a stumbling to them more
than any other gross practices; they may stand out against these, and yet be
prevailed over by it.

2. It comprehends this also, that this tentation of error does rather
attempt the gaining of these that are eminent for profession, than others who
have no such name, although such sometimes may be carried also away therewith.
We see that these Nicolaitans, and false Apostles, and the prophetess Iezebel,
are not teaching nor seducing heathens, but the Church of Christ, and such as
he calls His Servants, Rev. 2. 20. which may take in even such as eminently
gave out themselves to be Christ's Servants; yea, it is clear, that neither did
this error have such success amongst heathens, as amongst Christians, nor did
the teachers thereof so intend the leaving of them* as they did vehemently
endeavor the corrupting of the Church; we see it also in other Churches, Was
there any Church more shining with gifts* than that of Corinth? and yet there
did false Apostles breed great distractions and opposition to the Apostle Paul,
and that as taking occasion from the giftedness and eminency of that Church
beyond others, to drive on that design. Again, was there any Church that did
more tenderly receive the Gospel, than these of Galatia? as we may see from
chap. 4. 14 15. They received him as an Angel of God, and as Christ Jesus, they
would have plucked out their own eyes for him; and yet there is no Church so
soon shaken and infected by corrupt teachers, and so bewitched with them and
their tentations, as we may gather from chap. 1. 6. chap. 3. 1, 2. and
throughout the Epistle: It is like the devil took occasion of their warmness
instantly to set upon them before their settling, more than on other places, or
Churches, where such hopeful beginnings did not appear; And thus we see in
experience daily, that where profanity abounds, there are fewer onsets to
tempt to error, and less success, than where the Gospel has had more
welcome and fruit; as it were, the devil bends this tentation against the
last, with more vehemency and subtilty, than he does against the former: for
which we may give these Reasons, 1. His hatred is most at them* and he would
fainest have them overturned. 2 Because he has other baits that are more
suitable to profane men: and so long as they are his, he does not so much seek
to engage them by this, for that is no gain to him. 3. Because especially,
these who have a form of Religion, if withal weak in knowledge, are most
capable, in some respect, of a tentation to error; for, profane men, care not
(like Gallio) what be truth, and what be error; but a poor soul that has some
conscience, is ready to debate, and desires the truth to be cleared, and when
not so strong as to rid it self, it is readily drawn away like these silly
women Paul speaks of, 2 Timothy 3. 6 7. who were ever learning, and never able
to come to the knowledge of the truth. 4. Because gross tentations to
profanity (wherewith others are carried away) are not so taking with them,
therefore the devil essayeth them with error, under color of some truth, or
new discovery of some more strict and holy way, which often prevails when the
other would not. 5. Because it is most advantageous to error, and make it
digest with others, to have one of name or parts, or piety for it, this being
ordinary among most men, to look more to these who maintain such a thing, and
what such a man thinks of it, than to the thing it self. Therefore does the
devil drive this as a main design whereby he may prevail over many; this was
ever a great mean made use of to induce to error, that many who were accounted
godly, did embrace the same, as may appear from the histories of the Novatians,
Donatists and others, who called themselves the pure and holy Church of
Martyrs, and took other such like titles in opposition to the Orthodox Church,
whom they accounted carnal; and by this mean they did brangle many. 6. He does
this also, that he may divert the exercises of these that look honest like from
self-searching repentance, etc. that if he cannot get them engaged to error,
he may bring them, at least, to dispute truth, whereby he essayeth to
extinguish the former conviction, or to give it a wrong mould before it be
settled; or to keep them, as it were, taken up about the shell, while he
intends to rob them of the kirnell, and so one way or other, if he gain not
all, he does yet disquiet them, and weary them by wakening of questions and
debates, which are without their reach, and possibly also beyond their station.

CHAP. IV. How it is that gross delusions may come to such height, as they
often do.
IT may be also questioned, How it comes that such absurd errors can come to
such a height, and prevail so against the Church? Or, what way the devil by
corrupt teachers does so delude Professors?

There are some reasons that are more general, and others more particular and
useful in the consideration of them for practice; that we may not be ignorant
of the devils devices, we shall insist most in these, all of them may be drawn
to three heads. 1. The Lords overruling, holy, just and wise (though often
secret) way of punishing men's ingratitude. 2. There is something in the devils
way of carrying on the tentation. 3. There is something in the distemper of
Churches and persons to be considered: Which three, being put together, will
make it not seem strange that the most gross and absurd error prevail. For
the first, The Lord has an overruling hand in such a design, which is partly,
to try his own, therefore heresies must be, 1 Cor. 11. 19. partly, to punish
the generation of ungrate hypocrites, who receive not the love of the truth, as
it is, 2 Thessalonians. 2. in both which he is to be glorified, either in his grace, or
justice, or both: Now these being the Lords designs, the absurder that the
error be, it attaineth his end the better; and appears to be the more
judiciallike, as by comparing, Isa. 44. 18, 19. and Romans 1. 21, 25, 28, etc.
and 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. is clear. All which places speak not only of the
most gross spiritual abominations, but of the Lords judicial hand therein.

If it be asked, What hand the Lord can have in What hand the Lord may have in
such a plague.
such a plague? Or, how He may be said to send it? Answ. It is not so much to
our purpose here, to dispute the Question of Gods providence in such actions;
But for clearing of this reason, we may lay down these grounds,

1. There are spiritual plagues, wherewith God justly punishes the ingratitude
and other sins of people, as well as there are external and corporal plagues;
these places cited, Isa. 44. 18, 19, Romans 1. 21. ^2 Thessalonians. 2. etc:
10, 11. Rev. 7, 8, and 9. Chapters, and almost that whole Book does confirm
this: only this would be adverted, that most ordinarily gross practices, as
adultery, murder, uncleanness of all sorts, are punishments for abusing the
light of nature, as may be gathered from Romans 1. 21. 25. 28. But to be given up
to strong delusion, and to believing of lies, is a plague that ordinarily
follows the abuse of the light of the Gospel, as we may see from 2 Thessalonians. 2.
9, 10. and this may be one reason, why more commonly such gross scandals and
practices abound, where the Gospel is not, or at least, is in less power, and
why error prevails most, where the Gospel has been, or is with more
clearness, because they are plagues to such respectively. This, I say, it is
most generally, though it be not always and universally, especially where
there are some other concurting reasons to make a difference.

2. We say, that the Lord is no less just, holy and pure in punishing men with
such plagues, than when He makes use of some other rods or judgments, neither
is there any thing in this to be attributed to Him, that is unbecoming His
absolute purity and holiness. For, 1. He does not punish any with this plague,
but such as have by their former abuse of light and other miscarriages justly
deserved the same. 2. He does not infuse any maliciousness in the heart, nor
increase what was, but justly permits what is to break out, and overules the
same for His just ends. 3. He does not strain them to any such course, but does
make use of their own willingness thereunto, and of their free choosing to
follow such a way for the glory of His justice. 4. He does not connive at, nor
dispense with the sinful practice of any instrument, but does really abhor,
and will also severely punish the same. So, that as the same act has a twofold
consideration, to wit, ^s it is sinful, and as it is penal, So it is diversely
to be ascribed, to wit, in the first respect, to man only; and in the last, to
Gods overruling providence, who can bring good out of evil, seeing there is
nothing so evil, but He can bring some good out of it, and make it subservient
to Him, otherwise He that is Omnipotent and only wise, would never suffer it to
be.

3. We say, although the Lord be not, neither can be accessory to this
delusion, as it is sinful, (for this impossibility belongs to His infinite
and blessed perfection) yet has He a just hand in the complexed design, which
does add exceedingly to the strength of the delusion. As, 1. He may justly give
the devil way to set on with his tentations, at one time, and on one person,
more than at another time, or in reference to an other person, as by proportion
we may gather from the case of Job. 2. He may furnish men with gifts that are
of themselves good, and justly permit them to use the same, for the promoving
of error; this has been often exceedingly isntrumental, in the furthering of
Satan's design in all ages, wherein he has made use of some great Scholars,
and men of subtle wits to oppose the truth, and to pervert the Scriptures of
God, as is clear in all the heresies that ever have been; and this is no less
just in God, to furnish with parts, an instrument of a spiritual plague, than
to give strength and power to some whom he imployeth, in temporal judgments,
who also may be found guilty before him, for abusing of the same. Hence it is
said, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. that there is not only a word and letter to shake the
minds of people at such a time, but there is also a Spirit or gift in an
eminent degree, and therefore it is called, ver. 10. All deceivablenesse; and,
no question, these that called themselves Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. 13. and made
Paul's gifts to be accounted weak in respect of theirs, had more than ordinary
gifts; and in this respect, sometime the Lord says, a false Prophet might
foretell something that was to come to pass; and so truly have an
extraordinary gift, when yet the Lords design is by such, to try the peoples
adherence to him, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. Thus often promovers of error may be
gifted with ability to reason, make querees, shift arguments and places of
Scripture, preach well, pray well with a great deal of eloquence, and liberty
of plausible expressions, yea, they may possibly not want, as it were, signs
and wonders (as in the place formerly cited) and yet the Lords end be to try,
as is said: of this sort are such as are spoken of, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Who wrest or
pervert Scripture to their own destruction; it is a strange word, they are
unlearned and unstable, (and, it may be, are crying down learning in others)
yet, says he, they have a dexterity to wrest the Scriptures, to coin new
interpretations, possibly never heard of before, to the admiration of others.
And what is the consequent thereof? It is their own destruction. It had been
advantage to many such themselves and others also, that they had never had such
a gift. 3. The Lord also may someway arm the devil, as His executioner to
carry on this design, by furnishing him with such instruments, giving him time,
opportunities and occasions to tempt, and suffering him in many things to
prevail: thus, 2 These. 2. Satan is said to have a power, and to exercise the
same, by bringing forth of lying wonders; and, no question, the devil when he
gets way, may do much, when it is said that he put it in the heart of Judas
to betray his master, who yet was furnished with parts, and admitted into
Christ's company by Himself; all which was subservient to carry on the devils
and the Pharisees design, of betraying the Lord; which, notwithstanding, tended
to the greater ruin of his own kingdom.

4. In such a case also, the Lord does justly deprive men, whom He minds to
plague with that delusion, of these means, which might be useful to discern
and resist the same. As, 1. he may take away all outward restraints, which
usually keep corrupt teachers from open and professed spreading of their
errors; and in His providence, give them full way to multiply, and avowedly to
pursue their design. This is to pluck up the hedge, Isa. 5. and to suffer the
winds to blow, Rev. 7. which are ever great inlets to this judgment of
delusion, when, to say so, there is a flood spewed out, and there is no earth
to help the woman, and to dry up that flood. 2. He may take away prime lights
and guides, which are useful to keep people right; or, if they continue, he
may suffer jealousy, division and other things to interveen so, that thereby
their weight and authority is lessened to such persons: in which respect, Ahab
becomes jealous of Micajah, whereby the devil has occasion to make the lies
of the false Prophets the more to be commended to him. 3. The Lord may withdraw
the light that persons have (and, it may be, some common gifts of the Spirit)
and by depriving them of that, they become the more obnoxious to tentation,
although it may be they think themselves wiser, and more understanding than
they were: thus the Apostle calls the Galatians foolish and bewitched, Gal.
3. 1, 2. as having fallen from that light which at first they had. 4. He may
remove common convictions of the Spirit, and challenges of a natural
conscience, so that they may go on in their delusion without a challenge; yea,
(as it is said, Ioh. 16. 2.) think that they do God good service in so doing:
this is, to have the conscience feared with an hot iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2. that
waits upon seducing Spirits; and thus we see, that the most vain and
reasonlesse confidence does often wait upon the foulest errors, as, Isa. 44.
9. unto 20. This is called, Gal. 5. 8. a persuasion in respect of its
confidence, which yet comes not of God. And the Lord may not only justly
deprive of such common gifts, but even of ordinary reason and judgment, whereby
men become, at least, in the prosecution of their errors, absurd and
unreasonable, without all capablnesse of seeing the weight of a reason, or
receiving a conviction, or observing their own folly, and to carry without all
respect to credit, honesty, good manners, and such things as are even respected
among civil men; yea, sometimes without respect to their own estates, or their
own persons, as we may see in the prophets of Baal, 1 King. 18. and many others
in Antichrists kingdom; these are called by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
unreasonable, or absurd beastly men, as if they wanted reason: this is also a
companion of delusion, and a piece of Gods judgment, as is clear from that of
Isa. 44. The Lord thinking good, for the abuse of light, to deprive men of
reason, as he did Nebuchadnezar, whereby the vilest and absurdest tentations
have access to men, (that otherwise may be reasonable) to carry them on with
greediness, and without all reluctance or contradiction.

5. When men are in the Lords justice thus deprived, and being set upon with
the tentation, which he has letten louse upon them, the Lord may in His
providence tryst many things that may be abused, for the carrying on of this
judgment, As, 1. he may tryst such a person with such a tentation, to live in
such a place, to have such acquaintance, etc. 2. He may tryst such a tentation
to fall in such a time, as there is no external aw-band to restrain; yea, in
his wisdom, order it so, as that then there may be many occasions of stumbling
among the Professors of the truth, what by scandals in practice, what by
division and other distempers, as the way of truth may be ill spoken of by
many; and the Ordinances in that resp^ct made vile, as is said in the case of
Elie's sons, 1 Sa^. 2. Sometime he may tryst such tentations with some
ignorant, unskilful* in^exterous hands, who may rather (...) than help any in
the removing of their doubts: These and many such like things may the wise and
just Lord order in His providence, which may be as snares and stumbling blocks
to proud secure hypocrites, who by their corruption may fall thereon; yea,
sometime the very Ordinances and the exercising of them, to wit, the Word,
Sacraments and Discipline, may, through men's corruptions, be stumbled at more
than if they were not; in this sense, when the Lord reproves the unfaithful
Prophets an^ Priests, Ier. 6, 14. and the peoples not hearkening to his
faithful Prophets, ver. 17. although they kept the form of Religion, ver.
20. he does threaten to (...) stumbling blocks before them, upon which they
should fall, ver. 21. All which and many more ways, (as sometimes following of
error has applause attending it, as, 2 Timothy 4. (...) Sometimes it has gain
waiting upon it, as, (...) Pet. 2. 3. 1 Timothy 6. 10. and Gal. 6. 12. Philip. 3.
19) being trvsted in the Lords just providence, have often much influence,
through men's corruption, to make delusion the more successful.

6 Beside these, the Lord has a judicial upgiving of proud, corrupt men, unto
the hands of such tentations: so that when as it were, the devil sets on by
such a blast of wind, and seeks to win^ow such and such persons, the Lord
does as a just judge* sentence them to be committed thereto, as to the
executioner of His justice; in this sense, he is said to give them up: and in
this respect, such defection, as it is a punishment, is judicially permitted
and ordered by Him, who willingly and purposly Sentenceth such persons to be so
given up, because of former sins, whereas others whom He does not so Sentence,
are not so carried away with that same tentation.

Also the Lord, who is wonderful in couns^l, and whose ways and judgments
are past finding out, may have many other wonderful and inconceivable ways in
the carrying on of this judgment; for, if all His judgments be a great depth,
much more are His spiritual judgments. It is upon this ground, to wit, the
considering of the Lords just severity of concluding all under sin, all in
unbelief, of the rejecting of the Jews* etc. that the Apostle does cry out* O
the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? Therefore we
shall search no further in this. Only, from what is said, we may see, that the
Lord has a just hand in the over ruling of such delusions; and also, that they
cannot but be strong and successful which are guided so, as to be
executioners of His justice; this also may make men tremble the more,
considering that the opening up of sl^ces, to let in the spait of delusion, is
no less Gods judgment, and no less to be feared, than the sending of Sword
or Pestilence, or the opening up the fountains of the great depths, to let in a
deluge upon the earth; and were men so looking on it, and affected with it, it
might possibly be much more bounded.

CHAP. V. How error may be known to be a judicial stroke. and why the Lord
smites with it.
IT may be asked here, 1. How error may be known to be a judgment or
judicial? And, 2. for what cause most ordinarily the Lord does send such a
judgment?

We cannot insist in every occurring Question; Yet to the first, We say, 1.
there is no error or delusion, but may be well accounted penal and judicial,
either as to the persons who fall therein, and vent the same, or as to others
who may be infected therewith, (although it may be but a trial in reference to
some) for, blindness of mind was a fruit and cons^quent of the first sin, and
follows not only as a sin, but as a punishment upon all the children of Adams
house. And therefore as in some respect, all following sins may be accounted
punishments of the first, this may be so in a special manner. 2. Beside this
general consideration, it is often the punishment of some special sins, and
in some cases is more judicial and penal than in other cases, as may be
gathered from these Characters. 1. When in the nature of it, it is very absurd
and unreasonable, as is said, such as these delusions of the Nicolaitans were,
because in such delusions the judgment of God does especially appear, when
they cannot be thought to be consequent in any reasonable way, or, to flow from
common infirmity. 2. When the persons that vent it, are, in respect of their
conversation, parts, place or profession, someway eminent, as was formerly
cleared, because so the tentation seems to be armed of the Lord, which
usually is not for naught. 3. When it is trysted with such a time and with such
circumstances as has been described; for, such things happen not by chance,
but are ruled by providence. 4. When it breaks in violently, and, it may be,
carries away some whom men would not have suspected, that is judiciall-like,
when, as it were, the Dragon with his tail and subtility, does bring stars from
heaven, and surprise some that thought themselves without the reach of such a
tentation. 5. It may be known by the gifts (to speak so) of such as carry on
the same; for, as in carrying on the work of the Gospel, the Lord does furnish
His Ministers, with gifts and painfulness, when He has to do with them; So
upon the contrary, when He has a work of judgment on the wheels, and the devil
a design of carrying-on delusion, the instruments are fitted proportionably, to
wit, there is a zeal carrying them here and there, So that by all means, as it
were, they compass sea and land to make Proselytes; there is dexterity,
quickness and nimblnesse in starting of doubts, wresting of Scripture, etc. as
is said; and there is a sort of patience in enduring, boldness and confidence
in attempting, and some success, as in the case of the false Prophets against
Micajah, 1 King. 22. and against Jeremiah, Ier* 29. When, I say, corrupt
instruments are fitted by these and such like means, it is probable, that the
Lord intends something by them which they themselves do not mind. 6. It is
judiciall-like, when it trysteth on the back of a peoples having the truth, and
being unfruitful under it, because, so it speaks out the very end of its
appearing, especially, if there be in people an itching-new-fanglnesse after
novelties, and if there have been needless and affected stirings and
questionings about lesser truths, If then greater delusion come, it does look
judiciall-like, as being a stroke for their former unsettlednesse; this is to
give men up to heap up teachers to themselves, that have itching ears, 2 Timothy
4. 3. and this is, to give men teachers according to their own hearts, that
there may be like people like priests, which is often threatened by the Lord.
And thus of old, when the people began to miscarry in the wilderness, in
reference to the second Command, He gave them up to worship the host of
heaven, and to miscarry in the first, as is mentioned, Acts 7. 41. 7. It
appears to be judicial indeed when it does hurt, either by corrupting of
truth, or ma^ing of unity, or wakening of divisions, etc. which a^e consequents
of the first four trumpets that bring spiritual plagues, Rev. 8. These and such
like characters may sufficiently convince that the Lord is angry.

To the second we may soon answer: And, 1. we What causes do most ordinarily
procure this plague of delusion.
say, that such a plague is not the consequent of common out-breakings and sins
of infirmity; Nor, 2. of ingratitude for, and abuse of, common mercies; Nor, 3.
ordinarily is it the punishment of gross sins of the flesh, to speak so; for,
this is rather a fruit of that: but it does follow upon, 1. the abuse of
sprituall mercies, such as the light of the truth of the Gospel, slighted
convictions, smothered challenges, broken promises made for further
Reformation, and such like, as may be gathered from 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. 2. It
follows upon spiritual sins, such as spiritual pride, security, hypocrisy
and formality, keeping up of the form without the power, having truth but not
the love thereof, as in the place formerly cited, and elsewhere. 3. There are
some sort of distempers, which especially procure this, beside others. As, 1.
an itching humor, that begins to loath the simplicity of truth. 2. A hasty
partial humor that cannot abide sound Doctrine, if it be not someway curiously
dressed, especially if it reprove their miscarriages: both which are spoken of, 2 Timothy 4. 3. 3. There is a proud self-conceitednesse, whereof the Apostle
speaks, 2 Timothy 3, 4. when persons are selfie, proud, boasters, etc. such are
a ready prey to such tentations. 4. Little respect to faithful Ministers that
preach truth, may procure this plague, to get Pastors according to their own
heart, and judgments that are not good, as the Lord threatens, Ezekiel. 20. and
is threatened by the Lord, Ioh. 5. ver. 43. I have come in my Fathers Name, and
ye have not received me; if another shall come in his own name, him will ye
receive. 5. It may be procured by lightness and unstablnesse, when folks go
vainly beyond their reach to seek or meet a tentation, the Lord justly may
smite them with their own sin; and thus reading of corrupt books, hearing of
corrupt preachers, conversing with corrupt men, and such like, which the Lord
has commanded to eschew, does not only prove, in Gods righteous judgment, a
snare or mids of folks insnaring, but also the procuring deserving cause of
being given up to that delusion, which they make themselves obnoxious to, by
going without His call, although, at first, possibly there was no positive
affection to that way, but, it may be, the contrary; even as suppose one
hazarding, contrary to the Command, to go nigh the door of the adulterous
woman's house, should for that cause be given up to fall in her snare and to
enter, although at first he did not intend it, as these places do insinuate,
Prove. 5. 8. and 6. 26, 27, 28. where he says, to this purpose, that a man
cannot take fire in his bosom and not be burnt, etc. And it is said, Prove. 22.
14. such as are abhorred of the Lord, shall fall in that pit. 6. There is a
jangling questioning strain; this often brings on this ill, when all truths are
not received, but folks begin to cast at the lesser truths; this procures
delusion in a greater height, as is said, because every truth is precious, and
when men become untender in the smallest truths, (if any may be called so) it
is just with God to deprive them of all, even as smaller sins in practice,
being connived at, do bring on more gross outbreakings: and thus the visible
Church, by her declining from the truth, in the Primitive times, and becoming
more to be taken up with Ceremonies and other unnecessary debates, did draw on
upon themselves Antichrists delusion at length: of this sort are ignorance in
the fundamental truths, that does proceed from negligence, little love to, and
delight in, the Word and Ordinances, little bemoaning of the falls and
miscarriages of others, when we hear them to be overtaken with such snares; and
many such like things might be named, but we will not insist further.

We come then to the second thing proposed, and that is to consider how corrupt
Teachers do carry on their design; and what means the devil uses by them to
prevail with poor souls, for to cast at the truths of God, and to drink up the
most absurd delusions: and although we cannot reach Satan's depths, he having
much subtlety, and many wiles, to carry on his design, as it is, 2 Cor. 11.
3. and it is called, Ephesians. 4. 14. a cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive, Yet seeing we ought not to be ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor.
2. 11. We shall gather somethings from Scripture, that may be useful to arm us
against the same: and to take up his way the better, we may consider, 1. The
instruments which he chooses. 2. The method that he keeps in tempting by
them. 3. The means which he uses, or common places from which he draws his
arguments. 4. The manner how these are carried on.

CHAP. VI. By what means, and how Satan drives on this plague among people.
1. SAtan does not act in this design immediately, nor does he act
indifferently by any instrument, but he has his special ministers, as it were,
set apart for that end, as the Apostle speaks 2 Cor. 11. 15. He has many
subjects indeed, but beside these, he has some special ministers for this
design, as our blessed Lord Jesus has Ministers specially set apart in His
Kingdom. Concerning which we may observe, 1. That he employeth some more
eminently to traffic, as it were, in this very employment, who, by compassing
sea and land, and traveling to and fro, may further his design, such were
these who were called false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. 13. Revel. 2, 3. and in the
history of the Acts we will find such coming from one place to another, as from
Jerusalem to Antioch, Act, 15. and elsewhere, purposly to spread their errors,
as the Apostles did travel for preaching the truth. 2. He has particular
instruments, preaching in particular places, that are, as it were, his
ministers of such and such bounds, as in the place cited. 3. Beside these, he
has stickling underhand-dealers, who, not appearing openly, yet creep into
houses; and ordinarily he has some women, who are specially employed in this,
as he has Iezebel the Prophetess in the Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2. and such
he had in the primitive heresies, particularly one of the Montanists, because
such are often vehement in what they are engaged in, and have access to
pervert and seduce, which others cannot easily have; his assisting of them
withal to speak sometimes to the admiration of others, seems more wonderful
like. 4. Whom ever he makes use of, they are someway fitted (to say so) for
the designs they are employed in, although their manner of carrying on these
designs may be diverse, as experience shows.

2. In the method which he follows, we will What is his method of proceeding.
find this progress, 1. He sets himself by all means to make the Ministers
of the truth odious and contemptible, and that either by crying down a
Ministry altogether, or making all indifferently to be Ministers, which is,
upon the matter, one with the former: this was Korah, Dathan, and Abirams
fault, Numb. 16. which is applied to corrupt teachers, Jude 11. or if that
fail, he endeavors to make their persons odious, who are in the station:
thus we see, even Paul is traduced by the false teachers of Corinth and
Galatia. The reason of this, is, 1. because Ministers are appointed, and gifts
are given to men by Jesus Christ, purposely to guard the Church from being
tossed to and fro with corrupt Doctrine, by the sleight of men, as it is Ephesians.
4. 11, 12, 13, 14. that he may therefore have the more easily his will, he
endeavors to bring the Watchmen in suspicion, and to render them useless.
2. Teachers of the truth, and corrupt teachers cannot both together have
peoples affection, and no teacher readily will have weight, if he have not
affection from his hearers: Therefore he by all means endeavors to traduce
Ministers that by excluding them, he may make way for his Emissaries, for they
are like (...) wooers (...) the same Bride, So that both cannot have her
affection, to this purpose is the Apostles word, Gal. 4. ^7. they zealously
affect you, but not well, yea, they (...) exclude you; it is in the Original,
and on the M^rgent, they would exclude us, (that is, the true Apostles) that
you might affect them. And considering the great access that the devil has to
destroy, when once Ministers are in contempt, it is no marvel he begin at the
removal of this impediment out of his way; and s^ing he attempted this against
the great Apostl^ Paul, so often and frequently, it cannot be thought strange
that he seek to defame others.

If it be enquired how he prosecuteth this? We How ^e (...) (...).
may observe these particular ways; As, 1. Although he question not a
Ministry in the general, Yet he wakeneth Questions, 1. concerning the calling
of such and such men, if they be duly called Ministers or not; thus Paul's
Apostleship is questioned, because he had not conversed with the Lord; and for
thi^ cause he is put, in the Epistles to the Corinthians and Galatians, so
largely to vindicate his Calling and Apostleship, and to produce, as it were,
not only his Commission, but the Seal thereof also, particularly, 2 Cor 3. 2,
3. and the occasion thereof is expressed, 2 Cor. 13. 3. since ^e seek a proof
of Christ speaking in me* 2. He endeavors the discrediting of their gifts,
as if the m^tter spoken by them were common, their expressions mean, and their
carriage base and contemptible, as we may see in the instance of that some
great Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 10. 1. and 11. 6, he is called ^ude in spe^ch. 3.
This is especially by comparing them with the fair show of corrupt teachers in
their flourishing, spiritual, ravishi^g* like discours^s, which are by many
(...) mysteries, and are called depths, Revel. 2. 24. The Lord indeed calls
them depths of Satan, but it is not to be thought that they themselves meaned
so, who yet are said to give them the name of depths; sometimes unconceivable
nonsense, will be admired, and plain truths and duty despised. 4. They cry-up
their revelations and spiritual seize in an immediate manner beyond what
is in the Ministers of Christ: Therefore, 2 Cor. 11. 12. Paul is put to compare
himself with them, and particularly in revelations and singular manifestations
of God to him. 5. They endeavor to make the Ministers of Christ to be esteemed
covetous, self-seekers, earthly-minded, and such like, because of their taking
wages to preach the ^ospel, as if they were making a prey of the people, which
is often objected to the Apostle, and answered by him in these Ep^stles to the
Corinthians. 6. When evidences fail, then they raise suspicions of Ministers
craftiness and underhand dealing, as if in every thing they were seeking their
gain, as that Apostle answers it, 2 Cor. 12. 16* 17. 7. Whatever the
Ministers carriage be, they lie in wait to traduce it, if he be more meek and
familiar in his conversing, they say he is a carnal man, a friend and lover of
sinners and corrupt men, as was said of our blessed Lord; if he be more aust^re
in checking their faults or retired in shunning their company, he is called
intolerable and devilishly proud, as was imputed to John; if he take wages or
gifts, he is accounted greedy and covetous; if he refuse and abstain, it is
expounded to be want of love and respect to them, as was also said of Paul when
he continued firm in his former resolution, 2 Cor. 11. 10* 11. 8. They are
usually counted proud, exalters of themselves above, and despisers of, the
people, and to take too much on them to the prejudice of the Flock, whose
liberty and privileges corrupt teachers ordinarily pretend to vindicate
against Ministers tyrannous encroachments (as they say) This was pretended by
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram against Aaron, and was revived and followed in the
primitive times by these corupters, spoken of, Jude 11. 9. They endeavor to
have the people suspecting the Ministers love to them, as 2 Cor. 11. 11. yea,
that all his freedom to them, and his speaking against their faults and errors
is bitterness, railing, and the like, which the Apostle touches, Gal. 4. 16.
Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? 10. It is
ordinary to charge Ministers with lightness and changeablnesse, and that
therefore much weight is not to be laid on them, for, they think one thing this
year, (say they) and alter the next, when yet, it may be, edification has
moved them in such a change; this has been imputed to Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 17.
purposedly to make his word to have little weight, and it is no marvel that
that same way be followed in reference to others. For this end also, where
there is any personal fault in a Minister, it is not past over but exceedingly
aggreaged; yea, though it has been in his youth, before his conversion or
entry into the Minist^ry, it is not forgotten, if it may serve to defame the
holy Calling: For preventing of this, it is required of Ministers, that they be
of good report, even among those that are without; and it is like the false
apostles spaired not to upbraid Paul with his former conversation and
persecution. 11. Differences of judgment and divisions among Ministers, are
much made use of for that end, even sometimes when they are but apparent: Thus
Paul is said to preach another doctrine, by the false teachers, than those at
Jerusalem did, whereupon he is often put to show the harmony that was betwixt
them, as particularly in the Epistle to the Galatians; And Josephus marketh,
that Ahab's false teachers did oppose Elias his Prophecy (wherein it is said
that dogs should lick Ahab's blood at Iezreel) to Micajah, who said he should
die at Ramoth * gilead; Also, that others did harden Zedekia, by this that
Ezekiel said, that he should not see Babylon, and that Jeremiah said he should
be carried thereto; which they took to be contrary, and did thereby seek to
defame the Prophets, and to weaken the esteem of their Prophecies; and though
there was no real difference there, yet it shows how, and to what end, they
lie in wait to aggreage the differences of God's Servants, though but apparent,
which should make Ministers carefully avoid those things. Again, secondly,
Though, at first, principal truths are not altogether and plainly denied, Yet
by degrees he does engage many, 1. To reject some less fundamental truths
concerning Government, communion with others in the Ordinances, and such like.
2. He draws them to separate in practice from the fellowship of others, under
the pretext of more purity and spiritualnesse; this seems to be expressed by
Jude, v. 19. These are they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
Spirit, although it is insinuated that they did pretend to it: And indeed this
way was followed in the first heresies, which began at small things, as those
of the Novatians, Donatists, etc. who at first only separated to eschew the
impurity of promiscuous communion. 3. He comes then to quarrel expressions
that are used by the Orthodox, and to commend, as it were, a new kind of
language; for which cause, the Apostle commends the holding fast the form of
sound words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. And these corrupt teachers are said to speak great
swelling words of vanity, and to have expressions much more weighty like, than
what formerly has been used, Jude 16. Thus the Arians will not admit the word
(...), or consubstantial, and a Council must be called to lay by that: and so
they come to question, in the next place, the Truth it self, alleging men are
too confident to determine such things, It Is not clear, much may be said
against it, and such like; whereby, under pretext of doubting, they endeavor
to a wake scruples in others, that they may be disposed the more to admit of
their resolutions. 4. Absurdities are laid down as consequences that follow
upon Truths* and thus the doctrine of Providence* Election and Reprobation,
etc. are loaded with horrible consequences and absurdities, pretended to follow
on them, (...) so the do^trine of Gods absolute Soveraignity, (...)
Justification by free grace, were loaded in the (...) times, as if thereby Paul
had taught that men might do evil that good might come of it; That the Law was
wholly made void; That men might sin securely, because grace did so much the
more abound, as in the second, third, and sixth Chapters of the Epistle to the
Romans, is clear. 5. He endeavors to diminish men's hatted and zeal against
errors and the most absurd opinions, that he may either obtain some actual
toleration to them, or, at least, keep off such hard constructions of them;
for, if that be gained at first, although error get not a direct approbation,
yet a great point is gained, if he can get some to tolerate, and others to
hear: This is condemned in the Church of Thyatira, that the Officers suffered
Iezebel to teach, and that the people, who are there called Christ's servants,
did countenance and hear her; And it seems something of this was in Corinth,
which makes the Apostle say, that evil communication corrupts good manners,
and that therefore men should not become cold in reference to error, although
they be not tainted with it, 1 Cor. 15, 33. And upon this ground the most
gross Heretics of old and of late, as Socinians, Arminians, those of the
Family of Love, and others of that kind, have maintained a liberty in
prophesying a problematicknesse in the main truths of the Gospel, and a
toleration in matters of doctrine, etc. as principles subservient to their
design. 6. He proceeds then to have the persons of such as are tainted with
error, much beloved and esteemed of by others, that there may be the more
familiar access to converse with them, and the readier disposition to receive
their leaven from them: this he does sometimes by making men's gifts in their
quickness and nimblnesse to be commended, sometimes by the seeming gravity,
austerity and holiness of their carriage, for which cause they are said to be
wolves in sheeps clothing, Mat. 7. and he is said to transform himself into an
angel of light, and his ministers into the ministers of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 14.
Sometimes by flattery, and seeming sympathy and affection, for which the lying
Prophet is called the tail; and if it were by no other mean, he does it by
their reproaching of honest and faithful Ministers, and, it may be, hitting
upon some real ills among them, which is often but too too pleasing to the
carnal humor of the generality of people, as in the instances formerly given
is clear. Lastly, when this is obtained, then there is easy access to make
the most gross Doctrines and delusions to be drunken in, which at first would
have been abhorred: by these degrees Antichrists delusion came to its height,
and by such steps, some, that at first only separated from the Novatians and
Donatists, came at last to that height of delusion, as to become Circumcellians
(a strange wild kind of delusion) Anthropomorphits, and such like.

3. The means and arguments that are used to carry The means and arguments that
are used to carry on this design.
on this delusion, are to be observed, which are these or such like. 1. The
carriage and conversation of the abetters thereof, is made very plausible, fair
and approveable-like, that there may be no suspicion of the devils influence on
such a work; Therefore they are said to be transformed into the Ministers of
Christ; thus the Pharisees make long prayers, live austerely, etc. thereby to
gain reputation to their traditions: for, the devil would mar all his design,
if he did not look like an Angel of light: yea, there will be much seeming like
zeal, patience and suffering in such, as may be gathered from 2 Cor. 11. 23.
and in experience it will be found, that the most gross Heretics in doctrine,
have had (at least for a long time) a great show of holiness before others, as
might be instanced in the greatest deluders.

2. It is useful in this design, to have some that have Church Power, and
bears the name of Officers, engaged, that they may come in, not under the
name of Ministers of Satan, but as it is, 2 Cor. 11. 23. as Ministers of
Christ; and therefore, if no ordinary call can be alleged by them, they readily
disclaim all such, and yet pretend a calling to be Preachers of Christ, of his
Gospel, and such like: as we may see by these false teachers of old, who called
themselves Apostles and Prophetesses, as having some extraordinary call from
God, thereby making way for their delusions.

3. They follow their designs under a pretext of advancing holiness and
spirituality, to a higher degree, and of having a more humble way of living,
and of being a further length in high seize, than other men can win at,
or are capable of: thus some are outwardly despisers of all pride, and of
giving respect to men, and that as the Apostle says, Col. 2. 18. by a sort of
voluntary humility, and intruding upon things which they have not seen,
casting, in the mean time, at common and plain truths.

A 4. mean, is, the pleasing of ears and itching humors, with great swelling
words, new notions, and large discourses of nonsense* delivered with great
confidence, when as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 1. 7. They know not what they
say, nor whereof they affirm, yet often such discourses are sublime mysteries
to the ignorant, and such as loath the simple truth.

5. They make use of a pretext of good will and advantage to these that they
speak unto, as it is, Romans 16. 18. by good words and fair speeches they deceive
the simple, and by pretending to wish their souls well, and to pity their
blindness and hazard they are in, they creep into their houses and affections,
2 Timothy 3. 6. and lead simple persons captive; By this pretext, the serpent
beguiled Eve at the first, promising some advantage by hearkening to him, and
this way is followed by corrupt teachers still, as it is, 2 Cor. 11. 3.

6. Sometimes there is much more pretended strictness, especially in outward
things: thus some of old added the observation of Moses Law to the Gospel, as
if that were a more perfect and strict way, and upon this ground have so many
traditions been brought in into the Church.

7. There is a pretending to more Christian liberty and freedom from the
bondage of Ordinances of whatever sort, so as men must not be tied to hear
preachings, keep Sabbaths, Pray, Praise and such like, which are (say they) but
forms and burdens to Saints, and unbecoming that freedom and spiritualnesse
that grown Believers should have. Thus such deceivers and these that are
deceived with them, are said to promise liberty to whomsoever they propose
their delusions, while in the mean time all of them are made servants to
corruption.

8. There is great pretending to know Christ's mind, and confident alleging of
the writings of His Apostles, and that in a seeming convincing way: Thus, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. there are mentioned Spirit, Word and Letter, as proceeding from
Paul, whenas he himself is disclaiming such interpretations as they did put on
him.

9. They use to allege the authority of men, and to oppose such to these who
oppose their errors: thus the Pharisees alleged Moses, and the Nicolaitans
Nicolas; and it is like, the false apostles that came from Jerusalem, did
oppose other Apostles authority to Paul's, as if they had preached nothing but
what they preached in Jerusalem; and very often the infirmities of some great
men, are stumbled upon, and made arguments against truth.

10. Many are stirred up to vent queries and captitious questions, (as often
the Pharisees did, by sending their emissaries to Christ) that some advantage
may be gotten that way, and these that are for truth entangled.

11. Sometimes he makes use of humane reason, and cries down every thing that
seems not consonant to it: upon which ground the resurrection was denied by
the Sadduces, and some of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. and the most fundamental
truths of the Gospel, are by the Socinians and others unto this day. Sometimes
again, all use of reason, learning or prudence is disclaimed; in which respect,
such men are called unreasonable, 2 These. 3. and bruit beasts, 2 Pet. 2. and
Jude, 10.

12. They endeavor by all means to carry the favor of the civil Magistrates,
and to have Ministers especially such as are zealous against them, made
hateful and suspected unto them, and the gaining of this has a double
advantage with it to their cause, as it strengthens it, and weakeneth the
truth: this we see the false Prophets did of old, 1 King. 22. Ier. 26. Amos 7.
10. and so endeavored the Scribes and Pharisees to engage the Romans against
Christ, and against His Apostles; So also did the Arrians and other Heretics,
and so has Antichrists emissaries ever endeavored to stir up civil
Magistrates against faithful Ministers, as most hateful persons: This they
carry on by such like means. 1. They pretend to give the Magistrates more
submission, and charge faithful Ministers with sleighting of their authority,
for they know this to be a thing well pleasing to Magistrates: Thus the
faithfuln^sse of honest Ministers is accounted disobedience and hatred, and the
lying flattery of such is given out for re^pect and obedience, so was it in the
case of Mica^ah. 2. They cry out upon faithful Ministers, as factious and
turners of the world upside-down, sowers of sedition, as, Acts 24. 5. troublers
of the peace, who do keep the people in a continual stir, and cross their
designs, and mar the absoluteness of M^gistracy; So, Elijah is counted an
enemy to Ahab, and a troubler of Israel. 3. They vent many groundless
calumnies against them, as if they were guilty of many gross evils; Thus
Athanasius and many others were charged by the Arians, as murderers and
adulterers, and some pretended proofs made thereof: Yea, it was alleged to
Constantine, that Athanasius had meddled with civil matters (which was
derogatory to his authority) by inhibiting all Corns to be exported from Egypt.
4. They bring the Magistrates in tops with them, by appellations from
Church-judicatories to them, and seeming to plead an absoluteness to
Magistrates in things Ecclesiastic; Thus Heretics in all times have sheltered
themselves under this pretext, till Magistrates declared against them, and then
they cast them off also, as of late in the practices of the Socinians and
Arminians has been made out. 5. They represent them to Magistrates as
unsufferable, in respect of their plain threatenings, and that such are not to
be endured so to affront Authority, and to weaken these that profess so much
to respect the same; thus Amos is represented, chap, 7. 10. by Am^ziah Priest
of Bethel, and often Jeremiah is so by the false Prophets in his time. 6. They
propose faithful Ministers as unwarrantably arrogating a kind of infallibility
to themselves, and thereby derogating from all others; so is that word, 1 King.
22. What way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to you? and by a certain
audacious confidence, seek, as it were, to put out faithful Ministers as
despicable men, not worthy to be cre^ited, as in the case cited; and Ier. 28.
and elsewhere, and often by such means their insinuations and flatteries do
exceedingly prevail for promoving their designs. Augustine charge the
Donatists with this, that in their application to Julian, they used this
phrase, quoniam apud ^e solum justitia habet locum: and this was (says he)
when they knew he was an apostat, Epist. 48.

The last thing in this, is the manner how this design The manner how this
design is carried-on.
is carried on by such corrupt teachers, which is not always the same in all,
and may in part be collected from what is said; Yet we may name these
particulars. 1. It is covertly and subtly done, therefore they creep in with
insinuations, looking far otherwise than they are. 2. It is done
hypocritically* 1 Timothy 4. They speak lies in hypocrisy, and do pretend both to
be Religious and friends to Religion and Truth, while they do so. 3. It is done
sometimes vehemently, as it were knocking with force at hearts, So it shakes
the hearer by the bigness of words, peremptorinesse of threatenings, confidence
of Assertions, and vehemence in the manner, so that it has (as the Scripture
says) a strength and power with it, and therefore is compared to a spait or
flood, Rev. 12. and is called strong delusion, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. This is done with
all diligence, compassing sea and land, leaving no mean unessayed. And, 5. with
a kind of seeming simplicity, zeal and singlnesse, and with many professions
thereof, as may be gathered from the instances formerly given; and from Gal. 4.
17. where it is said, they zealously affect you, but not well, and from Romans
10. 2. 6. This is done with great boldness, which appears, 1. In pretending
to eschew no suffering, or to fear no hazard that may follow on their opinion,
if it were to give their body to be brunt, and, it may be, doing much in this.
2. It may be stuck to by them at their sickness, even in their death beds, as
it is not unlike it was with Iezebel and some of her followers, Rev. 2. 21, 22.
for, neither is the devil silenced, nor corruptions removed by sickness or
death. 3. It appears in confident undertaking to dispute with any; yea,
oftentimes seeking occasion of that: Thus the Libertines arise and dispute with
Stephen, Acts 6. and it is like, the false teachers of Corinth, that said of
Paul, (...) Cor. 10* 10. that his bodily presence was weak and his speech
contemptible, would not have declined to have disputed even with him. 4. It
kythes in their confident t^usting to their own judgments, and their
undervaluing of all others. 5. It appears in confident as^erting of any
thing, and not only in the reproaching of any private person, but of Officers
and Ordinances, 2 Pet. 2. 10. they are not af^raid to speak evil of dignities.

By these considerations, we may in part see how What accession a people may
have to the bringing of this plague upon themselves.
delusion comes to such strength and height, in respect of these who carry on
this corrupt doctrine. We come now to consider a thi^d thing, to wit, What
accession is from the peoples side for the promoving thereof, which we may draw
to these three. 1. There is something sinful in a peoples former carriage
whereby delusion is exceedingly strengthened against them, when it comes as a
just plague for former ^iscarriages; But of those sins we have already spoken.

2. A peoples present temper, or rather di^temper, may have much influence on
this, and exceedingly dispose them for, and cast them open to, the tentation.
As, first, lightness of mind, unsettlednesse in the truth; these the Scripture
calls unstable souls, 2 Pet. 2. 14. 2. There is an itching new-fangle humor,
desirous of some new thing, and loathing simple Doctrine, as it is, 2 Timothy 4.
3. 3. There is too great facility in believing the spirits, without trying of
them, which its like has been in Galatia, whereby they were soon drawn away to
another Gospel, and to credit some insinuaters foolishly* as, chap. 1. 6. and
3. 1. 4. A secure carnal frame, wanting exercise of conscience, is dangerous
So are also proud presumptuous persons* (that have an high esteem of
themselves, and such as are self-willed, who are mentioned, 2 Pet. 2. 10.) in
great hazard of this: The tentation will also sometimes take advantage of some
persons who are jumbled in mind, and under some weight and heaviness, and come
in under pretext of remedying the same; many such distempers there are, whereof
some may be gathered from what is said of the sinful causes that procure this,
because that which does meritoriously deserve to be so punished, proves often
also a disposing mids for receiving of the tentation; But we forbear.

3. People often by their carriage do promove this plague of delusion upon
themselves, casting themselves in the snare, 1. By needless familiar
conversing with such persons. 2. Going to hear them. 3. Purchasing or reading
their books. 4. Hazarding to entertain their doubts, and to prosecute their
arguments and questions, to plead for their opinions, and such like, shunning
withal of such means and ways as might recover them, and entertaining
prejudice at such as would aim thereat, and such like, whereby that of the
Prophet is verified. The prophets teach lies, and my people love to have it so.
Now, if all these be put together, can it be thought strange to see the
great^st delusion prevail? We have been the longer on these, not only for the
confirming of that truth, but for drawing together in some short view, a little
map, as it were, of these ways, whereby the devil drives on his design by the
cunning craft of these that lie in wait to deceive.

CHAP. VII. What is called-for as duty in such a case.
IT rests now that we should consider what is duty in such a time, or case,
when delusion in less or more does prevail, or is very like to prevail? It
cannot be denied, but that something is calledfor, and is necessary where the
danger is so great; and also it is evident, that something more than ordinary
is necessary, because the ill is more than ordinary. The remedy therefore must
be proportionable and timous; for, a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump,
Gal. 5. (...). And experience proves, that such ills do fret and corrupt, as
does a gangrene, 2 Timothy 2. 17. The difficulty is in determining what is to be
done, wherein, not only the piety, zeal and conscience of men will have
exercise, but also their prudence and parts.

The loosing of this question will relate to three ranks of men. 1. To
Church Officers, especially to Ministers. 2. To Magistrates. 3. To people in
private stations. Yet before we positively say any thing, We shall, 1. show
what is not the remedy called-for. 2. We shall show what is called-for, but is
not sufficient. 3. What seems to be called-for as sufficient.

As to the first* There are two extremities to be shunned, which we shall lay
down in two Assertions.

Assert. 1. An absolute and unlimitted forbearance What is not the proper
remedy or duty in such a case.
and toleration of all errors, and of the promoters thereof, is not the due
remedy that is called-for in such a time, in reference to such evils. This, I
suppose is clear, if there were no more in Scripture than what is comprehended
in these Epistles, Rev. 2. and 3. For, 1. the Angel of Ephesus is commended,
chap. 2. 2. that he could not bear or endure them that were evil, to wit, the
false Apostles: This enduring then cannot be the duty, seeing Christ commends
the contrary. 2. He does reprove Pergamos, ver. 14. because they had such
amongst them that held the doctrine of Balaam, that is, because they suffered
them. And, 3. this is clearly expressed in the Epistle to Thyati^a, ver. 20* I
have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Iezebel to
teach and seduce My servants. There can be nothing more clear than this; and it
is the more observable, that this not-forbearing is commended in Ephesus, where
things in their own particular condition are not altogether right; and the
other Churches are reproved for neglect of this, even when their own particular
conditions are right. Which shows, That the Lord loves zeal against such
scandals, and abhors forbearance of them. What was formerly said in the
Doctrine, What is clear in the practice of Scripture, both in examples and
commands that are given therein in reference to this, and what may be further
said in the positive part of this direction, will clear this.

And whatever humane prudence and carnal fainting would suggest concerning such
a way, as that it were fittest to deal with persons, in such a distemper, no
otherwise than absolutely to forbear them, at least, so far as relates to
th^se distempers as such; yet it is clear, this is not Gods Ordinance so to do,
nor the remedy that is by Him appointed: And therefore there is no promise by
which we may expect a blessing to it, although sometimes the Lord, who is
absolu^ely Sovereign, may condescend without any means, to dry up and bound a
flood of error, even when men are guilty of forbearing: The effect is not to
be attributed to men's sinful forbearance, but to Gods gracious condescendence.

Assert. 2. We say on the other hand, That an indifferent, Extremes to he ^s
chewed.
rigid, equal pursuing, or not enduring of every thing that is an error, or of
every person who may be in some measure tainted, is not the suitable remedy or
duty that is called-for in reference to such a case. For, as neither all
errors, nor all persons are alike, So neither is the same way at all times to
be followed, because, what may be edifying in one case, may be destructive in
another. And as therefore there is prudent difference to be made, in reference
to scandals in practice, and persons in respect of different scandals, yea,
even of different tempers are div^rsly to be dealt with, So is it also to be
here. Men are to walk, as they may most probably attain the great end,
edification, which ought to be the scope in this, as in all other Ordinances:
And therefore there can be no peremptory rule concluded, that will meet all
cases and persons, as has been said: We see even the Apostles putting
difference between persons and scandals, according to the several cases; for,
sometimes they Excommunicate, as in the instance of Hymeneus and Phyletus,
sometimes they instruct doctrinally, as Paul does the Church Members of Corinth
and Galatia; others he threateneth, and yet does not actually Sentence them, as
he does false teachers in these Churches: Sometimes again, no particular
Apostle alone, does decide the question (although doctrinally they might) but
there is a Synod called judicially and authoritatively, to decide the same, as,
Act. 15.

The reason of the 1. is, because these errors of Hymeneus and Phyletus, were
of themselves gross, destroying the faith, and obstinately and blasphemously
adhered to. 2. He instructs and expostulateth with the people of Corinth, and
proceeds not to the highest Censure, 1. Because they were not seducers, but
were seduced by others. 2. They could not be accounted obstinate, but might be
thought to have sinned of infirmity, Therefore more gentle and soft means are
to be applied for reclaiming of them. 3. They were a numerous body, and
therefore Excommunication or cutting off, could not be expected to attain its
end. 4. They were in a present distemper, questioning the Apostles authority;
he seeks rather therefore to be again acknowledged by them, that so both his
word and his rod might have weight, whereas if he had smitten in their
distemper, they had rather broken off further from their subjection. These are
clear, beside what may be said of the nature of the scandal or error.

3. He threatens the corrupt teachers with offcutting, because they were
leaders and seducers, and so deserved to be more severely dealt with, than
those that were seduced by them, although, possibly, as drunk with these same
errors: Yet, though he threaten, He does spare for a time to strike, not out
of any respect to those corrupt teachers, or from any connivance at their
error, but out of respect to the poor seduced people, for whose edification
Paul forbear, even when the weapons were in readiness to avenge all
disobedience; he abstained, I say, because such people having a prejudice at
him, and being bewitched by these teachers, might more readily in that
distemper have cleaved unto them, and have forsaken Paul, which would have
proven more destructive to them; he seeks therefore, first, to have their
obedience manifested, and so not only forbeareth them, but even those corrupt
teachers, for a time, for the peoples edifying, as may be gathered from 2 Cor.
10. 6. and chap. 12. v. 19.

Lastly, I said, Sometimes Synods or Councils are called, as in that place,
Act. 15. which in other cases we find not, 1. Because then that error was new,
and it is like wanted not its own respect from many of the Church, Therefore a
Council of Officers joined together to decide it, which is not necessary again,
after that decision is past; but Ministers are doctrinally and by discipline to
maintain the same, as we see Paul does maintain, in the Epistles to the Romans
and Galatians, the conclusion of the former Synod. 2. This Synod is conveened
not for want of light (for, any of the Apostles, as such, were infallibly
inspired to decide in the same, and had in their preachings decided it) but it
is to make it have the more weight with others, and therein to be a precedent
to us. 3. That was a spreading error, which did not affect one place only, but
many Churches; and it is like that many Believers were in hazard to be shaken
therewith: Therefore the most weighty remedy is called-for. 4. There was need
now, not only of light to decide the doctrinal things, but there was also need
of directions for helping folks how to carry in reference to such times, so as
to eschew the snare of error on the one hand, and of giving offense upon the
other, as we may see by the decrees of that Synod: Therefore in such cases, not
only would men severally endeavor the duty of their stations, but they would
jointly concur and meet judicially, or extrajudicially, as occasion calls, to
deliberate and consult in these things of so great and common concernment: for,
seeing the Church is one city, and one lump, a little fire may hazard all, and a
little leaven corrupt all, and unwatchfulnesse at one part, or post, may let in
enemies to destroy all. It is needful therefore, that in some cases there be
mutual concurrence, although it be not necessary at all times to have a
judicial meeting, nor at any time is a present duty to be suspended by any
person, if no such meeting can be had. What is said, does demonstrat that there
is a difference to be made in reference to errors, persons and cases.

CHAP. VIII. When some errors are to be forborne.
IF it should be enquired, how this difference is to be made? or, how it may be
known when without guilt there may be some forbearance, and when not? Answ.
This is indeed difficult, and we will not undertake in particulars either to be
satisfying or peremptory; yet we supose the considering of these general
Distinctions will be helpful, and the Some necessary an^ useful distinctions.
application of them necessary, in this case. 1. We would distinguish betwixt
some errors and scandals and others, and that both in respect of their
grosnesse and evidence: for, some errors are, as Peter calls them, 2 Pet. 2.
1, 2. pernicious and damnable, as striking against the special Truths of the
Word of God, or inferring gross practices with them, as this of the
Nicolaitans did, and hazarding the souls of the maintainers of them, not as
other sins of infirmity, but in respect of the principles which they imply; and
of this sort are many both errors and practices. Again, Other things may be
errors, that are contrary to Truth, but not destructive unto, nor altogether
inconsistent with, the foundation, but such a thing, as possibly many true
Saints may be taken with, and yet have access to God and may enter Heaven,
although they should die in that opinion; of which sort are many things that
are debated amongst orthodox Divines; and indeed there is nothing but it has a
truth or a falsehood in it, yet are not all of equal necessity and weight. Of
the first sort was that error, which the false apostles endeavored to
bring-in, that is, the adding of the practice of the ceremonial Law to Christ
in justification, and the mixing-in of works moral and ceremonial therein, as
from the Epistle to the Romans and Galatians may be gathered. Of the second
kind, was the debate for meats and other things, mentioned, Romans 14. and in the
Epistles to the Corinthians. Of the first, we say, there ought to be no
tolerance, Therefore the Lord does here reprove it; and in the Epistles to the
Romans and Corinthians, Paul does plainly and powerfully refute them and
reprove them, even when it was exceeding ill taken, and they were ready to
count him an enemy, because he told them the truth, Gal. 4. Yet will he not
forbear, because a little leaven of that sort will leaven the whole lump, and
hazard the making of his labor among them to be in vain.

Of the second sort, we say, That there is a moderation called-for in it, and
Ministers are not always called either doctrinally, or by Discipline,
judicially to reprove or censure them: I will not say but sometimes it may be
meet to discover the least error, and it may be by circumstances so aggreged,
that it may be needful judicially to take notice of it, as when it is involved
with offense and ready to breed Schism or Scandal, or in such like cases (in
which respect there are some things mentioned in the decree, Act. 15. which are
not very material in themselves, as the eating of things strangled) yet, we
say, it is not simply and always necessary for Ministers to press at the
convincing of all who maintain something different from truth, or which is
supposed to be so by them, if ^it be of things extra-fundamental, or, which
have not direct or palpable influence upon the violating of faith, or
corrupting of manners, much less to censure for the maintaining of it. For, it
is not of such that these Epistles speak: And we see, Romans 14. and in the
Epistles to the Corinthians, in the debate about meats and eating of things
sacrificed to idols, and such like, wherein though there was still a right side
and a wrong, yet does he rather press the forbearing of these debates, than
the dipping into them, not astricting men always to follow this or that,
providing it be done without breach of unity and charity. Hence it is* that
although there be somethings he will give no forbearance unto, but
authoritatively and ministerially he decideth in them, yet in the same Epistles
there is something amongst the Saints that he seeks rather to heal, and to
obtain mutual forbearance in, than peremptorily to decide. See Romans 14. 1 Cor.
8. 2, 3, etc. Phil. 2. 3.

2. There are some truths and practices evident, which by the light of the Word
may be solidly demonstrated to an impartial and unbyassed searcher; and some
contrary errors and scandals, that are at the first obvious (and, it may be,
even to a natural conscience) to be such, so that although men would use
tergiversations, and say as Hymeneus and Phyletus did, 2 Timothy 2. 17. that there
were no resurrection to come, because the Scripture speaks of a spiritual
resurrection, which in the Believer is passed already. And although many
deluded persons, who will not admit of distinctions according to reason, in
such a case, may be drawn away with them, and adhere still to them; yet are the
things demonstrable to these that are even but of ordinary reach, by sound
grounds from the Scripture, and that convincingly: Other things, again, may be
truths, and there may be to some persons a possibility of reaching them by many
consequences from Scripture, yet are they not so clear to many; whereupon it
is, that men, yea, even learned and godly men, do differ in their apprehensions
of several truths, the Lord so thinking good to bridle men's humors and to let
us see the necessity of humility and soberness, and this may be in the
meanestlike things; these the Apostle, Romans 14. 1. calls doubtful
disputations, as being things wherein too many, at least there is not such
evidence attainable as to stay the minds of ordinary people, or to refute the
contrary assertions of any adversary* of which are Genealogies, and other
things that Paul mentions to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 4. and calls them endless,
because there is no settled ground to rest on, but one question does generate
another; and so the principle that must be laid down for clearing such a thing
to one, is also disputable to another as the thing it self is, and men know but
in part, even those that are eminent, so that an universal harmony in these
cannot well be expected: In reference to this, we say, That greater
peremptorinesse is required in the first sort than in the second* wherein, by
reason of the practice of the Apostles in Scripture, yea, and of necessity
there is a forbearance requisite, Yet we would beware of partiality in
accounting truths, either evident or disputable, as men (according as they are
judged) are too apt to do; it is better therefore to try these by the common
account that the Godly and Learned have had in all times of such truths, if
there has been still difference, and yet moderation in these differences; Nor
would this be tried only by an age or time (wherein a point may be more
agitate than at another time) but more generally, especially when the arguments
on either side want that evidence that the reasons brought for other truths
have, and are so fully set down in Scripture, That amongst godly and learned
men in all ages there has been a general consent.

Again, 3. We would distinguish betwixt errors and the consequents of them, or
practices following thereupon; there may be somethings truly errors that may
and should be forborne in themselves, yet their consequents ought not to be
forborne, and this also may be at one time, and in one Church more necessary to
be adverted to, than in another, because consequents of schism, faction,
division, etc. may sometimes follow on the meanest errors. And seeing these are
always enemies to edification, even when they arise from the least ground,
they are never absolutely to be forborne; for* to say, I am of Paul, and I am of
Apollos, and for one to think such a man a better Preacher than an other,
seems to be no great matter; yet when it begins to rent them, and to make
factions in Corinth, it is not to be forborne, but to be reproved: And in the
former difference of meats, the Apostle condemns always the offense and
Schism that followed on it, although he did not peremptorily decide any thing
as to men's practices, or censure for the opinion it self: thus one might think
the first day of the week not to be Iure Divino, and this might possibly be
forborne, But if he were pressing the change of it, and refusing to observe it,
or venting it to offend others, that were intolerable; thus the differences and
errors concerning Church Government by Bishops, and in the Congregational way,
may, we conceive, in themselves be forborne in persons where they are not vented
to the shaking and drawing away of others; but if pressed in practice, to the
renting of a Church, and preferred or equalled to the true Government that is
established by the Word, in that case they are not to be forborne, because then
truth is to be vindicated, and obstructions to edification in the renting or
distracting of a Church to be removed, and at on time more than at another, as
such an offense does waken a Schism, and disturb order and Union in one Church
or at one time more than another: hence we see, Acts 15. somethings are put in
that decree in reference to that time, only for preventing of Schism and
Scandal, while the doctrine of the abolition of the ceremonial Law was not so
clear; And somethings were forborne amongst the Gentiles, which were not so
amongst the Jews for a time, as circumcision and all the ceremonies of the Law,
which yet for a time the Jews observed; and experience and reason make the
thing clear, according to that of Paul, To the Jews I became as a Jew* and I
became all things to all men, etc. which is not to show his counterfeiting, or
his dallying in any necessary thing, but the squa^ing of his practice in
lawful things according to the several cases of these he had to do with, which
will be applicable both to persons and Churches.

4. We would distinguish betwixt things, and persons, Sometimes it will be meet
to censure a fault or error in persons, as Paul does in the Corinthians and
Galatians, and yet it not be fit to censure the persons; he does indeed
threaten these, but does forbear* least thereby he should have hurt more by a
subsequent and following rent, than by his stroke he had cured. So also are
persons to be distinguished, some whereof only err, but others teach others
so; and in that respect are Heretics and Schismatics* which, had that been
their own opinion only, could not have been imputed to them; these last cannot
plead that forbearance that ought to be had toward the former. Also
distinction is to be made in the manner of forbearance; it is one thing to
forbear simply and altogether one that is infected with error and spreads
it, it is another thing to for bear, in some respect, to wit* of censure only,
or it may be in respect of degree, something may be more gently censured, and
yet not altogether forborne; and one may Ministerially reprove a fault and
person by the key of Doctrine, in applying of it, when yet he may forbear the
exercise of Discipline and Censure, as in the forecited place, Paul is
reproving false teachers in Corinth, yet sparing the rod for a time; and so,
wishing that some were cut off in Galatia, yet not doing it; and this is not so
much respect to the persons of these teachers, as to the Church and to the
multitude of their followers, whom hasty Censures might rather have stumbled
than edified, which is the great end of that and of all other Ordinances:
Therefore seeks he first to recover them, and again, to bring them back to
the acknowledgement of his authority, and thereupon to exercise the weapons
that he had in readiness for the avenging all disobedience, when their
obedience is made manifest* 2 Cor. 10. 6. which he would not do before that,
lest they (being addicted to these teachers) had sided with them against his
authority, and so it had been both more hurtful to them and to the Church than
edifying, by which alone he is swayed. These and other such considerations
being had, Ministers by christian prudence, are to gather when to be silent,
and when to speak, when to Censure, and when to forbear; but by all means, are
ever to be watchful, lest the grounds that plead for forbearance sometimes for
the Churches edification upon the one side, be not stretched out so broad, as
to foster our lukewarm temper, coldness, and fainting cowardlinesse in the
things of God; and there is much need to try from what that moderation does
flow, and whether even then the heart be hot with holy indignation against
these; Even as on the other side, true zeal would be guided toward the scope
of edification, lest that duty of exercising Discipline, which is acceptable to
God, and useful to the Church, be rejected of him, because proceeding from our
own spirits, and prove more hurtful than edifying in the effects thereof; Some
few instances whereof have given some occasion of speaking evil of this
Ordinance of Jesus Christ, to these who at all times ly in wait, to catch at
what may be wrested to the reproach thereof. But to conclude this, without
insisting on particulars, there must be a single, impartial and prudentiall
walking, so as may attain edification, and as men may be answerable to Jesus
Christ in their trust, having an eye to these things that most contribute to
edification.

But, 1. if what is vented be blasphemous, and destroys Some things not at
all to be forborne.
the foundations of faith, that comes not within this debate, as in Paul's
dealing with Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 20. is clear; for zeal for the
Majesty of God, and love to the salvation of souls (which is the substance of
the two great commandments of the Law) will admit of no forbearing in such a
case. 2. If it corrupts or defaceth the Church, and makes her a reproach to
the profane, it is not to be forborne. 3. If the things become not the
Ordinances of Christ, but reflect on them, and consequently on Him whose
Ordinances they are, they are not to be connived at. 4. If such things hazard
the public beauty, order and government of the Church, without which there is
no keeping up the face of a visible Church, these are not to be over-looked. 5.
If they mar the union and love that ought to be in the Church (which is to be
preserved, and every thing that may mar it, removed) they ought not to be
tolerated. 6. If they turn to be offensive and scandalous, either by making the
ways of the Lord to be ill spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 2. or by grieving the godly,
or by infecting others; they are not the object of forbearance, except some
circumstance concur, as has been said, in which case it cannot properly be
called forbearance: By these and other things, this may be tried, when an
error is to be forborne and when not, in which, consideration is to be had,
both of the nature of the error, and of the person that does hold it, as also
of the case of the Church and people, who may be edified or hurt by the
forbearing or Censuring of such a person.

What is needful, but not sufficient, will appear when we come to consider
what is called-for; for, what is less than what is required, must be defective
and not sufficient: as it is requisite that men not only keep themselves free,
but also that by admonition and exhortation, means be used to reclaim these
that have fallen; yet these are not sufficient if there be no public mean,
yea, though there were public authoritative preaching and exercising of the
key of Doctrine, yet that is not sufficient, if there be not also censuring by
discipline, and an exercise of the key of Jurisdiction; and in some cases every
censure will not be sufficient, if it be not extended to the utmost, for Christ
has not given that key for naught to His Church, in reference to all her
scandals, nor are men exonered till they reach themselves to the uttermost in
their stations, but this will appear more afterward.

CHAP. IX. What is called-for from Church Officers in the case of spreading
error.
WE begin now to speak particularly to the Church Officers duty, and what is
called-for from them, especially from Ministers, which we may consider in a
fourfold respect. 1. There is something called-for from the Minister in
reference to God. 2, In reference to himself. 3. In reference to the Flock and
people who are not tainted, but, it may be, under the tentation. 4. In
reference to these that are in the snare, especially the promotters of these
evils.

The first two are interwoven almost, Therefore we shall speak of them
together: and we say,

1. When such a tentation sets on upon a people, What a Minister is called
to, in reference ^o God and himself, at such a time.
and begins to infect or hazard the infection of a particular Flock, or of
many together, (for, the hazard of one, is the hazard of many in such a case,
as is said) the Minister would look first to God as the great over-ruler, even
of these things that are evil in the Churches; and he would consider if things
be in good case betwixt God and him, especially in respect of his Ministry;
for, such an infection in a Flock is a prime stroke upon a Minister, because
the spreading thereof threatens the unchurching of that Church and blasting of
his Ministry, as, Rev. 2. is threatened against the Angel of Ephesus, and it
never comes but it has with it a spirit and spait of bitterness against, and
many crosses, faintings and vexations unto, the Minister; he is therefore
soberly and composedly to look to God as his party, and is not to think, that
such things come by guess, and spring out of the dust, nor from the
corruptions of some giddie people only, but that there is a higher hand;
without this there can be no right use made of such a dispensation; and this is
it that should humble the Minister and make him serious, lest by the peoples
sin, God may be smiting him: Paul has this word when he speaks of the
Schisms and contentious debates that were in Corinth, 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21, I
fear, says he, lest when I come, my God will humble me amongst you, he did so
construct of their miscarrying, as making for this humiliation: yet it is to be
adverted, that it is not the Minister or Flock that the Lord is most displeased
with, that always is so assaulted and shaken, although it be ever matter of
humiliation.

2. When the Minister is composed to take up Gods hand in the matter, then is
he not only to look to Him for direction and guiding in his duty, and without
fretting to reverence His dispensation, but he is to reflect upon himself, and
to consider his bygone carriage, especially in his Ministry, if he may not be
chargeable before God with some sinful influence upon his peoples distempers
and miscarriages. And particularly, he is to look to these four, 1. If he be in
good terms with God, in reference to his own particular state and condition,
and if there was that due tenderness and watchfulness at the time of the
outbreaking of such an ill: I grant it may be that things were right, as in the
case of Job, Job 3. 26. yet it becomes him to try; for, such a thing may be
trysted with security and negligence, that thereby he may be awakned to see his
former defects. 2. A Minister would then reflect on his clearness to that
calling, and particularly to such a charge; and though to both he may be called
by God, yet it is his part to try, that he may meet the reproaches with the
greater confidence, as we see Paul does in the Epistles often mentioned; for,
in such a case a Minister will be put to it, and who knows but possibly
expectation of ease, quiet accommodation or credit in such a place, and
tractablnesse in such a people, and such like, might have had weight with a
good man to sway him to one place more than another? and by such a dispensation
the Lord does chasten that, to learn Ministers at their entry to be swayed
alone with the Churches edification. But, 3. to come nearer, a Minister would
try if he has any sinful meritorious influence (to speak so) in procuring
that stroke to the people, to be given up to these delusions; for, it is
certain, a Minister may be smitten in some stroke of this kind upon his people,
as is clear from that threatening to the Angel of Ephesus, Rev. 2. even as a
Magistrate may be smitten by a stroke that is immediately upon his people, as
we see in David's case, who thus procured the Pestilence, 2 Samuel 24. because,
first, the people themselves are not guiltless, so that there is no injustice.
And. 2. Because there is a great sibnesse betwixt Minister and people, so that
a rod upon one, does indeed prove a rod to both: he would therefore try if
possibly he has been somewhat proud or vain of his authority, or respect
amongst them, of their knowledge, orderly carriage, or dependence on the
Ordinances, especially if he have any way affected such a thing, and has
withal slighted the trying of their spiritual estate, and bettering of it, or
if he has been neglective to pray for them, and for their stability in the
truth; if he has been defective to warn or to keep up the authority of the
Ordinances, and of a Ministry among them; if he has been too familiar and
trivial in his carriage with them, and such like; also, if he has been
affected with zeal for Gods honor, when other Congregations have been
infected, if he has sympathized with such Ministers, and born burden with
others in such cases; or, if on the contrary, he has been careless, or, it
may be, puffed up because himself was free: these and such like sins would be
searched, because their is a Justice, and, if I may say, a congruity in
Justice, in punishing such sins with such a rod; for its often when the husband
men are sleeping that the enemy does sow such tares. 4. He would try if he has
had any sinful influence on such evils, as if he has not been full and
diligent in grounding them in the fundamental truths, and clearing to them the
Doctrines of the Gospel, as well as preaching duties, cases, and such like, or
if he has needlessly fostered curiosity in starting any questions, or in giving
people way to follow them, if he has made a sport of some errors publicly or
privately, if he has laughen at, or lightly spoken of, the errors and
miscarriages of others, before them, if he has not been faithful to admonish
and reprove the first gadings, or if he has fed the people with empty notions
and wind, and builded hay and stubble upon the foundation, and has not
seriously discovered to them their guiltiness, and has not put them to the
exercise of Repentance for their corrupt inclinations, thereby to press
humility, fear, watchfulness, diligence, etc. that so their hand might be
filled with a more solid work, and Christ by them employed to preserve them,
even from this tentation. These, I say, and such like, would be tried, because
where they are, the Minister wants not accession to their sin, as if in some
respect he had combined with these seducers.

3. When this is done, the Minister would be affected with his own guilt, and
then his sympathy with the peoples condition will be the more lively; and he
would, first, endeavor the recovery of himself, and his restoring to good
terms with God through Christ Jesus. 2. As he would confess his own faults,
so also the faults of the people; and as he would pray for pardon for himself,
so would he do for them, who, it may be, do reproach and curse him, yet would
he not cease to pray for them, having that word fresh under such a stroke, As
for these sheep, Lord, what have they done? 3. There would be special dealing
with God, and dependence on Him for fitness rightly to manage such a case;
for, the charge becomes more heavy: God therefore should be acknowledged for
obtaining suitable furniture, even in reference to that particular: And
Ministers would know, that it is not their abilities, gifts, nor parts that can
do this; and if we cannot speak profitably to one that is not in such a
distemper, what can we do where the person is so prejudged and distempered, if
the Lord do it not? Ministers therefore would (...) reference to every word,
unto such persons, in a ^ly fear and jealousy, lest, lippening to themselves,
they mar the Master's work, and stumble a poor soul rather than edify the
same. 4. He would aim seriously not only at exoneration, but at edification;
and for that cause would begin, by dealing with God for success, and that
either the Lord would immediately Himself convince or bless His furniture to
him for that end; yea, He would be blyth if any mean were provided and blessed,
though in another hand than his own.

4. The Minister would now use ordinary means for fitting of himself to
discover such errors as his people are guilty of, that he may be able solidly
to convince them that are stumbled, and to establish others that stand; and
pains would be taken in this, as well as for preaching, or in the studying of
common heads at the passing of trials, which is but a proof of the man's gifts
in a more remote reference to such a case, which now is specially to be put in
exercise; Therefore he would, first, endeavor to be through in the wole body
of Divinity and grounds of Christian Religion; for, there is such a connection
among truths, that when one is wronged, many are wronged, and one error may
overturn many foundations: And if a Minister have not some general impression
of the whole, he cannot with confidence search in, or undertake the refutation
of, any one particular error: Neither ought a Minister, who possibly for a
time has forborne studies of that kind, think it unbecoming him again to return
to them, seeing it is duty, and there is no shame to be learning what may fit
one for his duty; And who knows but among other ends, this may be intended,
that Ministers may be put to more constant study and search in the fundamental
truths of the Gospel? 2. He would then, like a wise Physician* endeavor to
know the malady that has infected and distempered his people, what are the
errors they maintain, what are the arguments that ^ave weight with them, what
are the tentations they have had, or who are the tempters or instruments that
have seduced them, and such like; What also is their natural humor, hasty or
meek, proud or humble; What has been their former way of walking, what are
their parts and abilities, with whom they converse, who has weight with them,
or are esteemed by them, that by these and such like means he may be in better
capacity to know how to apply the remedy, and to deal with them himself, or to
make use of others for that end. 3. He would endeavor the furnishing of
himself, especially in reference to these errors beyond others which they are
tainted with, and for this cause would provide fit Books, converse with others
that are able to help him, and gather his own observations from Scripture and
other grounds, that through Gods blessing upon his labors he may be able to
speak of these things confidently as to himself, and convincingly as to others.
It is to be observed, that the former order laid down, does not require a
succession in time, in reference to the several steps (for, in some cases a
Minister will be instantly put to what is beyond all these, and to deal by some
other means) but it shows the order of nature, and what way is to be followed
according as there is access and opportunity.

Further, It is necessary for Ministers, at such a Union amongst Minesters and
their flocks, is in such a case carefully to be s^udied.
time especially, to endeavor union among themselves and amongst the people of
their flocks; for, oftentimes division and delusion are trysted together,
whereby the deluders are exceedingly strengthened, Truth, and the Ministers
thereof, made exceedingly contemptible and put in an incapacity to edify, or
have weight, till that be removed. Therefore we see, that in the Churches of
Corinth, Galatia and Philippi, where Seducers were driving their designs, and
division had taken great footing, the Apostle has a special regard to the
recovering of their union at such a time: We may read it also in the Life of
Basilius the great Antagonist of the Arians, who, being by some division with
Eusebius, then Bishop of Cesaria, necessitated to withdraw for the Churches
peace, Whereupon Valence the Arian Emperor, and other Arians, thought that a
fit opportunity to vent their error in Cesaria, which they could not
succesfully do, while union continued there. To disappoint this design, Gregory
Nazianzen advised his return and uniting with Eusebius, as the only mean to
prevent the growth of that heresy amongst the people, which being accordingly
done, and both of them forgetting their particular discontents for the public
good, the Church was so established, and the error so opposed, that the
forenamed enterprisers were constrained to give over their design upon that
union.

In the third place, We come to consider a Ministers What is his duty in
reference to his flock.
duty in reference to the flock in general (and certainly by proportion it may
be gathered what seriousness, gravity and diligence ought to be amongst
Ruling-elders in their concurring with him in such a case, who are also to join
with him according to to their places in the former search and trial of their
carriage, and in fitting of themselves for being useful in such a time) for,
it cannot be denied, but somewhat peculiar is called-for from the Minister, in
reference to his Ministry in common amongst the people, more than is
called-for at another time. As, 1. he is to be in respect of all Christian
qualifications in his carriage and all ministerial duties in his charge,
singularly serious and eminently exemplary, because it is now a main and prime
thing to have a testimony of sincerity, faithfulness and love to the peoples
edification in their own consciences; and this cannot be obtained at such a
time without the former. For, in experience we see that declining to error,
and falling from esteem of the Minister, go together: and where this is
preserved, either the fall is prevented, or there is the greater access to
recover the person that is fallen. Ministers therefore would especially study
that, as a main mean of the peoples edification. And for that cause, would
observe, 1. If any thing has escaped them in their way, which might have given
offense, and would by all means endeavor to remove it. 2. If any thing has
been unjustly imputed to them, they would condescend to clear it. 3. They would
take notice of what particulars they use to be charged with, though, it may be,
unjustly, or what usually Ministers are charged with by the corrupt men of the
world, as pride, cove^ousnesse, self-seeking, hypocrisy and the like; and at
such a time, Ministers would not only eschew these evils, but also the very
appearance of them, which is a part of Paul's becoming all things to all, that
he might gain and save some, 1 Cor. 9. And, in a word, a Minister would so
carry in that time, as every look, word, action, gesture, yea, as every thing
less or more in his Ministry, in his family, diet, clothes, and such like,
may abide the trial of the most narrow and watchful observers, yea, of one
that is a more high and narrow observer than they.

2. There are some things wherein particularly he would insist and seek to have
born in upon the people. As, 1. to have them sensible of the evil of error,
and of the hazard that comes by it, also of the devils subtilty and craft in
carrying on of such a business. 2. To have them instructed and cleared in the
truths of the Gospel, especially in such things as are controverted, that the
errors and consequents following thereon, may be made as obviously clear and
hateful as may be. 3 This would be done so as they be not diverted from
practice in the main duties of godliness by any speculation; but, searching,
up-stirring and material Doctrines, with powerful and convincing applications
of all kinds, would be in a special manner pressed then, as we see in these
directions to Timothy and Titus is clear: where, upon the one side, the taking
head to fables and vain janglings is dehorted from, and convincing, exhorting*
reproving with all authority, pressing of good works, and exercising to
godliness, are, on the other side exhorted unto. 4. People would be pressed by
all means, to eschew snares and the company of seducers, which was both our
Lords practice, and the practice of His Apostles. There is no duty more
frequently pressed than that: It is true, this is sometimes mistaken by people,
yet it is the duty of Ministers to press it; yea, they are charged to charge
others in reference to this, as in the 1. to Tim. 4. 11. and 6. 13. being
compared with the directions that are given in these Epistles. 5. It may be it
were not unmeet in such a time, that something were done in writ, for clearing
of these things which are especially controverted, and that some in particular
might be designed for this part of the work: for, often seducers spread their
errors by writ, as we may in see in Ier. 29. 25. And sometimes there will be
access to instruct and edify by writ, when it cannot be done by word, yea,
so, some persons may have objections moved and answered to them, before they be
confirmed in such and such opinions, which possibly they would have thought
shame to move till they had settled in them; and so have been in a greater
prejudice against the truth, and in a greater incapacity to be gained from
them; and we see, that the Apostles used this way unto Churches and People, to
confute material errors in writ, and so also to confirm the truth against all
cavils of adversaries, even as they did it by word of mouth and preaching.

3. In all this, the Minister would take good heed to his manner of proceeding,
that it be grave, weighty, serious, loving, and in every thing such as may
convince the people, 1. Of his own seriousness, and being much affected with
such a business, Therefore light and mocking expressions would be shunned, but
the Minister would be affectionate and serious, like one traveling in birth,
while Christ be formed in them again, as Paul speaks, Gal. 4. 19. 2. To
convince them of the evil of the thing, and for that cause would so carry, as
he may make error also hateful and loathsome to the people, as any scandalous
practice whatsoever; for which cause Ministers would rather endeavor to stir
the peoples zeal against such evils, by grave, convincing, affectionate
expressions regrates or expostulations, than to move their laughter with
trivial mock^ or taunts, in reference to such principles or persons; for, (as
holy Master Greenham used to say) that does but make sin ridiculous, when it
ought to be made hateful. 3. He would endeavor to convince them of his
singleness in seeking of their good, and of love to them, and pity to these
that are misled; for which cause any thing that may make him be supposed to
resent personal reproaches or indignities, or aim at upholding of his own
credit, or to vent bitterness against the persons of others, would be
carefully abstained from: for, these things derogate much from the weight of
what a Minister can do; and we see the great Apostle Paul, does not stick to
condescend in such cases to vindicate himself from such mistakes, and to use
great expressions of love, yea, sometimes to attest God as to the sincerity of
his professions, and such like, which are frequent in the Epistles to the
Corinthians and Galatians, which may be an example to Ministers in such ca^es.
4. Their whole carriage would be affectionate, even to the persons of opposers;
for, nothing prejudgeth more, than for a Ministe^ to be thought carnal and
passionate, whereas tender dealing and usage to persons and to their outward
estates, does prove as coals of fire to soften them, as in experience is found;
however its becoming of a Minister; yet it is to be done without marring zeal
and indignation against their errors, and without prejudice to his seeking to
censure them for these, or his restraining them from venting of the same.

It is here to be adverted, 1. That what was spoken of the manner of a
Ministers carriage in reference to practical scandals, and of his duty in a
time when offenses abound, is also to be remembered here and in what follows.
2. That what is spoken of Ministers duty, will by proportion agree to
Ruling-Elders according to their stations; for, they should no less endeavor
the preventing and suppressing of corrupt doctrine than of other scandalous
practices, and they especially are to endeavor to have the means used by the
Minister, made weighty amongst the people; and for that end, are to endeavor
to have himself weighty also.

We come now to the fourth step of a Ministers What is a Minister's duty in
reference to those that are seduced.
duty, and that is, as it relates to those that are tainted with error, (we
mean gross errors and delusions, such as this discourse runs upon) We may
consider it in these four steps, as it relates, 1. to discovery, or trial, 2.
to conviction, 3. to admonition, 4. to rejection.

For the first, as the Apostle says of men in general, 1 Timothy 5. 24. Some men's
sins are open before hand, going before to judgment, and some men's follow
after: So here, sometimes error discovers it self, and there is no need of
search; yet sometimes also there will be many secret objections moved and
harbored against truths, which will not be avowed, though they be privately
muttered; yea, sometimes corrupt teachers will endeavor the vailing and hiding
of their tenets, or errors, by many shifts, even when they are studying to
leaven others with their delusions. There is therefore a necessity in such a
case, 1. to try what opinions are held and vented, and to discover the
absurdnesse and grossnesse of them; for, many will maintain the premises
ignorantly, who will not know that such absurd conclusions do follow thereupon;
It is fit therefore to lay by the names and expressions used by seducers, and
to express the thing as it is, especially if it be the reviving of some old
absurdity under some new coat and pretext; Thus the Lord does discover the
abomination of the Nicolaitans doctrine, by comparing it unto, and evidencing
it to be, upon the matter, indeed one and the same with the practices of Balaam
and Iezebel, Rev. 2. 14. 15, and 20. This way is also followed by Peter, 2
Epist. 2. and by Jude, who compared corrupt teachers to Balaam, Korah, Dathan,
etc. thereby to take the vi^orn off old newly revived errors, that they may
appear as they are; for, often error is commended to people under some new
representation, and many will love it so represented, who yet will abhor former
errors, which are still the same, though under another name, which are two
tricks of the devils subtility, 1. To make old error pass under the opinion
and construction of some new light. And, 2. for that end to disguise it in some
circumstances, and to change its name: And indeed, it is no little piece of
spiritual dexterity to remove that mask. Secondly, There is a discovery to be
made of the persons who hanker after such opinions, that it may be found who
are infected thereby; This would be done to reclaim the persons, and to cure
that distemper, before it break out, or come to a height; for, it is more easy
often to cure one at the beginning than afterward: also, when it becomes
public, it has with it some kind of engagement on the person, and he is more
hardly recovered, lest he should seem thereby to appear weak, erroneous,
unstable, or such like. Beside, it is more gaining-like when the Minister
privately finds them out, and endeavors to recover them secretly, before
any public notice be taken thereof, and often has more success with it, than
after debats, as seems to be held forth in that place, Gal. 2. 2. where Paul
says, that he communicated with them of reputation, the Gospel, first,
privately, lest by any means he should have run in vain. Therefore we conceive,
persons suspect of error, would not hastily be brought to public, but in some
respect, the publicknesse of their offense, would be, as it were, dissembled,
or not positively so publicly taken notice of, that thereby there may be the
fairer access for them to retreat. 3. If there be any retreat, the person
would be waited upon* although at first it be not fully satisfying, and all due
care and diligence would be used to have his former error buried, as if it had
never been, without any public hearing, except some extraordinary circumstance
persuade to another way. For, (besides the reasons given) error becomes not
readily a public scandal, except there be tenaciousnesse therein, or some
actual stumbling block laid before others thereby, which often the persons
reclaiming, will remove more than their censuring. Therefore, upon supposition
of a persons recovery, there is no great fear of hazard in abstaining from
bringing such a thing to public, except he has been isntrumental to seduce
others, or in some such case which does make his carriage open before hand, as
is said. 4. This secret discovery before things break out, is needful to
prevent the defection of others, because, if the persons be not reclaimed, they
may be found out to be dangerous, and may so be noted, for the preventing of
their being a snare to others, which they might have been more easily, had they
not been marked to be such, which is the reason of that exhortation, Romans 16.
17. Mark them that caus^ divisions, and avoid them. When a person is discovered
and found to be tainted, then all means are to be used for his conviction by
conference, reasoning and other such means as may gain the end, this is a
special qualification of a Minister, Ti^. 1. 9. that he may be able by sound
Doctrine to convince gainsayers. And (as it is, 2 Timothy 2. 25.) in meekness to
instruct these that oppose themselves: Which step may be considered under
diverse respects, 1. As it tends to the gaining of the person directly, so
especially private debatings are requisite, which are to be carried on with all
meekness and long-suffering, although they meet with reproaches and
reflection^ in the prosecuting thereof. 2. Although there be little hopes of
gaining the person, yet there is need of such means for the stopping of his
mouth, and the edification of others, that thereby he have not occasion to
seduce them; for, often such debatings solidly and judiciously carried on,
though they do not convince the person, so as to make him silent* yet do they
convince others of the absurdnesse of these errors, and the unreasonablnesse
of such a persons carriage; and experience has proven, that often such debats
have been blessed for the credit and vindication of the truth, in reference to
many others, and by that place, Tit. 1. 9. seems to be clear duty, though
there be little hopes of coming speed, as to the persons seduced.

CHAP. X. Whether at all times a public debate be necessary with such persons
upon these points.
IF it be questioned here, 1. Whether in all cases there be a necessity of a
public debate? 2. What is to be accounted conviction? 3. What is to be done,
when the persons are not silent? 4. How this debate is to be managed?

We shall answer by laying down some Assertions promiscuously in reference to
all these Questions.

Assert. 1. We say that there are some times and In what cases it is called ^or.
cases wherein public debates are not altogether to be shunned; I will not
say, that every person is to accept of such a challenge, lest there by truth be
wronged; (neither is it always the ablest man that manageth such a business
best) but in general the thing is necessary in these and such like cases: As,
1. when errors seem to be new among the people. 2. When the promotters of them
become insolent, as if they durst come to the light with their deeds. 3. When
by forbearance and silence, people are in hazard to think something of these
insolent boasters, and of their opinions. In which cases, I say, and the like,
there is some necessity of this, for the C^urches edification, as may appear
from Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11. There are many, says the Apostle, who are unruly and
vain talkers (such as vainly boast of their own ability, to maintain their
opinions) whose mouths must be stopped, lest they get advantage to seduce
others; and this is given as the reason why Ministers should be qualified with
abilities to convince gainsayers, because sometimes the insolency and vanity
of some such, does necessitate to this; and on this ground we will find our
blessed Lord Himself, and Stephen and Paul, frequently disputing even in
Assemblies and Synagogues. This will not infer a necessity for every Minister
to dispute at all times. even in such a case, but sometimes it may be referred,
and put to others; for if truth be maintained, and error be confuted, it may
stop the gainsayers mouth, although every one do it not.

Assert. 2. Yet there are some cases, when such entering In what cases it is
not called for.
of debats is not necessary nor expedient. As, 1. supposing these things not to
be new, but to have been sufficiently confuted formerly, and it may be in other
places not far off, nor long before that; for, if there should be a continuing*
still to debate, there would be no truth acknowledged to be settled, nor access
to other and further duties. 2. When some persons are known vainly and purposly
to seek to put all in confusion, by multiplying such debats, and irreverently
to prosecute the same, as if they made it their trade or vocation to do so: The
answering of such men according to their folly, would be an accession to their
guilt of taking the blessed Name of God in vain, and for satisfaction to men's
humors, and not for the great end of edification. 3. When men become
unreasonable, and in their debatings, show irrational contradiction and
blasphemy; in such a case, it is to be forborne or broken off with indignation,
and with zeal to the glory of God, as we see Paul and Barnabas do, Act. 13. 45,
46. 4. Some erroneous persons are so gross and absurd, that they are not to be
disputed with, but rather to be reproved and abhorred: and therefore we see in
these Epistles, Rev. 2. 3. there is no disputing against the Nicolaitans, as
Paul uses in other cases, because, where such absurdities are owned, there is
no access to fasten a conviction from reason, when men by such opinions appear
to be unreasonable. 5. When men deny principles, as the authority or
sufficiency of the Scripture, or when they lay new principles, as a light
within, revelations, enthusiasms, or such like; or, when they grossly and
absurdly wrest and pervert the Scripture, as Peter speaks of some, denying
most clear senses, and forging senses which are most ridiculous: In such cases,
there is no access to dispute, not only because it cannot be done without
admitting of them to blaspheme, but also because there is no mean by which they
may be convinced, seeing the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, is
rendered useless unto them: As for instance, Hymeneus and Alexander, said,
there was no resurrection to come, because it was past already; they wanted not
dexterity to abuse the Scripture, which says, that there is a resurrection
from sin, and by the new birth Believers are raised from the dead. Now, the
applying of what is spoken of the general and second resurrection to this
particular and first resurrection, is so gross, that Paul does not dispute
with but Sentence such blasphemers and abusers of the Scripture; for, it is
clear, that they did not deny the Scripture, or a resurrection simply, but did
grossly and irrationally misapply the same: of this sort, are such as will admit
of no distinctions, nor consequences, nor different acceptions of words and
phrases, and such like: for, according to these grounds, the Scripture is made
to disagree from it self, to give no certain sound in any thing, and to infer
many absurdities, which is blasphemous to think.

Assert. 3. It is not to be thought that that only is conviction, What is to be
accounted as the sufficient conviction of a gainsayer.
which puts the adverse party to silence, or that when convincing of
gainsayers is commanded, that that only is intended: for, men of corrupt unruly
spirits (as the Apostle says) wax worse and worse, and do resist the truth, as
Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, 2 Timothy 3. 8. and are therefore called
reprobate concerning the faith; yea, sometimes the more they be pinched and
bound, the more they cry out, and will not yield to convincing truth, as we
see, Act. 6. 9, 10, 11. and Act 13. 45, 46. and certainly there were none of
Paul's opposers able to dispute with him, yet we will never almost find his
adversaries silent, though he put them to silence, and did actually convince
them; notwithstanding they are still muttering and contradicting, so that
oftentimes he breaks off, shaking the dust off his feet against them, when
arguments did not the business. Oftentimes also, this continuing of
contradiction with some dexterity to pervert Scripture to their own
destruction, is to them penal and ^udiciall, as was formerly observed, and
does follow upon their hazarding and daring to oppose the manifest truth. And
who would have thought, but that these Magicians that resisted Moses, should
have been convinced by so many miracles, not to have essayed further to oppose
him? which yet notwithstanding they continue to do; and if it was so then, and
with Paul and the other Apostles afterward, can it be expected to be otherwise
now? seeing the spirit of Iannes and Iambres, and the gainsaying of Core is
marked by the Scripture to wait on such.

If it be asked then, What can be understood by conviction? and if a person may
be accounted convinced, who yet may be keeping the last word, and confidently
bragging of the victory? Answ. That conviction is not to be bounded with
acknowledgment or silence in the party convinced, we suppose is already
cleared; yea, those that are convinced, may, as it were, cry the others out of
the company by multitude of words and confidence of expressions, as those Jews
did cry down Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13. 46. Therefore we see in that precept,
Tit. 3. 10, 11. that the Heretic which is to be rejected, is both said to
refuse admonition, and also to be condemned of himself; yet it cannot be said
that he was put to silence by these admonitions, or did forbear to vent his
errors: this therefore must be accounted certain, and is confirmed by 2 Timothy
2. 25. where the recovery of opposers, even after sufficient instruction, with
meekness, has a peradventure in it, as a thing most rarely to be found. We
must therefore place conviction in some other thing than that: and so in answer
to the question, What is to be accounted conviction? We say, 1. it is when a
person is so far convinced, and the truth with his error so far cleared to be
truth and error respectively, that his continuing obstinate, cannot be
supposed to be of infirmity, which often will evidence it self in foolish,
weightlesse and unreasonable shifts and answers, or when there cannot be weight
in such an answer, to satisfy a man's own reason or conscience, if he were
sober and at himself: upon this account, the Heretic is said to be condemned
of himself, Tit. 3. 11. not because actually his conscience does condemn him
for dissimulation; for even then it is supposed he may be in a delusion, which
keeps off such challenges; and their consciences are said to be seared with
an hot iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2. which imports, they were not capable of positive
convictions within themselves; but it must be understood thus, that they are
the cause of their own blindness, as wilfully and maliciously refusing and
rejecting light when it is offered to them, and so the cause of their own
damnation does not flow from the neglect of others, in not holding forth to
them sufficient light, but from their own obstinacy, prejudice and
maliciousness. 2. They may be said to be convinced when the thing is made
clear to sober serious men, even as some stupid ignorant persons are
inexcusable in their ignorance, when they live under such means as others of
ordinary capacity thrive by; although such plain preachings, discourses or
doctrines be no way understood by them, yet may it justly be said, that that
light was sufficient to instruct them, or that Gospel to convince them, seeing
others have been profited by the same. 3. They may be said to be convinced,
even when they speak again, when there is no answer to purpose in their
speaking, but absurd denying or asserting of things without any reason, or when
there is a granting of absurd consequences, or an asserting of an absurdity,
that possibly is greater nor another which they would eschew; o^, bitter
railing against men's persons, seeking to defame them for strengthening of their
cause, as the false teachers did Paul among the Corinthians and Galatians, and
as the Libertins did to Stephen by venting calumnies on him, and provoking
others against him, Act. 6. or, when in their answers or debates, they break
out in blasph^my against God, against His Scriptures, against His Ordinances;
such, in such cases, are to be accounted sufficiently convinced, and their
obstinacy is to be accounted malicious; and this we may gather, as from others
places, so from that, Act. 13. 45, 46. when they come to wilful contradictions
and blaspheming, Paul and Ba^nabas will reason no more. And, Acts 28. 24, 25.
some Jews are accounted to be sufficiently convinced, and their contradiction
to proceed from judicial blinding, when they reject that word which did
sufficiently convince others. Also, we see, Act. 17. 32. when men begin to mock
at the fundamental things of Religion, or to shift clear places of Scripture,
by putting strange and absurd expositions upon them, as was formerly marked of
Hymeneus and Alexander; such persons are not to be disputed with any more, but
to be accounted abundantly convinced, Notwithstanding of the most confident
contradiction: and what was said of some cases, wherein public debate was not
to be admitted, the same may be applied in this case, as being evidences of
sufficient conviction and self-condemnation of such persons.

Assert. 4. When any such debate is found necessary, How a public debate is to
be managed when necessary.
there is much spiritual zeal and prudence required in the managing thereof: in
which, beside what is generally required in the manner of every thing, these
things are to be observed, 1. That it be not tumultuary and confused, because
so the Name of God is irreverently dealt with, and made obnoxious to reproach:
Therefore order and reverence, and what is needful and fit for such an end, is
to be provided for; otherwise, such confused meetings are to be left when
entered into, as dishonorable to the Name of God, and unbecoming the gravity
that Ministers should follow, as we see, Act. 13. 45, 46. and Act. 19. 30, 32.
for, in such a case there is no access to edification. 2. Men would deniedly
undertake such a thing when called to it, as being convinced how difficult the
task is, how fecklesse they themselves are, and how subtle the principal
adversary which they have to do with is. Therefore there would not be an
undertaking upon the account of gifts, parts, or learning* nor would it be
managed only or mainly by subtle arguments, nor would advantage be much sought
for, that way but simple truth would be plainly, gravely, and zealously
proposed, with respect to the affecting the conscience of the party, and of the
hearers. And as it is in preaching, not the subtilest and learnedest discourses
do always prove most taking, So in debates that concern conscience, material
plainness demonstrating the truth with power unto the conscience, has often
the clearest evidence with it. There is a notable instance recorded by
Ruffinus, Eccles. hist. lib. 10. chap. 3. which was thus, at the Council of
Nice, great Scholars were conveened from all places, upon report of that
famous meeting, to which also did come some chief Philosophers, of whom one
most eminent did dispute frequently with the greatest Scholars, who were never
able to bind him, because such (says he) was his nimblenesse, that like an eel
he slipped them, by one shift or other, when arguments did seem most
constringent. But God, that he might show that His Kingdom did not consist in
word, but in power; one of the Confessors, being a man of a most simple nature,
and knowing nothing but Christ Jesus and Him crucified, when he saw the
Philosopher insulting and boasting of his quickness, desired liberty to speak
with him a little, others did shun it, knowing the man's simplicity, and fearing
left he should become a reproach to subtle men: notwithstanding, he persisted,
and began thus, Philosopher, in the Name of Jesus Christ hear these things that
are true, There is one God who made Heaven and Earth, and formed man out of the
dust, and gave him a Spirit, who made all things which are seen and unseen, who
sent His Son, born of a Virgin* to deliver us miserable sinners from
everlasting death, by His suffering of death; and has given us life eternal
by His Resurrection, whom we expect to come as Judge of what ever we do:
Philosopher, believe thou these things? Then he, as if he had not known how
to contradict, astonished with the power of what was said, and put to silence,
only could answer, that it appeared so, that there was no other thing but truth
in what he had said. Then said the aged Confessor, if thou believe so, rise
and follow me to the Church, and receive the seal of this faith: Then the
Philosopher turning to these that were with him, and other hearers, said, Hear,
O Learned men, while the matter was managed with me with words, I opposed words
to words; but when for words virtue proceeded out of the mouth of him that
spoke, words (said he) could not resist power, nor man God. And therefore, if
any of you have felt what I have, let him believe in Christ, and follow this
old man, in whom God has spoken. Thus far Ruffinus: a story not unworthy to be
observed. 3. It would be known what principles may be laid down, or what rules
may be binding, otherwise there may be an asserting of any thing, or denying
of every thing. 4. There would be still a ministerial gravity and authority
preserved, lest that Ordinance become despicable, and so Ministers would both
improve their reason, light, authority, and ministerial commission from Christ
upon the conscience of those they have to do with, as we see Paul does in his
debates, even where his authority was much questioned.

CHAP. XI. Admonition is necessary, and how to be performed.
THe third step, is Admonition, that is, when convictions have no success,
then ought Ministers to proceed to judicial and authoritative admonitions, as
the word is in the direction, Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an Heretic reject,
after the first and second admonition. This admonition has no new reason to
inform the judgment, which is already presupposed to be done, but it adds
these two, 1. It has a concurring weight to affect the conscience which has
withstood or smothered the light; and so it is, with Gods bl^ssing, useful to
make former despised light more seriously and impartially to be weighed and
considered, when in His Name the admonition is particularly upon that account
directed to them. 2. It is a warning, giving advertisement of some sadder thing
coming, if they shall continue to reject the Truth, and so it is a shoring of
them for that particular fault, before the stroke be laid on, that either, by
Gods blessing, it may humble and soften them, and so put them to endeavor the
preventing of the coming stroke; or, if they continue stubborn, it may make
them more inexcusable; and thus there is the clearer access to proceed to
rejection. This admonition The several steps of admonition.
may be considered in these three steps, 1. It may be in private, after the
Minister's conferring with the persons and his finding them guilty, he may not
only instruct them, but afterward, if they continue, admonish them, and that as
a Minister, in the Name and Authority of Jesus Christ, which is more than the
admonition of a private person. 2. There is a step of this admonition to be past
judicially by a Church-judicatory when the person is brought before them,
whereby they judicially interpose their authority to admonish such a person of
the evil of his way, and of the necessity of the present duty of repentance for
the same, like that which sinfully and most abominably was misapplied by the
Priests and Pharisees, Act. 4. 5. yet, that in the general there is such an
admonition, is apparent. The 3. step is publicly before the people, wherein
(after the former has failed in reaching the desired end) the party infected
is solemnly and publicly admonished before the Congregation. In which step, 1.
The parties good is to be respected, that now it may be tried if the admonition
both of officers and people (who are supposed to join in this public
admonition) may have weight. 2. It is useful for the people to guard them
against such an evil, and such a person. 3. If it succeed not, it leaves the
person more inexcusable, and convinces all of the justice and necessity of
proceeding further, and so tends to make the Sentence to be the more
respected by all. This, we conceive, is the admonition intended, Tit. 3. 10.
and answers to that public rebuke, spoken of, 1 Timothy 5. 20.

In carrying-on these admonitions, these things Some things observable in the
way of admonishing
would be observed, 1. That there be no great hasting, except the persons
readiness and diligence to infect others require the same, in which case there
is no delay to be admitted. 2. All these steps of admonition would be so
carried-on as becomes an Ordinance of Christ, and that the weight of them may
lie there. 3. There is difference to be put betwixt giving of an admonition,
and entering of a debate for conference; Therefore there is no necessity of
suspending an admonition, because the person is absent, more than there is of
suspending of a warning or citation: And, on the other side, If the persons
were present, and should contradict and oppose themselves, there is no
necessity nor convenience of entering in debate again, because that is not the
present work, but authoritatively to admonish those who have resisted
sufficient conviction, and so they are to be left under the weight of the
admonition, from which the renewing of debate would diminish.

The fourth thing and that which follows fruitless That rejecting of an
obstinat Heretic, is to Church Officers a necessary duty, and a mean to be
made use of for the Churches edification.
admonition, is rejection, Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an heretic, reject. This
rejection is the same with Excommunication or delivering to Satan, 1 Timothy 1.
20. Concerning which these things are clear,

1. That a man, continuing an Heretic, may and ought to be rejected and
excommunicated as well as for any other gross Scandal: For, 1. the precept is
plain in the place cited, A man that is an Heretic, reject; which must be a
casting of him out from Church Communion, and a giving of him over in respect
of the use of any further means for his edification, which is in effect, to
account him as an Heathen man and a Publican, which is called, 1 Cor. 5. 13. a
putting away from amongst our selves a wicked person. 2. The example and
precedent is clear, 1 Timothy 1. 20. 3. Where this is followed, it is commanded,
as in Ephesus, Rev. 2. and where it is forborne, and corrupt teachers suffered
to be in the Church, it is very sharply reproved, as in the Epistles to
Pergamos and Thyatira. 4. The general grounds of Scandal and of Discipline
against the same, and the reasons which enforce the exercise thereof in any
case, have weight here. For, 1. It is scandalous exceedingly. 2. It is hurtful
to the Church. 3. Discipline* and particularly that Sentence, is appointed for
remedying the hurts of the Church, and the removing of offenses from the same;
which grounds have been formerly cleared, Therefore it palpably follows, that
this Sentence is to proceed against such: But for further clearing of this,
there are some Questions to be answered here, As,

1. It may be questioned, What if the person be What if the person seduced be
judged to be truly gracious.
godly, or accounted so? Answ. I shall not say how unlike it is that a really
gracious man will be a minister of Satan, we have spoken of that already; but,
supposing it to be so, 1. If it be scandalous in a gracious man, is not the
same remedy to be used for the Churches good? 2. That supposition of Paul's
Gal. 1. 8, 9. does put it above all question, Though we (says he) or an Angel
from Heaven, preach another Gospel, let him be accursed. And* again, he says
it, to put this out of controversy, If any man shall preach another Gospel,
let him be accursed. And, if Paul will except no man, no, not himself, nay* nor
an Angel from Heaven, who can be excepted? The mistake is in this, that
Excommunication is not looked upon as an Ordinance of Christ, useful through
His blessing for humbling and reclaiming of a sinner more than if it were not
applied; whereas, if it were looked upon as medicinal in its own kind, it would
not be ^o constructed of; For, by comparing 1 Cor. 5. with 2 Cor. 2. we will
find that it was more profitable to the excommunicated person himself that this
Sentence was past, than if it had been for born.

2. It may be asked, What if the person be no fixed What if he be no fixed
member of any particular Congregation.
member of any particular Congregation, who yet does infect others? Answ. This
cannot be sufficient to exempt from Censure, Because, 1. he is a member of the
Catholic Church, Therefore Censures must some way reach him: otherwise,
supposing a man to disclaim all particular Congregations, he might be a member
of the Church, who yet could be reached by no Censure. 2. He might claim the
privileges in any particular Congregation, if he should carry fairly as he is
a member of the Church-catholick: Therefore it would seem by proportion and rule
of contraries, that Presbyteries may reach him with their Censures, if by his
miscarriages he become offensive to the people. 3. We see that the Church of
Ephesus, Revel. 2. did judicially try and censure those who called themselves
Apostles, who, it is like, being strangers, obtruded themselves, under that
title, upon them, and so could not be accounted members of that Church; And
indeed, there is no less needful for the edification of the people of such
particular Congregations, and for guarding them from the hurt that may come by
vageing persons, than that either they be censured somewhere by one
Congregation, or many, in associated Church-judicatories; or, at least that
some public note and mark be put upon such, that others may have warning to
eschew them, as the word may be taken, Romans 16. 17, 18. and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
which is there spoken of, busy bodies and wanderers without any certain
calling or station.

3. It may be questioned, What if Magistrates in What if Civil Magistrates
concur not for the backing of the sentence.
their place concur not, or, if the case so fall out, that they be displeased
with the drawing*forth of such a Sentence? Answ. This may require the more
prudence, zeal and circumspectnesse, but ought not to mar the progress:
Because, 1. Excommunication is an Ordinance instituted by Jesus Christ for the
edification of His Church, as Preaching and giving of the Sacraments are. 2.
That same might have been asked in the primitive times when Paul did
excommunicate, and when the Lord did reprove the want thereof. Revel. 2. There
was then no concurrence of Civil Power. Yea, 3. in this case it seems most
necessary; and the greatest enemies of Church Discipline do allow the Church to
Sentence her members in such a case. 4. The weight of this Sentence does not
depend upon Civil Power, but upon Christ's Institution, Therefore the weight of
it is to be laid here, whatever Civil Powers do. 5. We will find the primitive
Fathers hazarding upon Martyrdom even in this very thing, So that when corrupt
Emperors have inhibited them to excommunicate Arians and other Heretics, they
have done it notwithstanding; and by designing whom they desired to have
succeeding them in their places before they past the Sentence, did declare
themselves ready to suffer, upon this account, any thing that might follow, and
accordingly some of them have been immediately put to suffering.

2. We say, That although an Heretic be to be rejected, Two limitations to be
adverted in the rejecting of Heretics.
yet is there a twofold limitation to be adverted to in that place, Tit. 3. 9.
first, That it is not every erroneous person that is so to be dealt with, but
he must be an Heretic: Which does imply these three, 1. A perniciousnesse and
destructivenesse in the error maintained. 2. An actual venting thereof, to the
destruction of the Church, either by corrupting the doctrine, marring the
order, or breaking the unity of the same, or some other way spoiling the vines
that have tender grapes. 3. It implies a pertinacy in such evils.

It is true, that sometimes lesser errors, in respect of their effects, and
other aggravating circumstances, may become intolerable and to be proceeded
against by this Sentence, as was said of lesser Scandals in practice. Yet, we
conceive, that properly it is some grosser error than what may be accounted to
be of infirmity (such as many godly, sober, unprejudged men may have) that is
to be the ground of such a Sentence. Therefore we refer the decision of this to
be gathered from the Distinctions formerly laid down.

2. We find it qualified by this, That this rejection is not to proceed
hastily, but to follow upon rejected and slighted admonitions: Therefore, if
an admonition be received before, and the Church therein be heard, there is no
further proceeding to be in in reference to this Sentence: Because, 1. the
limitation is express. 2. The reason is clear; for if the lesser do the turn,
and prevail to the recovery of the person, and removing of the offense from the
Church, What needs more?

CHAP. XII. What is to be accounted a satisfying and successful admonition.
IF it be asked, What is to be accounted a satisfying and successful
admonition? And how men are to judge of, and walk in reference to, the same?
Answ. We would distinguish satisfaction or success as to an admonition, which
may be either full satisfaction or only partial. Full satisfaction is, When
the person is so fully convinced of his ill, as not only to forbear the venting
thereof, and to give no offense for the time to come, but also fully to abandon
the same as being grieved therefore, and willing to edify others, by a
suitable acknowledgement. Some useful Distinctions of satisfaction.


Again, we call that a partial satisfaction or success, when though there is
not a fully satisfying length obtained; yet can it not be said to be altogether
fruitless. As suppose, 1. a person should not be brought wholly to disclaim
his errors, yet should profess a conviction of the ill of venting them, and
troubling the Church with them, and afterward should engage to abstain from
offending in that kind. 2. Suppose one should be convinced of the more gross
errors, and be content to disclaim these, yet should stick at some others,
professing scruple in them.

We would also distinguish these that give partial satisfaction. 1. Either
they are such as appear to be sincere in the length they come, and in the
professions they make, as also to be docile and ready to be informed; or, they
are such who discover the want of ingenuity in their proceeding, and themselves
but to be lying at the wait to return to their vomit.

Now to apply this, We say, 1. When this satisfaction is full, there is no
question; for, thereby not only all further process is to be sisted, but the
person is to be admitted to have communion in Churchpriviledges.

2. Where this partial success is of the first sort, We conceive it may be
sufficient to sist process for a time; and to continue the persons under means
within the Church, so long as they contradict not their profession; yet it is
not sufficient to give them free access to all Church Priviledges, as if the
scandal were fully removed.

3. Where that satisfaction is but of the last kind, that is, mocking and
dissembled, We say, that though it may put a Church-judicatory to try the
evidences of this dissimulation, and during that time possibly to stop a little
their proceeding; yet ought it not to mar the drawing forth of the Sentence,
lest there be an accession to the hurt which is intended to the Church by that
dissembler: And here we are to apply both the reasons against, and characters
of, dissimulation, which were spoken to on practical offenses.

4. If there be no seeming satisfaction at all, then after admonitions given,
the person despising the same is to be rejected, as one that is infectious and
unfit to have communion in the Church, or the benefit of any Church-priviledge
and Ordinance: And, in a word, to be, for his scandal, and obstinacy against
Christ's Ordinances, declared to be Excommunicate, and casten out of His visible
Kingdom, as an outlaw to the same; Which is to be done with such gravity,
weightinesse, sympathy and authority, as it may look like the Ordinance of
Christ, and have an impression of His dread and Majesty upon all that are
witnesses thereof.

If it be asked, Whether any further duty be required Whether any thing be
required of Ministers toward heretic that are rejected
from a Minister toward such a person after the Sentence is past? Answ. He is
not then properly under pastoral charge since he is no member of Christ's
visible Church, at least, in that respect, as members fall under common and
ordinary actual inspection. Yet we conceive, 1. That the Minister is to
continue to deal with God for him (at least in private) if so be he may be
recovered out of this snare, because he is under the last cure, which will
either prove life or death; Gods blessing therefore to it* is to be sought; and
it becomes well the natural care of a kindly Minister, that is thirsting for
the blessing, to deal with God for it. 2. Although there be not actual access
to any thing; yet ought there to be a lying at the wait to observe any
opportunity which may be for his good, and when it offers, it would be
carefully improven. And therefore, 3. for that end, whatever indignation
beshown against a man's ways or errors, to make these loathsome to others, yet
still there would be evidence of tender respect to the persons, and, if need
be, means used to supply them, especially if they come to any strait, although
in all this they would keep such a distance as may keep up the weight of the
Sentence, both to them and others: But, by this way, their suspicious mistakes
of Ministers, carnalnesse against their persons, are best removed, and access
is thereby made to be edifying unto them, Some examples whereof are recorded in
the life of Musculus* as to his tenderness to most desperately deluded
persons, when they were in affliction, and discountenanced exceedingly by
Magistrates, which God blessed in the end for their recovery; this is suitable,
severity in Magistrates, and tenderness in Ministers. And amongst other ills
and snares that that cruel indulgencie (which is indeed cruel to the poor
souls, to whom it becomes a snare) has following it, this is one* That the
Magistrate is accounted merciful, and the zealous Minister cruel, whereby
they are put in an incapacity to be edified by the one, and in a capacity, as
it were, to miscarry as they will, by the indulgence of the other.

CHAP. XIII. What is required of Magistrates for restraining of seducing
spirits.
THe second thing that we proposed to speak to in this remedy, was, as it
relates to Magistrates, to wit, Whether any thing be? or what it is that is
called-for by the Word of God from them, to be performed in their stations for
the drying up of such a flood* and removing of such a plague? It is not our
mind to insist so much in this as in the former, Yet it is fit that we say
something: And who knows but it may fall in the hand of some Magistrate, who
may be desirous to hear and know his duty? which we shall lay down in an
Assertion, or two, thus,

Assert. 1. Although God has not made Magistrates, as such, Church Officers,
nor entrusted them with the Ecclesiastic Government of His Church; yet does he
allow them, and call them to improve They are called according to their places
to interpose.
their civil power for the good of His Church in Ecclesiastic things in some
respect, as well as in civil things. And therefore if a Magistrate see not to
the providing of Ministers for a people, and of maintenance to them, and such
like, that are necessary for the being of a Church, as well as he provideth
Officers, and furnishes them that are needful in the State, he is faulty and
unfaithful to his trust. For, the Lords design in settling of Societies, and
appointing of Magistrates, is to be expounded as subservient to that great end
of men's glorifying of God, and enjoying him. And certainly, Magistrates are to
have that as their own end, even in the actions of their station, and to
endeavor to promove that amongst these over whom for their good they rule.
This is clear in all the Governments and Commonwealths that the Lord did
immediately model Himself, Magistrates had this for a special part of their
task, to keep His Ordinances pure, and to restrain the corrupters of them: This
is expressed in the Moral Law, where Masters are no less to oversee their
servants, that they work not on the Sabbath, from respect to the Lord, than to
direct their work all the week from respect to themselves; and by the rules of
interpreting of these commands, what belongs to a Master to be done by him as
a Master, in reference to these over whom he has power according to his
station, that does belong to all Magistrates in reference to these under their
charge, according to their stations. Also, where one instance is named, all of
that kind are comprehended. And therefore as this Ordinance of sanctifying the
Sabbath, is to be overseen by Superiors, so also are all others: yea, it is
acknowledged also, that what is expressed in one command, in respect of the
extent thereof, is to be understood in all. And therefore this obligation lies
on Superiors, to make inferiors observant of Gods Ordinances in reference to
all the commands; this is not doubted of the duties in the second Table: yet
there is no expression in it inferring the same* so express as is in the
first; and this is a common assertion, Magistrates have both Tables of the Law
committed to their keeping. This is fully made out by many godly and learned
men, and we need not to insist upon it; for, readily, no Magistrate does
question his own power, but that he may do what is fit, all the matter is to
consider what that is.

Assert. 2. It is not a Magistrates duty in the case of And not merely to look
to outward order.
overspreading delusion, merely to look to outward order and civil peace and
enjury, and to give liberty to any o^ many sorts of dangerous errors and
delusions to spread; or, to give toleration unto the maintainers thereof, in
their spreading the same. For, 1. such errors, are ill deeds, and such
spreaders, are ill doers, bringing great prejudice to people, Gal. 5. 20. 2
Epist. of John 11. 2. Magistrates ought to be a terror to evil doers
indefinitly; and, I suppose, if the sword be born in vain in reference to them,
the conscience will not have ground of quietness in the day of judgment, upon
a distinction of evil doers* when the Lord has made none such in their
commission. 3. They ought to be zealous of His honor who is their Superior,
that His name be not blasphemed: and can such be tolerate without this
construction, upon the matter, that men have liberty to blaspheme the Name of
God, to abuse His truth, reproach His Ordinances, and to take His Name in vain
as they will? Would any supreme Magistrate take it well, to have some inferior
officer, or Magistrate of a Town or Province, to give such liberty to these
under his jurisdiction in reference to him? And is there any such distance
between the supreme and inferior Magistrate, as there is between the Majesty
of God, and the most supreme power on earth? And what if He judge between Him
and them out of their own mouth, and, according to the measure that they met
out to others, met out to them? 4. Are they not to seek the peoples good? And
is there any such good, as their spiritual good? Or, are there any such
enemies to that as seducers? We conceive therefore* it will not be found
agreeable to the intent of their office and scope which they ought to aim at
therein, that Magistrates should give this liberty or connivance to men, to
vent and propagate such errors as may destroy souls, and actually overturn the
face of a visible Church, so that if something overspread universally, (as
Popery, and some other gross errors and delusions have done in some places of
the world) there should be no visible Church within such dominions; And indeed,
upon these principles, men cannot impute it to their own care, that it is other
ways. Also, such loosnesse may overturn Ordinances, and set up abominations in
the room thereof, remove all Ministry, Sacraments, Discipline and Preaching,
and all upon pretext of conscience: such delusions have been in the world; and
if by Magistrates connivance, they should overspread a Nation, so as there
could be no remedy applied, would it be satisfying or comfortable to him
(supposing him to have a conscience) to see his people under him in such a
posture? What if under pretext of conscience, Magistracy should be denied to
be an Ordinance of God, and he put therefrom, upon that account, that the
people thought it unlawful to obey him? Would not readily his conscience say,
That seeing he restrained not others from casting at these Ordinances, in which
the honor of God, and good of souls were so much concerned, that it was just
with God to permit them to cast at that Ordinance also, wherein he is so mainly
concerned? And indeed, this has not been unfrequently seen, that these who
have begun to cast at Church-ordinances, have come at length (as if they had
been thereto disposed by the former) to cast at Civil Ordinances (to speak so)
also; and what wonder is it, seeing there is no more clear warrant from God for
the one than for the other?

If it be said, that what has been spoken in the That the grounds against
toleration concern Magistrates as well as Ministers.
doctrine, and on these places, Rev. 2. concerning the not suffering of corrupt
teachers to vent their errors, does belong to Ministers and Church Officers,
and not to Magistrates. Answ. 1. If thou be a Magistrate that moves this
objection, pose thy own heart, if that which is so displeasing in Ministers and
Church Officers, to wit, toleration of corrupt men to spread their errors; If,
I say, that will be well pleasing and approven in Magistrates, when Christ
Jesus shall come to judge both in reference to this thing; Or, if in that day
when the great Judge will Sentence Ministers for tolerating in such a case, He
will take another rule to proceed by, with the Magistrate? Or if it be like,
that Christ out of love to His Church, shall peremptorily require Ministers,
not to suffer false teachers, but to restrain them, according to their
stations, and not to endure them to teach and seduce His Servants, and yet,
that the same Lord, for the good of His Church, should require Magistrates to
tolerate and maintain the same. 2. Consider if the grounds and reasons that
bind this duty on Ministers, will not equivalently and proportionably bind all
men according to their stations; for, the grounds are in sum, love to God, and
love to the edification and salvation of others, which are the substance and
fulfilling of the moral Law. 3. If in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, or in History since* these two be not ever joined together, the most
commended Magistrate, and one who is most zealous against corrupt teachers; the
fathers of old were no^ to spare their children, Deuteronomy. 13. nor suffer them to
teach or seduce to the dishonor of God, and hazard of souls; and can it be
said that souls now are less precious, or error now less infectious and
dangerous, or these things less to be cared for now in the days of the Gospel
than formerly, that concern the glory of God, and edification or destruction of
souls? 4. Consider if in the Book of the Revelation, the suffering of
Antichrist to delude souls, be not mentioned as reproveable; and if the
destroying of that beast, and putting him from corrupting the earth, be not
spoken of as a main piece of the commendation of such as shall be isntrumental
therein. Now in the Scripture Language, all deluders and seducers are
Antichrists, being led with the same spirit, and driving the same design
against the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; Can there be therefore any reason to make
such difference, where the Lord has made it? 5. Consider if it can be
accounted single zeal, that persuades to permit the Name of God to be
dishonored, when any reflection upon our own, does so much move us; for, it
does infer, that either there is an indifferency as to truth and error, So
that in the one, the Lord is not more dishonored than in the other, which will
be found exceeding contrary to His own expressing of Himself in Scripture, and
will not, I suppose, be pleaded in the day of judgment, when He will avenge
Himself on such seducers; or, it must infer, that men are not to take notice of
what dishonors Him, even though many things be within their reach to impede
it. And indeed, if a conscience seriously pondering the thing, will not be
provoked out of zeal to God, whose glory suffers, out of respect to the
salvation of many souls, that are hazarded and destroyed by such means, and to
prevent the many offenses that wait necessarily upon such ills, and the many
inconveniences, divisions, jealousies, rents, etc. that follow in Families,
Congregations, Cities and Nations, and the great prejudice that the
Commonwealth suffers, by the distracting of her members amongst themselves,
the incapacitating of many for public trust, the fostering of diverse
interests and contrary principles in one body, to the marring of honest public
designs: If by these, I say, the zeal and conscience of these who are
concerned, be not provoked, by what will, or can, they be?

If it be said, That it looks more Gospel-like, That total forbearance is
not like the Gospel.
and for the furtherance of Christ's Kingdom, that Magistrates should leave men
to follow their light, and to be dealt with by the preaching of the Gospel, and
force thereof. We shall propose these Considerations in reference to this, 1.
Consider if it looks christian and tender-like, for men so to stand by in the
Lord's Cause, and to let Him do (as it were) for Himself: It was indeed once
said of B^al, Judge. 6. If he be a god, let him plead for himself: But will a
tender heart think or speak so reproachfully of the Majesty of God? He indeed
can and will plead for Himself; and it is not for defect of power He makes use
of men, to defend His truth, or to restrain errors; yet it is His good
pleasure to make use of Magistrates therein, (and thereby to honor them) as He
does of Gideon in that same place. 2. Consider if it look christian-like, to
give the devil equal access to follow his designs with Jesus Christ in the
setting up of his kingdom: Now absolute toleration does this, and more, because
there is but one Truth, and there are many Errors, and each of these has that
same liberty and indemnity (to say so) that Truth has, and may with the same
confidence come forth to the open light as Truth may, in respect of any Civil
restraint. 3. Consider the case of Antichrist, there is no error against which
the Lord has more directly engaged Himself to fight with the sword of His
mouth, than against this of Popery, and yet we suppose none will think that
Kings might warrantably suffer it to be spread and preached to the infecting of
their People, without adding or injoyning any restraint by their Civil power;
certainly their hating of the Whore, and making her desolate, does imply some
other thing: And wherever true hatred of Error is, there will be more
effectual streatching of men's power and places for restraining the same. 4. We
may add this Consideration, That hitherto toleration of Errors and diversity
of corrupt opinions have ever been looked upon, and made use of, as a most
subtle mean for undermining and destroying of the Church. It is marked of that
skillful enemy of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Julian, That having improven his
subtility to the utmost to find out means to destroy the Church by craft, which
his predecessors by violence could not obtain* amongst other means he concluded
this Not to raise open persecution but to give liberty to all the differing
Bishops and Teachers (which then, after the Council of Nice and Constantins
death, were very many and bitter in their differences) to follow their own way,
and to vent their own opinions without all fear of any restraint: and therefore
did call them that he might make intimation thereof to them for their further
encouragement therein; The words which he used to them, as they are marked by
Ammianus and cited by Lodovicus Molineus, page 560 are, Ut consopitis civilibus
discordiis, suae quisque Religioni serviret intrepidus, that is, in sum* That
every one forbearing Civil discords, should worship in his own Religion without
control or fear: And is it like, that this shall prove a mean useful for the
good of the Church, which that expert child of the devil did make use of to
destroy the same?

Our third Assertion then is, That Magistrates in It Is Magistrates duty to
prevent the infection of the people under them.
their places ought to prevent the infection of their people under them by
corrupt doctrine, and the recovery of them when they are ensnared: and that
therefore they ought to restrain and mar corrupt teachers from spreading of
their errors to seduce others. This Assertion we suppose, is clear from the
former two: for, if Magistrates be allowed to improve their power for the good
of the Church, and if it be not their duty to give common protection to Error,
and the venters thereof, with Truth: Then this will follow, that they ought to
use their power to restrain the same, and, by the exercise thereof, to procure
the good of their people, in preserving of them from such a great evil.

CHAP. XIV. What may be justly acknowledged to be within the reach and power of
the Magistrate in such a case, and so, what is his duty.
IT may be more difficult to explicate this, and to show what is within the
Magistrates reach, or, what way he is to follow this. Before we answer, we
would premit,

1. That it is not intended, that Magistrates should rigidly and severely (much
less equally) animadvert upon all that in their judgment are erroneous, or
differ from what is truth, that is not called-for from Ministers. Therefore
here the former distinctions are to be remembered and applied: for, there is
great odds betwixt animadverting upon an absurd error, or taking notice
thereof, as it is a thing of the mind, and, it may be, a scruple in some
conscience, and as it is an external deed, having with it real offense,
prejudice and hurt unto others; in which case the Magistrate forces no man's
conscience to another Religion, but does keep his own conscience, by keeping
one that is deluded from seducing of others, or wronging the Name of the Lord
or His Church.

2. It is to be adverted, that we speak not here of the Magistrates duty in
punishing of corrupt teachers with civil or capital punishments, (though we
doubt not but in some cases their power does reach to that) much less are the
highest punishments to be understood here; whatever*be truth in these, we do
not now search into it, because the Scope is according to the Assertion, to
consider what is called-for, for the preventing of the spreading of corrupt
doctrine, and the preserving or recovering of a people therefrom.

3. This does not give way to Magistrates to condemn and restrain what they
think error, or what others think error; for Ministers that ought to reject
Heretics, are not warranted to reject whom they account so, but who indeed are
so; So is it here, it is what is indeed error* and who are indeed the teachers
thereof, that the Magistrate is to restrain, as those who teach rebellion
against the Lord.

We come then to consider what may be a Magistrates duty when seducing spirits
assault the people under their charge, and what is obviously in their power to
do for preventing of hurt by them, without insisting in any difficult or odious
like case. Their duty also may be considered in a fourfold respect, as that of
Ministers was. 1. It would be considered with respect to God, and so they ought
to fear some stroke coming upon their people, and by looking to Him to
endeavor to carry so in reference thereto, as they may be countable to Him:
for, if it be a privilege for Magistrates in the Christian Church to have the
honor of being nursing fathers therein, Isa. 49. 23. then it must be a great
credit, mercy and satisfaction to them, to have their people or foster (to say
so) the Church, flourishing and thriving upon their breasts; and if so, then
the mis-thriving of the Church by unhealthsom milk of error should and will
exceedingly affect them. And certainly that expression does both show what a
Magistrate's duty is, and how tenderly he ought to nourish the Church and
preserve her from any thing that may hurt her, as also it shows how nearly
any thing that may hurt the Church, ought to touch and prick him.

2. In respect of themselves, they are to consider if by any guiltiness of
theirs the Lord be provoked to let loose such a spirit, as Solomon's sins did
procure the renting of the Kingdom. So might they be also counted a cause,
bringing*on that idolatry and defection of Jeroboam from the Truth, as well as
from him and his posterity: Also if by their negligence in not providing
faithful Teachers to instruct the people, by their conniving at errors, or
tolerating them, or otherwise they may be charged with accession thereto: Thus
Ieroboams appointing the meanest of the people to be Priests, and his beginning
defection by his example, (though he seemed not altogether to forsake the true
God) disposed the people for a further length, and had influence upon their
going a whoring after Baal and other Idols of the Nations: Thus also Solomon
was guilty of much gross idolatry by his connivance at it, and taking himself
to worldly pleasures and miskenning the things of God, although it is like he
did not actually f^ll in that gross idolatry himself. And if Magistrates were
seriously reflecting on themselves, and affected with their own negligence and
carelessness in preventing of such things, whereof possibly they might find
themselves guilty, this were a great length, and other questions would be the
sooner cleared, and seriousness would make them find out remedies for such an
evil.

3. Their duty may be looked upon in reference to others, wherein they may and
ought to extend themselves for preventing the spreading of the infection
amongst these that are clean, by such like means, As, 1. by their example, to
show themselves zealous against that ill, and to abhor the questioning and
disputing of the truth; thus the example of a Magistrate is often of much
weight, yet car^ it not be accounted any coaction. 2. They ought to endeavor
to have faithful and honest Ministers, who by their diligence and oversight
may exceedingly conduce to the confirming of these that stand, and to the
preventing of more hurt. 3. They may and ought to countenance and strengthen
such as are faithful, whether among Ministers or people, which often has no
little influence upon the disappointing of seducers: thus it is said, 2 Chronicles.
30. 22. that for promoving of Reformation, Hezekiah spoke comfortably to all
the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the Lord: which is added, to show
that by this encouraging of honest and faithful Ministers beyond others, he
did design the thriving of the work in their hands, both by heartning them to
be zealous in it, and also by making them to have the more weight with others:
this is also marked of Constantine and other good Emperors, that zealous and
faithful Ministers were particularly taken notice of, and honored by them,
beyond others. 4. They may and ought to employ and make use of some fit
instrumen^s for the preventing of seduction, and may provide such as may be set
apart for studying such controversies, and confuting of such errors, that the
truth may be the more clear. 5. They may and ought to endeavor according to
their place, the composure and allayment of all the lesser and more petty
differences and heart-burnings that may be found amongst these that are, in the
main, one for truth; for often (as was said) a vehement spirit of error and
delusion is trysted with heart-burnings, divisions and offenses in the Church,
and amongst the Officers thereof: there were petty contests in Corinth, biting
and devouring one of another in Galatia, trysted with the harmony that was
amongst the followers of the seducers: and at the Council of Nice there was
not only difference with Arians and other gross heretics, but also there were
petty differences and contests amongst the Bishops and Confessors who stood for
truth; and these differences are most advantageous to the spreading of error,
and the removing thereof is a great bulwark against the same. It is marked of
Constantine at that Council of Nice, that amongst other means which he used to
suppress the Arian heresy, he did most carefully endeavor the removing and
burning of such differences and divisions, and by serious Oration pressed the
oblivion of all such, that they might the more unitedly and with the less
diversion be in capacity to oppose the common enemy. For certainly, when
Ministers are armed one against another upon some less concerning, and more
unprofitable debates, (as, alas! too much of them is in the Christian
reformed-Church at this time) there cannot but be the less strength, zeal, and
vigilance against professed enemies in the most substantial things. 6. They
may, and ought to interpose their Authority, for inhibiting the receiving and
hearing, or conversing with known and manifest seducers: for, this is but to
discharge, and thereby to preserve the people from running to their own hazard,
even as men ought to be commanded to keep at distance with a place or person
suspected to be infectious because of the Pestilence; neither could such a
restraint be accounted any diminution of their just liberty, yea this were but
a putting to of their sanction to the clear direction which the Lord lays
upon His people, and therefore there could be no hazard to miscarry in it,
especially where the application to such and such persons, might be as clearly
discernable from the Word as the duty is. 7. They might and ought to give their
countenance unto, and join their Authority with, such ecclesiastic statutes,
overtures, or means, as Church-judicatories or Officers might be about to make
use of for this end in their places; and this can be no more prejudice to
liberty, to countenance with their authority the Ornance of Discipline, than to
confirm by their Authority the Ordinance of preaching the Gospel. 8. They may
and ought to preserve the Ordinances from being interrupted, and the
administrators thereof from being reproached, and might justly censure these
things when committed. 9. In recovering a people, in a reeling and staggering
time, a Magistrate may engage them to formerly received truth, and interpose
his authority for this end, as is recorded of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 31, 32, 33.
Also, 10. He may and ought to remove all false worships, and endure no corrupt
preaching, or writing, or meetings for that end, or administrating of corrupted
Sacraments, or any Ordinance other than what is allowed; for, Josiah did cause
the people stand to the Covenant that was made, and having removed all
Idolatrous worship, he made Israel to serve the Lord, that is, he made them
abandon corrupt worship, and waiton pure Ordinances, as keeping of the
Sabbaths, offering of sacrifices, etc. and that according to the manner
prescribed by the Lord. Neither was it a wronging of their liberty, to do so:
Because, 1. it was the preservation of their liberty, to keep them from the
abominable bondage of these evils. 2. It was their duty to abstain from these,
and to follow the Ordinances purely, and the Magistrate may well put people to
that. 3. It is one thing by force to keep folks from dishonouring God in a
corrupt Religion, (as Josiah did) another to force them to a Religion; the one
belongs to the ordering of the outward man, the other to the inward. 4. He
might order them to keep the Ordinances, and in going about them to keep the
rule, because that is but a constraining of them to the means whereby Religion
works, and a making them, as it were, to give God a hearing, leaving their
yielding and consenting to him, when they have heard him, to their own wills,
which cannot be forced; yet it is reason that when God comes by His Ordinances
to treat with a people, that a Magistrate should so far respect His glory and
their good, as to interpose His Authority to make them hear. 5. Also, there is
a difference between the constraining of a circumcised or baptized people, to
worship God in the purity of Ordinances, as they have been engaged thereto,
which was Iosia's practice, and the constraining of a people to engage and be
baptized, which were not formerly engaged; because, actual members of a Church
have not even that liberty as others have, to abandon Ordinances: and this
puts them to no new engagement in Religion, but presses them to continue
under former engagements, and accordingly to perform: Hence we see, that both
in the Old and New Testament, Church Members have been put to many things, and
restrained from many things, which had not been pertinent in the case of
others. See, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13.

In the fourth place, there are many things also in their power, in reference
to these that are seducers or deluders, or actually deluded, which might be and
ought to be improven for the Churches good; (not to speak now of any thing that
may infer civil or capital punishment, upon men for their opinions, or any way
look like the enforcing of Religion upon consciences) As, 1. Magistrates might
and ought to put Ministers and Church Officers and others to their duty (in
case they be negligent) in trying, discoverring, convincing, etc. such as by
their corrupt doctrine may hazard others. 2. They may and ought to
discountenance such in their own persons, and, by their authority, inhibit them
to vent any such thing; yea under certifications: yet this cannot be called a
forcing of their conscience to any Religion, but is only the restraining of
them from hurting of the consciences of others. 3. When such certifications are
contraveened, he may and ought to censure the contraveeners, and so he may by
his authority put them in an incapacity of having access to infect others; yet
this is not the censuring of a man's opinion, for he might possess his opinion
without censure, but it is the censuring of his disobedience, and the prejudice
done by him to others: Nor is it the restraining of him from personal liberty,
because of it, but because he does not, nor will not use his personal liberty
without prejudice to the whole body, which is to be preferred to him: even as a
man, infected with the pestilence, ought justly to be restrained, though
against his will; yet cannot that be accounted a restraint of just liberty;
for, it is no just liberty to have liberty to hurt others. 4. They may and
ought to destroy such books as they use to spread for the infecting of others,
and inhibit and stop printing of them, or actual selling, spreading or
transporting of them, as they may stop carrying of suspected or forbidden
goods. 5. They may and ought to restrain idle and vagabound traveling of such
suspected persons, without representing of their necessary business to some,
appointed for that effect, in which case their doing hurt by such a voyage,
might be prevented, and they have a pass. Also, they might constrain them to
follow some lawful occupation, and to be diligent therein; both these are well
consistent with ordering of a State, And yet it is such busy bodies (as the
Apostle speaks) and vagabonds, that go without their station, that often
prove most hurtful to the Church, and isntrumental to the devil, as being
Apostles to him in such a business. 6. They may and ought to restrain and
Censure all blasphemous and irreverent expressions and speeches against the
Majesty of God and His Ordinances, and all calumnies and bitterness against
faithful Ministers or Professors that adhere to truth: for, these are moral
sins; and blasphemy, calumny, and such like, are no more to be passed over
without Censure in such, than in others who are not professedly tainted with
error: and the pretext of following light and conscience, cannot make these
sins tolerable, more than the Nicolaitans pretending the same for their
committing adultery and other filthiness: And this is not to punish men's
opinions, or force their consciences, but to punish their vices, even such as
have been hateful unto, and punished by, many natural and heathen men* 7.
They may and ought by their authority to cause them hear conferen es orderly
and reverently, give answers discreetly, wait on their trial* and such like,
before Ecclesiastic Assemblies. 8. They may and ought to make such incapable
of public places of trust, and remove them from such: Because, 1. they cannot
be supposed to employ their power singly. 2. Because such trust agrees not to
men and subjects as such, but are voluntarily conferred as tokens of respect
put upon men eminently qualified, and as may be for the good of the
Commonwealth: And therefore it cannot be justly accounted a marring of their
liberty as men or subjects. Upon this ground was Maachah the mother of Asa
removed from being Queen, or having any government, 1 King. 15. 13. 2 Chronicles.
15. 16. yet it cannot be said she was wronged when she was so dealt with.

In these steps mentioned, we have not aimed to lay down what might be done to
the utmost in such a case, but what we suppose cannot be in reason denied by
these of the widest principles in reference to this matter, if so be they
degenerate not utterly to loosnesse.

If it be said, That it seems sufficient for the Maigstrate It is not
sufficient to a Magistrate to maintain civil peace.
to maintain civil peace, and to restrain civil disturbances: We may look to
these considerations in answer to this, 1. This is no more than what Julian did
restrain, as the place cited before, clears; and certainly, he who rules for
Christ* will no^ think his example a good pattern. 2. This is that which
heathens do out of mere respect to themselves: and shall Christian Magistrates
have no respect to Christ but to themselves? o^, do no more for Christianity*
than heathens who owned it not? 3. Is i^ possible to separate growth in
delusions and variety of absurd errors, and civil faction and discord? o^, in
experience have they ever been separated? We se^ they made men carnal in
Corinth, they made them bite and devour one another in Galatia, as, chap. 5. of
that Epistle to them; yea, provoked to d^bates, envying, wraths, strifes,
back-bitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults, 2 Cor. 12. 20. and can such
things be with the entertaining of civil peace? For, does not the interruption
of civil p^ace, flow from hatred, bitterness, alienation of mind, envy
contradictions, and such like? And do not these necessarily wait on del ates,
and diversities of opinions? For, it is not to be ^upposed, that such
differences, proc^eding from want of light, can be in men that are altogether
mortified, and without corruption: Therefore may it be expected, that that
corruption will flam out upon such occasions; and that order is observable
which the Apostle has, 2 Cor. 12. just now cited, where he begins with
debates, and proceeds by diverse steps, till it close with tumults: and these
who are acquainted with the Histories of older and latter times, will
acknowledge this to be a truth. 4. There is almost but very little in the
foregoing particulars mentioned, but what is necessary for the preserving and
restoring of civil peace, or the preventing or censuring of the disturbance
thereof, s^ing there can be no solid ground whereupon to maintain peace, except
the springs of debates and tumults be stopped, and such distempers from which
they spring, be either cured and purged away, or restrained. 5. It may be
considered in experience, if ever such a way has done good to the Church,
(whose divisions and offenses have often thereby come to an height) or to these
that were seduced, seeing thereby not only the tentation was armed against them,
but they, at least, permitted to harden themselves therein, as in a thing not
so gross to wise Statesmen, as some conceitie Ministers would make it to
appear: O^ in the last place, it may be considered, if ever it has done good
to the State, wherein it was permitted, or to the Magistrates who did permit
the same; or, if thereby secret jealousies, heart* burnings, divisions and
factions have not been fostered and brought up to such height as has proven
dangerous to the body, and has hazarded the eating out of the belly, where it
was bred, or the stinging of the bosom that did give it heat.

CHAP. XV. What is called-for from people who are desirous to keep themselves
pure in such a time and case as the increasing of errors and seducers.
IT rests now, that we speak something of a peoples duty, that are members of
the Church where such delusions are vented: in speaking to which, we shall
follow almost the same method as in the former.

1. Then, people would be affected upon the appearance of such an ill, as upon
the news of sword, famine or pestilence; for then, as it were, the trumpet
sounds like that Angels proclamation, Rev. 8. 13. Woe, woe, woe to the
inhabitants of the earth, because of the Angels that are to sound, when as yet
all these Angels did principally forwarn of spiritual plagues, and
particularly of delusions. This would make people wary and serious; this would
curb vanity, mocking, laughing and puffing-up; this would make him that
stands, take heed lest he fall, if the judgment were considered as a thing
coming from God, and evidencing Him to be angry, and to threaten: and without
this, there is little ground to expect profiting by any other direction.

2. People would be seriously affected with the falling or hazard of the
falling of any they hear of, as being touched with zeal for God, and sympathy
with them, and for this cause, would humble themselves before God to deprecate
that stroke and plague as they would do sword, famine or pestilence.

3. People would try in what terms themselves are with God, and if things
inwardly be in good case, if there be any guiltiness procuring, or disposing
for the same plague, such as little love to the truth, little study of the
knowledge of the truth, little zeal against error, or simpathy with infected
Churches that are at a distance, laughing, it may be, at such things without
any other use making thereof, little prayer for others, or exhorting or
admonishing of them, (which is a mean for preventing of unstedfastnesse) little
endeavor, according to men's places, to have others instructed, or to have
faithful* able, and godly Ministers for that end; but, it may be, on the
contrary, much spiritual pride, self-conceitednesse, tenaciousnesse, and
addictednesse to our own wills and opinions, prejudice at able and faithful
Teachers, and readiness to hear every thing, and every person. These, and such
like, may be tried, and when found, ought to be mourned for, as causes of
humiliation to them for their accession to such a plague.

4. They would endeavor the strengthening and confirming of themselves in the
knowledge of necessary Truths, and would exercise themselves in the practice of
uncontroverted Godliness, and, by all means, would eschew jangling debates in
unnecessary things, knowing that that is a piece of the enemies subtility, once
to engage, if it were but in the meanest thing; for, thereby he does not only
divert from more necessary things, and wears away liveliness, but does
dispose for greater things, as was formerly marked in his method of dealing:
For, as in corrupt practices, men are not at first brought to an height of
prophanity, but by degrees; So is it in corrupt doctrines: and therefore there
is wariness called-for here in debating or questioning the meanest Truth, if
any Truth be mean.

5. If any thing be really doubted of, means would be used in a sober prudent
way for attaining information, either by providing and reading of some fit
Book, wherein often reasons are more deliberate and full, and may be more
deliberately studied and digested than in a transient discourse; but in this,
special respect would be had to a right choice, and for that cause the
judgments of such as are sound and able to discern, would be followed in this;
or, where God gives occasion, it may be done in sober and christian conference
with others of ability and integrity, especially with Ministers, who ought
neither to decline, nor rashly misconstruct the same, but affectionatly and
tenderly to welcome any such sober persons, lest they be provoked to consult
with others, who may prove Physicians of no value. In this, people would not
express their doubts in all companies at random, nor to, or before, such as
may possibly more easily take up the doubt, and with more difficulty be brought
off; when therefore such a doubt is to be moved, the party and the time would
be deliberatly chosen, that men may be serious therein, and no doubt, would be
moved for debate, but either such as the mover can himself loose, or in such
company where he may expect to have it loosed.

6. People would endeavor exceedingly to have good esteem of their Ministers
and Guides, and to be diligent and reverent observers of all Ordinances,
especially at such a time; for, Ministers are Guides, Heb. 13. 17. And
Ordinances are appointed to keep people from being staggered, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12,
13, 14. and it is to such that the Bride is directed, to wit, to keep near the
shepherds tents, for being preserved from wandering, Song 1. 9. And the more
that the devil drives to bear-in prejudice at Ministers, and blast the
Ordinances in their repute, the more are people to wrestle against that, and,
in some respect, to be more blind and deaf to what may be seen and heard
concerning Ministers faults, not so much for the Ministers respect, as their
own good: Therefore the Apostle gives this reason for his pressing of
obedience and submission to Ministers, Heb. 13. 17. because the want of that,
was not only prejudicial to the Minister, but unprofitable to themselves.

7. People would have an eye upon the way that faithful and eminently godly
men have gone to Heaven by, before them; This is to follow the footsteps of
the flock, Song. 1. 9. and the faith and patience of those that inherit the
promises, Heb. 6. 12. and readily we will find such to be most sober and
serious, and farthest at a distance from novelty, curiosity, or absurd
opinions. And it is no little part of the boldness and impudency that often
accompanies new delusions, that they generally condemn the generation of Gods
People, as if no way were to Heaven but by their vain inventions, this will be
no little stick to a tender mind, at once to condemn the Religion and practice
of such a cloud of witnesses.

8. They would be careful when they hear others questioning things, or
expressing their p^judice at Ministers, Ordinances, or established Truths, to
endeavor the present stopping of the same, and not to foster any thing of that
kind by moving new doubts, suspicions, or giving new grounds of jealousy
against Ministers or others, but rather would gravely and wisely endeavor the
removing of the same.

9. They would then be much and serious in the exercise of christian
fellowship, observing or considering one another, provoking one another, and,
as the word is, Heb. 10. 24. and 3. 12, 13. taking heed, lest there be amongst
them an evil heart of unbelief, and lest any of them be hardened: but, exhort
(says he) one another daily, as the remedy of that. There is no time wherein
christian fellowship is more calledfor, and wherein it may be more profitable,
than at such a time, if it be rightly ordered and managed: I say, rightly
ordered and managed; for, often the pretext of christian fellowship is abused
to the hatching and propagating of the most absurd opinions, when people turn
light and frothy, taking up their time with vain janglings and diverting from
the main scope, to wit, edification. These things are indeed to be shunned, but
christian fellowship is not to be disclaimed, but wisely to be ordered in
respect of the persons with whom, and occasions upon which it is used, and, in
respect of the matter and duties insisted on, which is to be the confirming of
themselves in some truth, faithful freedom in admonishing one another of what
is wrong, serious endeavor to keep repentance, humility, self-denial, and the
like graces, fresh; These and such like things are good and profitable to men,
when gravely, singly, faithfully, tenderly and inoffensively followed. What is
their duty in reference to the persons infected, and if they ought to refrain
from their company.


In respect of persons infected, the peoples duty may be considered in these
steps, 1. As they are to be affected with their fault, and to pray for their
recovery. 2. As they have occasion, to testify their dislike of their way* 3.
Such as are noted or known to be instrumental in the carrying-on of novelties,
ought by all means to be shunned. As, 1. their company and fellowship is to be
avoided, Romans 16. 17, 18. Men are to beware of them, Matthew. 7. Philip. 3. 2.
Secondly, They are not to receive such into their house, nor to give them a
salutation, or bid them God-speed, 3 Epistle of John, ver. 10. They are to have
no company with them, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. We conceive there is no duty that is more
pressingly urged upon the People of God, both in the Old and New Testament, as
may be clear by considering, not only the forecited places, but many other
places of Scripture, especially that place, Prove. 19. 27. Cease, my son, to
hear the instruction [that causeth] to err from the words of knowledge. And
there is this double reason for it, 1. There is nothing conduces more to
preserve those that are entire; For, it is hard to walk upon fire, and not be
burnt, Prove. 7. 27, 28. and the experience of not a few confirms this; for,
many had not declined, had they kept distance even from the garments that
were so defiled and infected; and it is a hearing of such instruction that
causes to err from the way of understanding. 2. There is nothing more useful
to convince the persons infected, and to make them ashamed; which is another
reason why the Lord does command this. And we may add, that there is nothing
that does more evidence respect to God, and reverencing of Him; and nothing
that is more becoming a sinner, that is sensible that he has corruption, than
that he stands in aw to come near a seen tentation; For, God is jealous, and
will not abide men's hazarding of themselves to be carried a whoring from Him:
and men are not free of corruption, and so readily are capable of what is
corrupt. It may be that people do think that there is no ill and hazard in
trying any thing, that so, proving all things, they may hold fast what is good;
and also, that it may be Ministers fearing the diminishing of their own
particular respect, that does make them press this, and that it proceeds
from their carnal passion; But such would consider,

1. If our blessed Lord Jesus, and His Apostles, did restrain people from any
due liberty, when they expressly prohibit their companying with such, and
hearing of such, especially where it is done purposely, usually and
deliberatly. And, we suppose, that there is scarce a direction in reference to
any particular in the Word more frequently, weightily, and peremptorily pressed
than this, as the places alleged do clear.

2. They (...) consider, if our blessed Lord Jesus, or the Apostles, had any
fear of losing their respect, or of inability to maintain their point against
any Seducers; yet do they press this themselves, and command and charge other
Ministers after them, to press this also upon their hearers.

3. They would consider, if these (to wit, our blessed Lord and the Apostles)
did foster carnal passion, whileas yet they so pressed the people, and did
reprove the suffering of such to continue in fellowship; Yea also* they di^ so
practice it themselves, the Church History records, that the Apostle John
having entered a Bath, where the heretic Cerinthus was, he did immediately in
have go out, professing fear to be ruined with him, if he should continue under
the same roof.

4. They would consider, if the meaning of such places, as, Prove all things,
Try the spirits, be such as necessitates folks to give hearing unto every
novelty. For, 1. that is not possible, that every person should enquire and put
to trial every error and every opinion. 2. The people are not in capacity to
do so. 3. This directly crosses the letter and scope of the former precepts,
which were given even then, when this command of proving all things, was given.
It must be understood therefore, as agreeing therewith, and to point-out that
no doctrine should be admitted without proof, upon the trust of any bearer, but
ought to be tried, if it be the Word of God, as the Bereans did, Act. 17. but
it does not allow them positively to try every thing, especially how gross
soever it be, without trial, though it command them not to admit any thing
without proof.

Further, a main part of the peoples duty is to concur in their places, for
countenancing and adding weight unto the respective Sentences, and steps, which
are called-for from Ministers in their stations: As, 1. to contribute what
clearness they ^an for the discovery and trial of such persons. To add their
testimony to the truth, and thereby to make the means of conviction the more
weighty to them. 3. By evidencing of their dislike of the persons obstinacy,
and their acknowledgement of the justice and necessity of drawing forth further
Sentences against them. 4. In shunning of their company, abstaining from
familiarity, and otherwise, to express their indignation against their way.
5. In carrying to them accordingly as they are Sentenced, that so they may
ratify the same, and in their place, endeavor the making of it weighty, and
eff^ctuall upon the persons, that thereby, they being made ashamed, may the
more readily be humbled, and turned therefrom. And people are by all means to
shun such familiarity, especially with Excommunicate persons, as may lessen the
weight of their Sentence, or mar their being ashamed, which indeed will make
people guilty of despising the Ordinance of Christ, and obstructing the fruit
thereof unto a brother, and also make themselves obnoxious to Censure, as being
scandalous by so doing.

CHAP. XVI. What further duty is required of private Professors toward
Heretics that are cut off.
IF it be asked, What duty further is called-for from private persons toward a
person cut off?

Answ. I suppose these things are called-for,

1. Abstinence from unnecessary civil fellowship, as, not to frequent their
company, to visit them, to dine or sup with them, or to have them dining or
supping with us, or to use such familiarity in such things, as uses to be with
others, or possibly has been with them: So it is, 1 Cor. 5. and it is no less
the peoples duty to carry so, that it may be a mean for their edification, than
proportionally it is the Ministers duty to instruct, pass Sentence, etc.

2. Their would be an abstinence from Christian fellowship, that is, we would
not pray with them, read or confer of spiritual purposes, (purposly at least)
nor do any such thing that belongs to Christian-communion, that is, to reject
him in that sense from Christian fellowship, and to account him as an heathen
man or publican. In this respect, we cannot walk with an excommunicate man, as
we may walk with other Christians; And, in the first respect, we cannot walk
with them, as we may walk with other heathens, that, it may be, are guilty of
as gross sins upon the matter; for, the Word of the Lord, puts this
differeece expressly between them and these who are simply heathens, 1 Cor. 5.

3. Yet even then prayer may be made for them; for, excommunication is no
evidence, that a person has sinned the sin against the holy Ghost; or, that
their sin is a sin unto death, and their necessities, if they be in want, may
and should be supplied, because they are men, and it is natural to supply
such; they may be helped also against unjust violence, or from any personal
hazard, if they fall in it; and as occasion offers, folks may give a weighty
serious word of admonition unto them, and such like, because by such means, the
end of the Sentence and its weight are furthered, and not weakened.

4. These that are in natural relations, ought to walk in the duties of them,
as Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Magistrates
and Subjects, etc. for, what nature binds, the Church does not loose.

5. Men may follow civil business, as paying or exacting payment of debts,
buying or selling, and may walk in such things as are requisite for humane
fellowship and society, because, though Church Censures be to humble and shame
men, by bearing in on them their sinfulness, yet it is not to undo them, and
simply to take away a being from them.

6. Yet all these things would be done with them in such a manner, As, 1. the
persons may show their indignation at their way, even when they express
tenderness to their persons. 2. It would be done in a different manner from
what uses to be with others, not under such a Sentence, that so they may bear
out their respect to the Sentence, even when they show respect to them.
Therefore, there would not be such frequencie in meddling with such persons, nor
would it be with familiarity or many words, and long discourses to other
purposes, nor with laughing, and with such cheerfulness, intimacie or
complacencie, as is used with others. But, in a word, the business would be
done, and other things abstained from. 3. When, what is necessary is past,
except it be on necessity, folks would not eat or drink with them at the time
of doing their business, or after the closing of the same; because that does
not necessarily belong to them as men, and by so doing, the due distance would
not be kept; and this is the great practick, so to carry to them as the
weight of the Sentence be not lessened, nor they prejudged of what otherwise
is necessary to their being, but that so every opportunity may be taken,
whereby their edification may be advanced.

If what is before said, be considered, We suppose there will be no great need
to add arguments to provoke either Ministers or others to be zealous in
prosecuting their respective duties; Yet these few considerations may be taken
notice of, and pondered to this purpose, Some Considerations to provoke
Ministers and others to the faithful discharge of their duty in all the
forementioned particulars.


1. That scarcely has delusion, though never so gross, ever broken in into a
Church, and for a time been forborne, but it has carried away many therewith,
and has proven exceedingly inductive to much sin, offense, reproach, division,
bitterness and ills of all sorts into the Church of Christ: Very little
acquaintance with the History of the Church, will put this out of question.

2. Consider that this spirit of delusion, is in a special manner
fore-prophesied of, to have a great reviving and strength in the latter days;
it is said, 1 Timothy 4. 1. That the Spirit speaks expressly, That in the last
times, some shall depart from the faith: And why is that expressly added, but to
give warning the more clearly, that men may be at their duty? Again, 2 Timothy 3.
1. This know, that in the last days, perilous times shall come. It is the
observation of a holy and learned man, that in this place, it is the last
days; in the former, the last times, as if this did relate to a time nearer
the end of the world: and so the first looks to the Popish superstitions and
abominations, (and indeed, the nature of the Doctrines there reproved, does
seem to favor this) and this last place does relate to the gross delusions,
that under the pretext of the form of godliness, were to succeed to these; And
therefore men, according to their places, ought in these times to be so much
the more watchful and zealous, s^ing the Trumpet has given so distinct a
sound.

3. The dreadful effects which such ills necessarily bring with them, may be
considered; it is not ruin to bodies or estates, but to souls; it is not
simply to sin, and to permit that, but its rebellion; and which is more, It is
to teach rebellion, and to carry on the same with a high hand against God; and
what will stir zeal for God, or what will waken love to, and sympathy with,
the souls of others, if this do not?

4. It would be considered, how often zeal, diligence and faithfulness of men
in their several places (as has been laid down) have proved exceeding helpful
for preventing and restraining the growth of such evils, so that thereby such a
^loud has been dried up, as it is Rev. 12. which otherwise might have drowned
the Woman and her seed; and, Matthew. 13. it is marked, that such tares are sown
and spring up, not while men are watchful and diligent, but while they sleep
and are defective in their duty, ver. 25. for, diligence in the use of means,
has the blessing promised which others cannot expect; and if wrath be come to
such an height, as the Lord will not be entreated in that matter, yet the
person that is diligent may look for his own soul for a prey, and to be kept on
his feet in the midst of tentations.

5. It may be a provocation to humility and watchfulness, to consider how
great men have been carried away with the most vile delusions: the Church of
Corinth did abound in most eminent gifts, yet corrupt teachers wanted not
influence upon them. The Church of Galatia has been most singularly zealous
and tender, yet what an height delusion came to amongst them, is evident, so
that they were bewitched therewith, Galat. 3. 1. In Church History also it is
evident, that most eminent men have been carried away with the vainest
delusions: that great Light, Tertullian, became tainted exceedingly with the
delusions of the Montanists: and aftertimes have letten us see, that the
eminentest of men are capable of defection; and even Stars are often made to
fall from heaven by such storms.

6. It is dreadful also to consider how difficultly men are recovered from
these delusions. It Is a rare thing to find in Scripture, or in History, any
observable recovery of a person that has slipped in this kind. Sometimes
indeed persons, that through fear have been brought to deny Christ, or to
countenance Idolatry in a particular act, are marked with much tenderness and
satisfaction to acknowledge their failing, and to abandon it; for, often such a
failing is the fruit of some surprizal, and is of infirmity; but the recovery
of a person, who has with a kind of deliberation drunken-in error and
rejected convictions, is a most rare thing, and has a peradventure added
thereto, 2 Timothy 2. 23. (as was formerly marked) which will not readily be found
in any other case; yea, often such persons do wax worse and worse, and one
delusion draweth-on another till it come to the greatest height of absurdity.

PART IIII. Concerning Scandalous Divisions.
CHAP. I. How heresy, schism and division differ, together with the several
kinds of division.
HAving now come this length, there is one thing of nigh concernment to what is
past, which possibly might be useful to be enquired into, Concerning such
scandals as cannot be called in the former sense doctrinall, not yet personal;
because there may be purity in the one, and regularity and orderlinesse in the
other respect, and yet actually there may be a scandal and an offense or
occasion of stumbling lying in the way of many, and that is, by schisms and
divisions in the Church, or amongst the people of God. This we The introduction.
confess is no less difficult to speak to, than any of the former, because
there is often more that can be said for both sides, and the side from whence
the offense rises, is not so easily discernable, which makes, that we are the
more unwilling and less confident to undertake to speak any thing in reference
thereto; Yet seeing we have in providence been led to the former purposes,
without any previous design; and now, having this occuring to us, before we
close, we shall endeavor shortly to speak a word in reference thereto, in a
general abstracted manner, without descending to any particulars, which may be
dangerous to be touched upon; but shall give some general hints concerning the
same, which we are induced unto upon these considerations,

1. Because such divisions are as really scandalous The scandal and
hurtfulnesse of divisions.
and hurtful to the Church, as either scandals in practice or doctrine are. 2.
Because the Word of God has as fully discovered and abundantly condemned the
offensivenesse of this, as of any of the former. 3. Because there is such a
connection amongst these sorts of scandals, that often one is not without the
other. Hence we see, 1. that contention and offenses and the woe that follows
them, are joined together, Matthew. 18. 1, 2, 3, etc. 2. Divisions and corrupt
doctrine, or heresies, are knit together, 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. so that seldom
there is corrupt doctrine, but it has division with it; and never is division,
but it has offense, As in the Epistles to these of Corinth and Galatia is
clear: Hence dogs and evil workers, that is, the spreaders of corrupt doctrine,
are also called the concision, Phil. 3. 1, 2, etc. and in experience we often
find, that a spirit of division waits upon delusion, and oftentimes does take
up and prevail, even over those who have been preserved from the delusion; As
in a great storm, some places have great and dreadful blasts and drops, who
yet may be kept free from the violence of the tempest; Even so, this deluge
of error, has showrs of divisions waiting upon it, which often may affect
these who are preserved from the violence of delusion it self; which makes,
that the speaking something to this, does not impertinently follow upon the
former. 4. Because if this be wanting, what is said in the former cases, is
palpably defective, especially at such a time, when there is no less cause to
observe this evil, than any of the former. This being, as to them, in some
respect a cause that brings them forth and fostereth them, and, in some
respect, an effect which necessarily and naturally follows upon them: for,
divisions breed both scandals in practice and doctrine; And again, scandal in
these, does breed and entertain divisions.

2. What we would say, shall be drawn to these The heads of the ensuing part of
the Treatise.
four heads. 1. To consider what division is, or of what sort it is, which is
properly to be spoken of here. 2. What are the causes which do breed and foster
the same. 3. What are the evil effects which ordinarily flow from it. 4. What
may be thought to be duty in reference to such a time, and what may be looked
upon as suitable remedies of such a distemper.

For the first, We take it for granted, that there is such a thing as division
in the Church; which is not to be looked upon as any new or strange thing; for,
the Scripture makes it clear, and the History of the Church puts it out of
question: Concerning which we may premit these few things,

1. That the division which is intended here, is not every contest, and
alienation of mind, and difference of practice incident to men; but that which
is proper to the Church concerning Church affairs, and so is to be
distinguished from civil debates and contentions. We would advert also, that
there may be Church differences that fall not under the charge of Scandal, as
when in some things, men of conscience are of different judgments, yet carry
it without any offense or breach of charity; Or, when in some practices there
is diversity with forbearance, as was in Policarpus days, and the time of
Iraeneus (about Easter matters) These we speak not unto. 2. Although sometimes
titles and expressions may be used more generally and promiscuously; yet, in
this discourse, we would distinguish between these three, Heresy, Schism and
Division, without respect to what otherwise uses to be done.

And, first, Heresy, is some error in doctrine, and What heresy is.
that especially in fundamental doctrine, followed with pertinacie, and
endeavor to propagate the same. Again, Schism may be where no heresy in
doctrine is, but is a breaking of the union of the Church, and that communion
which ought to be amongst the Members thereof, and is either in Government or
Worship. As, first, in Government, when the common Government, whereto all
ought to be subject, is rent, and a Government distinct, set up. This may be,
either when the Government is altered* as, suppose some should set up
Episcopacy in opposition What schism is, and the kinds thereof.
to Presbytery, yet keeping still the fundamental truths; Or it may be, where
the same Government is acknowledged, but there be difference concerning the
persons to whom the power does belong; so, sometimes men have acknowledged
Popery, yet followed diverse Popes; So often, Sectaries have not disclaimed
Councils and Bishops, but have set up their own, and refused subjection to
these to whom it belonged. The first kind implies a doctrinall error
concerning Government; The second may consist with the same principles of
Government, but differs in the application of them, and becomes a schism,
when men act accordingly in acknowledging diverse supreme Independent
Governments: Because so, when there ought to be but one Church, it becomes, as
it were, two: and this is exclaimed against, and regrated by the Fathers, under
the expression of erecting altar contra altar, that is, altar against altar,
whenas the Lord allowed but one, even in reference to His own worship. 2.
Schism may be in worship, that is, when, it may be, both the same Doctrine and
Government is acknowledged, yet there is not communion kept in
Churchordinances, as in Prayer, Word and Sacraments; but a separate way of
going about these is followed. It seems, that this was in part the schism of
the Corinthians (whatever was the rise thereof) that they had a divided way of
communicating, and of going about other duties, and other Ordinances, as may be
gathered from 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19, 20, 21. with 33. This kind of schism has been
frequent in the Church, and has flowed not so much from dissatisfaction with
the Doctrine and Government thereof, as with the constitution of the Members,
or failings of the Governors. Thus it was in the case of the Novatians,
Donatists, Meletians, Cathari and others, of whom it is recorded, that their
fault did not consist in setting up any strange Doctrine* or in rejecting of
the truth (at least at the first) but in breaking the band of communion, as
Augustine has it often; for, says he, Schismaticos facit non diversa fides
sed communionis disrupta societas, contra Faustum, lib. 20. Again, he says of
the Donatists, Ad Bonifac. Epist. 50. Nec de ipsa fide vertitur quaestio, sed
de sola communione infaeliciter litigant, and contra unitatem Christi rebell^s
inimiciti^s, perversitate sui erroris, exercent. And this sort of schism does
often draw with it the former, there being no way to maintain this without the
other. Of this schism there are many kinds, according to its several rises and
degrees; and also, according as it extends to the breaking of communion in
whole, from Ordinances, or in part only from some, or in some Ordinances, as
appears to have been in the Church of Corinth, where there has not been a
total schism, though it has been in that Ordinance of the Supper especially;
and it is like also, that that schism has been occasioned, because of the
corruption of some members, with whom others have scared to communicate; and
therefore have not tarried for them: for, the Apostle does particularly condemn
this, and exhort them to tarry one for another; and to attain this, he does
clear them of what was necessary for right partaking, to wit, the examining of
themselves, ver. 28. and does declare unto them, that who so did eat
unworthily, and did not prepare himself, did eat and drink damnation; but to
himself, and not to others: wherefore, says he, ye need not be so anxiously
solicitous how they be prepared, or of what sort they be that are with you, but
examine your selves, and tarry one for another, that there be not a schism
amongst you. And this he speaks, even when he has been reproving
drunkenness among the Communicants, yet will he not admit that as an excuse,
why private persons should Communicate separatedly, which was their practice.
This was spoken of in the first part.

This Schism, however it be understood, has ever proven exceeding hurtful to
the Church, and has been an inlet and nursery to the greatest errors; It is
most pressingly condemned in the Scriptures, even with as great weight as
corrupt doctrine and heresy are, and it is attributed to that same original,
to wit, the flesh, with witchcraft, idolatry, heresy, etc. Gal. 5. 20. It has
ever been most weighting to faithful Ministers, most offensive to people of
all sorts, most advantageous to the enemies of the truth, and has made the
Church most vile and contemptible before the world, as we may see in the sad
complaints and writings of the Fathers, in reference to the Novatians,
Donatists and others of that kind: It has also proven most dangerous to these
who have been engaged therein, and often has been a snare to bring on some
spiritual desertion, deadness of spirit, security, selfconfidence, or some
other spiritual evils of that kind, or to dispose for receiving a more gross
tentation, as was formerly marked. Also, it may be observed, that such schisms
have spread very suddenly in some places of the world, but have not been easily
removed; for, these schisms of the Novatians and Donatists did trouble the
Church for several generations, which might be enough to make men think the
breach of unity, in that respect, to be no little evil, and to make them
fearful to fall in the same. But because every schism properly does imply some
error in doctrine, although it does not arise from the same, therefore we
shall forbear to speak any thing particularly to this, because what has been
said of errors in doctrine, may in part be applied here: For, we will find,
that schism does imply one, or all of those. 1. That such apprehended
corruptions do either make such a society to be no Church, or communion with
that Church in other Ordinances, to be unlawful because of such corruptions,
or of such corrupt members. 2. That there may be a distinct erected Church
beside a Church, which yet may not be of communion with that other Church. 3.
These or such consequences, that either the Church of Christ in the earth is
not one, (which truth of the unity of the Catholic visible Church, is the main
ground of all Church-union and communion) Or, that that one Church may be of
such heterogeneous or dissimilary parts, as the one of them ought not to have
communion with the other; Or, at least this, that a person ought to seek his
own satisfaction and consolation, though to the prejudice and renting of the
Church, and to the general offense and stumbling of all others; The fairest
schism and separation, must imply one of these: for, it cannot be conceived,
that otherwise men would act so directly, according to these principles, if
they did not take them for granted.

It is to be adverted, that as there is an unjust schism, that is, a separation
without any cause at all; so there is a rash and scandalous schism, that is,
when it is beyond the ground given; or, when the ground given, is not such as
will warrant such a separation: Which may be, 1. when the separation or schism
is upon some occasion which is indeed a defect in the Church, but not such as
does make communion therein sinful, as that in Corinth. Or, 2. when, it may
be, the schism is extended beyond the ground, that is, when suppose one could
not communicate in the Lords Supper in such a Church, because of some sinful
corruption in that Ordinance, if, upon that occasion, one should separate from
communion in all Ordinances, that were to exceed the ground given. Or, 3. when
no professed schism is owned; yet when really and indeed it is practiced, so as
men can neither justify a schism, or separation upon such a ground, nor yet
altogether vindicate their practice from inferring the same, in which respect,
the schism and rent flows from affection, or inclination, and not from well
grounded light, or reason, and so cannot be but rash and unwarrantable. 4. It
may be, in the manner, precipitant, when either means have not been used to
remove that ground if it be just; or, when men so heighten some lesser defect
in a Church by aggreging it with such circumstances, as may make it appear to
themselves or others, a ground sufficient to bear and warrant separation; or,
in such a way, to vent their dissatisfaction with things, or persons, as
thereby to hurt the unity of the Church, or to occasion a rent, or division, or
schism in the same, when* it may be, others beside their intention may thus
conclude, A Church so corrupted, etc. is not to be kept communion with, (and,
it may be, the proposition is sound and so qualified, as it is acknowledged by
all Divines) But this or that particular Church is such. This again, is offered
to be made out by the too vehement aggravation of some lesser defect, which may
seem to confirm that assumption: and in practice, it may be observed, that as
some will lay down premises concerning a schism, who yet dare not act
according to the conclusion, and actually separate, So others will keep the
conclusion, and actually separate in practice, who yet durst not in Thesi
absolutely maintain schism to be lawful upon such a ground. It is to be
adverted, that schisms and divisions are so nigh in nature and names, that we
may use instances for illustration of either promiscuously.

The third word, is Division, which does not at the first view differ from
Schism; yet we do take it here as different, and to agree to such Divisions and
Dissentions in the Church as are consistent with communion both in Government
and Worship, and have not a divided Government or Worship following them, as in
the former case. Of such there are many instances in Scripture and
Church History, as we may observe by considering these Distinctions thereof. 1.
There is a Doctrinal Division, as when What is here meant by the word Division.
the matter is not fundamental, nor yet is it pleadedfor as such, to the
breaking off of communion amongst these that differ, yet possibly being a mere
indifferent matter, is followed with too much eagerness, vehemence
bitterness. etc. by these who own the The several kinds thereof.
same respectively. Thus contentions were hot in the primitive times for meats,
and such things which were neither of themselves destructive to the foundation
of Faith on either side, at least in that time, and so were not heretical; nor
did they break off communion in Church-ordinances, and so were not
schismatical; yet was the Church troubled therewith by division amongst her
members. Of this sort are the divisions that may be amongst godly and orthodox
men in some points of Truth, when they too vehemently press their own opinion
to be received with a kind of necessity, or load the other with too many
absurdities beyond what will follow from the nature thereof.

2. There are some Divisions that may be called Practical and do indeed imply
some difference of opinion, but do also infer somewhat in practice: Of this
sort was the division about Easter in primitive times before it came to a
schism, some keeping one day, some another. And in aftertimes it abounded,
when some acknowledged the ordination of such a Bishop, and others not; when
some acknowledged the authority of such a Council, and others not, and so had
divided practices.

3. Some Divisions are betwixt particular men, some have influence upon
Churches, and are, as it were, one party against another. The first is more
properly a difference, and may be betwixt eminently godly and zealous men, such
as was betwixt Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15. 39. and is called a contention. Such
also we will find in Church History betwixt Augustine and Jerome, Chrysostom
and Epiphaneus, which indeed has a contention with it, and, if the Lord
prevent not, is apt to make parties, and to rent the Church; but the other, to
wit, the acting of one party against another, as has been seen in many
Councils, and appears to have been amongst the Corinthians, when one adhered
to one person, and one to another; This, I say, looks like faction, and is
properly division.

4. Division may be considered in all these respects as it is in judgment, or
in affection, or in practice. It is in judgment, when they are not of the same
mind, but have diverse apprehensions concerning Truths. 2. It is in affection,
when upon that difference of judgment alienation follows, whereby that love,
and affection, and charity that one owes to another, is somewhat cooled or
discomposed. 3. It is in practice, when they speak and act differently and
oppositly; as if it were an advantage to Truth for the one to cross and
undermine what the other does: This distinction is clearly insinuated, 1 Cor.
1. 10. I beseech you, brethren, that there be no divisions amongst you; Which
is branched-out in union in these three, to wit, speaking the same thing, that
relareth to action; Of being perfectly joined together in the same mind, that
relates to affection; And of being one in the same judgment, that relates to
opinion: which supposes that there were divisions opposite to all these, which
also often go together.

5. There are some Divisions, which (to say so) are negative, and are in the
manner and circumstances of doing some duties. Thus men may differ and take
diverse ways, yet both of them be endeavoring the thriving of the work of the
Gospel, and no way laboring to cross each other, or to make one another less
weighty and succesful. Thus Paul and Barnabas, after their contention, did
indeed differ in their manner of prosecuting the work of the Gospel, yet both
of them did continue faithful therein, and neither of them did counter plot
nor counteract to others. Again, some divisions are positive (to say so) when
men do not only differ from each other, but do oppose each other, and do not
set themselves singly to prosecute the work, which possibly their opposite may
be prosecuting with them; but there is an endeavor to lessen the authority and
mar the actings of the other, and to engage men in the approbation of that
particular wherein they do differ, which savoureth of division and faction
properly, and is more hurtful and intolerable, when as the first is more
tolerable amongst men who have their infirmities; and it is like, that such were
the divisions of Corinth when there was an endeavor to cry up one, and down
another.

6. Some are in doctrine, for difference of judgment; some are in government,
for precedence; as sometimes was amongst the Disciples, a contest who should be
greatest: which is not so much for Government abstractly, and considered in it
self, or about what should be done, as it is for the persons, who should be the
governors and doers thereof; as amongst the Disciples, it is not the question,
What kind of government shall be? or, What should be the Governors duty? But,
who should be chief and have the main hand in ruling?

7. Sometimes Divisions are more stated and deeply rooted, when some way men's
designs are cross, though not in the main, yet in the manner of carrying them
on. Sometimes again, they are more occasional, and arise from some particular
act or circumstance, wherein men may differ, and may be when neither side
draweth-on a division; So that particular of taking or not taking John Mark in
the company, was the occasion of that contention and division betwixt Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 15. when otherwise there was an harmony in the series and
strain of their whole way.

8. Sometimes Divisions are betwixt godly and orthodox men upon the one side,
and corrupt men upon the other; as were the divisions of the Church with the
Arian Heretics, and others of that nature. Sometimes again, they are amongst
godly and orthodox men on both sides, and this is a main ingredient in, and
aggravation of, the scandal of Division, when it is amongst Christ's own
Disciples; and this is that which we would especially speak to: Concerning
which we say,

1. That there is such a thing incident to the Church Division among the Godly.
as division amongst godly, able, and orthodox men, as betwixt Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 15. The Disciples of Christ and the disciples of John; yea,
oftentimes betwixt the Disciples of Christ amongst themselves. And afterward
the instances of Augustine and Jerome, Chrysostom and Epiphaneus, with many
others of later times, do demonstrat it. In the Old Testament we find Job and
his friends keeping up a long dispute right sharply. And, Numb. 12. something
is recorded of a division between Moses, Aaron and Miriam.

2. This Division may continue long, and come to It may continue long, and come
to a great height.
a great height, that is, it may be very sharp, although it may be the rise
thereof be small; for, contentions are, as the letting out of waters, Prove. 17.
14. and they often grow, even amongst good men, so as to provoke much
sharpness against each other, and that with much confidence, as the instances
given do clear.

3. Though it be frequent to them to come to an height, yet they are not easily
removed, even amongst the best; This being true, Prove. 18. 19. That a brother
offended, is harder to be won than a strong city, and that their contentions
are as the bars of a castle, they are so strongly rooted. Hence, we see, that
there is no breaking off between Job and his friends* till the Lord interpose;
there is no composing of the matter between Paul and Barnabas, but their
contention continues so hot, that they must separate; Neither is And not
easily removed
there any thing expressly recorded of their meeting together again, although
they had long been of most intimate fellowship as nearest colleagues in their
journeying and traveling in the Lords work, and that appointed thereto, even
by Himself extraordinarily, Acts 13. It is recorded, that Chrysostom and
Epiphaneus did sunder so imbittered one at the other, that Epiphaneus did wish,
That Chrysostom should not die a Bishop: He again did wish, That the other
might not see his home, to wit, Cyprus, to which he was then making his voyage;
both which accordingly fell out: which is a dreadful instance of this evil,
and looks like the Lords making use of their passion, to signify His
displeasure against both their distempers.

CHAP. II. Whence Divisions do arise, and how they are fostered and increased.
THis division does frequently arise, and is continued upon very small
occasions; for, it is not ordinarily gross heresies or palpable abominations,
that do draw godly and learned men to side in the defense thereof, but things
of lesser concernment; which we will find to be such as these, Various
apprehensions of inferior truths.


1. Some various and different apprehensions of truths, that are less
fundamental, such as was the debates about meats, genealogies, and other
questions in the primitive times, concerning which, there was no little
jangling even amongst good men; thus is it when Divines press too hotly some
truth, not simply necessary. It cannot be supponed, that all men who yet see
but in part should be of that same mind; and the Lord has left some things, as
it were, to be the matter of doubtful disputations, as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 14. 1. and though there be truth upon the one side of every debate, yet
considering that that is not always easily demonstrable, too peremptory deciding
and pressing of such things, cannot but occasion strife.

2. Sometimes it flows from the mistake of some The mistake of some
dispensations.
dispensations, and the suspecting of the sincerity and integrity one of
another; whereby sometimes men are engaged ere they wit, to maintain their
prejudice, and to lay the less weight upon light holden forth by others, It
was thus with Jobs friends, who, mis-interpreting Gods hand upon him, and
concluding uncharitably of his state, are brought to maintain an unwarrantable
These for making out of their point.

3. It may arise from different apprehensions about Different apprehensions
about some persons and things.
some persons, or from a different manner of doing the same thing, or from the
use-making of different persons; As when one would have such a man to be a
Minister, another does not think him worthy; When one does think such a man
deserves not to be a Minister, and another thinks that he does; when such
different thoughts about persons, means or manner of doing things, (which are
incident to the best of men) are followed with different actings accordingly,
and none does cede to another, then necessarily follows contention and
division* So Paul thought John Mark not meet to be taken to the Ministry again
in their company, seeing he had left them; Barnabas did think him meet and would
have him, whereupon the contention and division followed. Often also, we find
in the Church History, that good men have divided upon this, that some would
ordain such to be Presbyters or Bishops, whom others did not think worthy of
that office; and that some would not condemn persons or writings, which others
did condemn: for, learned men often think the condemning of a person or
doctrine which is owned by them, or the refusing to condemn a person or
doctrine which they do condemn, to be a reflection on them, and that therefore
they are engaged to deal with such, as with the principal party: It is marked,
that the rise of Chrysostom and Epiphaneus their difference, was, That
Chrysostom did not so go alongs in the condemning of Origin, and his writings
as the other did; and that some of the Clergy of Constantinople had refused
the same: whereupon Epiphaneus began in preaching to enveigh against the other,
which came to that height that is said. Also, sometimes some have been too
favorable constructers of deluders, as if they had been of some honesty,
whereby difference has grown with others who knew the deceit, As witness the
first Divisions that were in Phrygia concerning Montanus, because some being
simple, and not knowing that prophecy, in an extraordinary manner, was laid
aside by the Lord, did dispute, that possibly there might be some more than an
ordinary thing in his way, and that he might through access to God do such
things, when as yet they were not infected with his errors: This did breed a
schism; when others necessarily behoved to condemn the deeds, and also the
persons* as not serving the Lord, but their own bellies, Romans 16. ver. 16 17.

4. It usually arises from secret grudges at being Heart burnings at the
credit of others.
slighted, or heart-burnings at another credit and reputation beyond them,
and sometimes indeed, not because of the fact done, but because such persons
were the doers thereof, and one way or other springs from the root of pride,
envy, or emulation, which has many branches whereby it venteth its malignant
distempering disposition in sundry shapes. It is indeed sad that such things
should be amongst the Disciples of Christ yet often we see, that this, Who
should be the greatest, was a bone of contention among them, especially when
some had evidenced their too great pronenesse and inclination to prefer
themselves to others; This also had influence upon that muteny which Aaron and
Miriam did stir up against Moses, Numb. 12. and it is the Lords word by the
wise mouth of Solomon, Only by pride comes contention.

5. Too much insisting on, and aggreging of the Aggreging the infirmities of
others
infirmities or opinions of others, and loadening and aggreging them with many
fearful consequences, has much influence upon this, especially where words
are wrested beside the intention and sense of the speaker, because such an
humor shows little love and respect to the person, and by the nature of the
work, does tend to hold him forth as odious, ignorant, absurd, or some way
despicable; which even good men, being but men, are not easily brought to
digest. We see this in Job's friends, who frequently carp at his expressions,
and study to aggrege them, which indeed were not always altogether excusable;
yet their scope (at least, in the work) was, to represent them and him much
more absurd, than indeed they were. And this was in these debates between
Augustine and Jerome, and usually is where such differences are, as too many
reproachful and bitter differences now in the Church, almost every where, do
hold forth.

6. They are occasioned by a carnal and factiouslike A factious vindicating of
truth.
pleading for, and vindicating even of Truth. Often it is not the matter
whereabout godly and learned men debate, that makes division, (for, there may
be difference where there is no division) but it is a carnal manner of
prosecuting either side of the difference, even that side whereon the truth
does lie, that does engender the division; and often, we see men differing
about greater points than others do, and yet carrying so as it cannot be called
Division. It Is marked, 1 Cor. 3. that some were for Paul, some for Apollos,
some were for none but Christ; and yet this is counted a side of the faction
as well as any of the other; not because being for Christ is wrong, but because
that factiously they walked under that pretext: Which we may take up in these
respects, 1. When a man too peremptorily presses his light upon others, or
upon a Church, in a matter that is not fundamental, or necessary, which is
condemned, Romans 14. 22. when men in these debates keep not their faith, or
light, to themselves, but do trouble and distract others therewith. 2. It is,
when men too vehemently press such a thing, as if the contrary thereof, or
those who maintain the same, were intolerable; and so in a fiery violent way
seek to bear down that which is indeed an error, though of infirmity. It is
marked by some that write Church History, and Augustine is of that same mind,
That Stephanus, Bishop of Rome, did more hurt to the Church by his too vehement
opposing of Cyprian's error (which was, That those that were baptized by
Heretics, or Schismatics, ought again to be baptized) because he did thereby
hazard the dividing and renting of the Church, by refusing communion with such
as were against him, than Cyprian did in his maintaining of his error;
Because, though it was still his opinion, he did meekly and condescendingly
carry in it, with respect to the unity of the Church. 3. This is also, when
things are followed with Sentences and Censures on Undue Censures.
the opposite opinion, and the abbetters thereof, as if it were a matter of
Faith. It Is known what influence those Sentences of Victor, Bishop of Rome, had
upon renting of the Church, and stating that divisive distinction betwixt the
East and West Church, and that for a matter of nothing, to wit, What day of the
month precisely Easter was to be kept; and he was for that sharply reproved,
even by Iraeneus, who was of that same judgment with him: And many such
instances are in History. 4. It is, when in the Leaving the matter and falling
upon reflections.
prosecution of such things, men leave the matter, and fall on personal
reflections, and become bitter in these respects, as to cast-up pride and
arrogance hypocrisy, ignorance, heresy, or erroneousnesse* or some other
personal fault, if any be known or imputed to them or one way or other to
slight them and make them despicable: So Aaron and Miriam murmur against
Moses, Numb. 12. that he had married an Ethiopian woman, that he seemed to
slight them, as if God had only spoken by him, and not by them also;
Epiphaneus also did upbraid Chrysostom with hypocrisy; Jerome hugely revileth
Vigilantius, whose tenants seem to be as near truth as his are; so it was
between Demetrius and Theophilus, when in the matter of fact, each gives to
other the lie. 5. It is, when the manner of carrying on a thing, is factious,
as endeavoring, to make sides and parties under hand, and indirect dealing to
engage others in their Engaging of others.
differences, and to stir up men by such means against others: It is like it
was so in Corinth, even amongst the people who adhered not to false teachers;
It is marked also in that vehement bitter contention that was between Jerome
and Ruffinus, that he did endeavor by all means, to waken hatred against
Ieromes person, and to defame his writings more than in any convincing way to
make out his point; and yet all this arose from Jerome his alleging the other
to be a favourer of Origens heresy, because he had translated some books of
Origens, which was indeed condemned by others as being dangerous; yet seeing
Ruffinus did disclaim these errors, and deny that he approved them* there was
no such ground to press him with i^* and this became the occasion of that
irreconciliable hatred, which was never removed; in which also it is marked,
that Jerome does object to the other, obscurity, and harshnesse of style,
adding withal many other sleighting expressions.

7 It may be by the imprudencie of such as have Too much liking of some upon
fair pretenses.
good affection: As, 1. expressing too much good liking of some corrupt men,
because they pretend fairly: Thus the Church was divided in Phrygia for
Montanus, because some did too imprudently construct well of him, as if indeed
he and his Prophetesses had truly had the gift of prophecy; others again
vehemently upbraided them for it. 2. It is when things are pressed
unseasonably, or in an offensive manner, without respect to the manner of
things if they be satisfied in the matter. There followed many divisions upon
the back of the most famous Council, (which made Greg. Nazianzen to say, He
never desired to see many Bishops together) and the Centuriators give this
reason or occasion, Dum quidam fidem Nicenam imprudenter urgebant, alii eam
acriter impugnabant.

8. Too much peremptorinesse where there may be Peremptoriness without
condescending.
some condescending, has much hand in this; when men become not all things (so
far as is lawful) unto others. It is marked in the Church History, That
sometimes too tenacious adhering unto Canons and Councils, by some who would
not condescend in a syllable, when others did condemn the matter, has been in
this respect prejudicial; Such was the cause of the schism betwixt the East and
West Church, and particularly the tenacious adhering in all things, even as to
the very manner, to the Council of Chalcedon* (which was indeed a famous and
orthodox Council in the matter) The former instance clears this also.

9. Sometimes this does come from dissatisfaction Dissatisfaction about some
persons
in some particulars of Government, as when some have been displeased that such
and such men, formerly cast out, should have been again admitted to communion;
or, that a person, cast out of communion in one place, has been admitted in
another; This is frequent, as after instances may clear.

10. It is often occasioned by the encroachment of Mutual encroachment.
one upon another in the exercise of their power, as to preach, ordain, and
such like, within the bounds of others beside, or without their knowledge, or
against their will.

11. It has sometimes arisen from the Churches meddling in extrinsick or
unnecessary things; and seldom Meddling in extrinsick things.
Churchmen have been too much taken up and occupied about such things, but it
has had such a consequent: As when they are too much taken up about ceremonies
and things not commanded, as Easter was; or about indifferent things, as the
prescribing of forms in every thing* and such like; Or, about precedence in
Government, and what might conduce to the external splendour of the Church in
immunities, privileges, fabrics, dotations, etc. whereof instances are very
many. Or, when Churchmen have become too pragmatick in civil things, or affairs
of the world, thereby to carry on a temporal grandour in the spiritual
Kingdom of Christ; which was often the rise and occasion of difference amongst
the Apostles; and although there was scarce access to this occasion in respect
of practice while Magistrates were heathens, yet in after times, this is
evident; and sundry divisions followed upon such occasions, as the approving or
condemning of such and such an Emperors Election; the transferring of the
Empire from East to West, or from one Family to another.

12. New manner of expressions, or new moulds of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
different from what has Novelty of expressions and notious.
been formerly delivered, have given occasion to this; that is, when there is
either a new form of speaking, and an affectation of novelty in words*
different from the form of sound words which Ministers ought to hold fast; or,
when things are so proposed, as if all former moulds had been defective, and
all other Divines in their Preaching and Writings were nothing to such. It
seems that this newfanglenesse of speech had no less influence in dividing
the Church of Corinth, and begetting factions therein, than the diversity that
was in the matter, wherein they are not so generally found guilty, as being
carried away with error, as, of being itched with a humane kind of eloquence
in the manner of Preaching. This same also may be in Writtings, and indeed when
some cry up one manner or mould, and some others the contrary, it may breed
siding and division, even as well as diversity of Doctrine may do. And it is
not for naught that the Lord has commanded simplicity in the manner, and the
holding fast of the form of sound words, even as he has commanded soundness
in the matter; and oftentimes there does arise no less tastinesse or itching
amongst people, nor less emulation amongst Ministers, from the one than from
the other.

CHAP. III. The height of evil that division brings.
HAving now seen a little the rises of this evil* we may look to the height it
has come to from such beginnings: which we may consider in these steps. 1. It
engendere^ heat, strife and Heat and contention.
contention; and in that respect, makes men carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 2. It breeds
alienation in affection, and separateth these in fellowship that have been most
intimate, Alienation
as if their companying together had lost that sweetness and refreshfulnesse
that sometimes it had* and thereby even their Christian communion is
interrupted; both those may be seen in that strange and hot contention, which
came to this height betwixt Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15. 3. It breeds
jealousy Jealousy.
and suspicion of one another actions and intentions, yea, it may be, of the
sincerity of their state: it breeds envy at one another prosperity and
respect, and makes them less weighted with any cross or adversity that the
other falls into. Paul is suspected, not only by the false teachers, but even
by the professors, to be an enemy to them, and not to be single in his designs
amongst them: some have counted others hypocrites, as is before marked. 4. It
brings forth violent and virulent expressions, Virulent expressions.
and reflections upon each other, and greater heat almost is not to be found
than amongst differing Divines, that yet do aggree in the main. It is a wonder
to read some of the expressions that are betwixt Jerome and Ruffin, and betwixt
Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, and Theophilus Bishop of Jerusalem, with many
others; or to consider the sad regrates that Basilius, Gregorius Nazeanzenus,
and others, have of these differences; something may be seen of it in the
instance of Job and his friends. And what there is for the present amongst
Orthodox Divines abroad, and in this Island, I fear, out of honor to the men,
to mention them* yet I suppose such things may be read in the Prefaces and
Writings of the most eminent Divines, as may make the hearts of all to loath
such divisions. 5. It has come to that height, as Personal reflections.
not to spare to publish even personal reflections; yea sometimes, it has
come to that, that men have condem ned deeds in others, after such begun
differences, which formerly they did highly commend in them; (thus their
estimation and construction of their actions, does ebb and flow according to
their estimation of their persons) It is marked of Demetrius of Alexandria*
that whiles he and Origin did continue in fellowship* he was a great commender
of that deed of Origen's, to wit, his gelding of himself while he was young:
yet after difference arose betwixt them, upon very mean grounds, ( Origin not
being come to his grossness) he did most vehemently object that to him in
Imprecations and instigation of the civil Power.
his Writings. 6. Often in has come that length, that they have imprecated
evil to one another, as in the instance of Chrysostom and Epiphanius; sometimes
they have informed and most vehemently instigated civil Powers against one
another, that they might procure their deposition, banishment, and such like,
as Ruffinus did against Jerome, the Clergy at Antioch against Flavianus, and
some at Constinople, particularly Severianus, did stir up the Emperor against
Chrysostom. 7. Also, it has been followed in Councels and Synods Sharp
censures inflicted.
by the Sentences of Deposition and Excommunication, as was frequent in the
case of that debate about Easter, and in that debate betwixt Stephanus and
Cyprian; Tertullian also was Sentenced upon a prejudice, without just ground;
so was Chrysostom deposed even by Bishops that were not heterodox; and many
others. 8. It has extended to divide Churches Renting of whole Churches.
although it began amongst Ministers* and has come to that height, that they
have withdrawn from the communion of one another, and have chosen different
Bishops and Ministers without communion one with another, or without dependence
one upon another, and yet neither of them have been Heretics, nor professed
Schismatics, but because of some dissatisfaction, it may be, with the person,
or ordination of such a Minister; or upon some mistake of a particular act of a
Council, even when both did acknowledge the same, as particularly is marked to
have been betwixt Eustachius of Antioch, and Eusebius of Pamphilia; and again
at Antioch in the case of Miletus and Paulinus; and again betwixt Flavianus and
Fury of their followers.
others; which is marked to be in the fourth Century. 9. It has extended to
great heat and fury, even amongst the followers of each other; whereby much
jealousy, heat and dissension has been occasioned. Furious madness of Divines.
10. In both those there has been such a fervor, and as it were fury, that
there has been no uptaking nor removing of the same: And although we find
difference to have arisen from little, even amongst good men, yet often we will
find that most difficultly it has been removed, but for many generations it
has continued, when the first authors have been away, and that with very great
heat, as almost in all the instances given, so that, that sweet and moderate
Divine Melancthon, did usually call the difference of Divines rabies
Theologorum, and at his death did bless himself, that amongst other sins and
miseries he was to be fred from this rabies or fury of Divines, which was
evermore sadder to him than any opposition of open adversaries. 11. Usually, it
has diverted Diversion of them from their main work.
most serious Divines, both from the pressing of piety, and reproving of vice;
as also from maintaining of truth against open adversaries, and the pursuing of
their errors. Augustine does complain of this to Jerome, and does for this
end, as it were, crave a cessation; and it cannot be otherwise, for ^uch
debates do not profit these that are occupied therein. Heb. 13. ver. 9. and
when men's edge is hot and sharp against others in such particular differences,
it cannot but cool and blunt them in more weighty things, and is no little part
of the devils subtilty to make way for error and profanitie, thus to entangle
Ministers. Which occasion he has ever taken to sow tares, which that great
Father and Divine Basilius does condole to this purpose, That while there was
concord in every occupation, only in the Church and amongst Ministers there was
dissension, and that so hot, that no commiseration of the Flock, which was set
upon, and drawn away by perverse men, was prevalent with them, to abstain from
such differences. 12. Hence, it has followed, that though Both schism and
heresy following division.
there has been no considerable difference upon the matter at the first, yet
notwithstanding it has grown and come to a height* and that in respect both of
Schism and heresy; And it is rare to find in History, that a division has
continued long, but it has turned to separation in communion, and a Schism;
and again, Schism has not continued long, but it has brought forth heresy,
for divided practices lead men to lay down and maintain such principles as may
defend them, and the band of unity being broken, there is no stay or hold,
because, as that forenamed Father Basilius says, men take on them then to
speak, write, and do as they please. 13. Although sometimes the Commonly both
sides faulty, though not equally.
fault of division may be more on one side than another, yet seldom is any side
free, at least, in the manner of prosecution, and therefore often it turns in
the close to the hurt of both, and the one side becomes more schismatic and
erroneous, at least, in many of their members, as fell out in the case of the
Novatians, and Donatists. The other side again, have often become more cold and
secure in the practice of holiness, carnal and formal in pursuing ceremonies
and external things, with less affection and life in the main, because the
edge of their zeal was bended toward these differences; and generally people
have been stumbled and offended by them; and by the miscarriage of some
affectionate persons, men more formal and not very zealous in the main thing,
have come to have more weight and sway in the Government of the Church; and
thus we see that after these hot debates that were in the Church about lesser
things, schisms and heresies grew up on the one side; luke warmness,
formality, and inclination to ceremonies, and a formal lazy way of worship,
did grow up and increase in the Church, upon the other side. 14. Though we
Division hardly cured.
find men sadly regrate these, yet was there always a difficulty to get them
removed; there being often a kind of inconsideratnesse whereby the public good
has been overlooked, and men have walked too much by particular inclination
and affection, and so have come to hate whom formerly they praised, and to
praise whom formerly they hated; by which the Ordinances have become
weightlesse to all; and the Ministers, who sometimes were counted a gazing, a
reproach and the offscouring of all men because of afflictions, have become
much more despicable because of their own intestine divisions, as one of the
Fathers does pathetically expostulate for the dissentions of his time, writing
to Nazeanzen.

CHAP. IIII. The causes why Division usually comes to so great an height.
WE may now enquire what be the causes why Divisions usually come to such a
height, and are so difficulty removed, even amongst men that are affectioned in
the work of Christ, and otherwise sound, zealous, and sober; which is indeed
strange, especially considering, that they do often see the evil, regrate it,
and profess their desire of a remedy themselves? In answering to this, we are
to look, 1. to the Lords sovereign hand even in this. 2. To what accession
there is to it from those that differ. 3. To some occasional accidental
causes that concur therein. 4. We may consider the strength of the tentation in
respect of some other circumstances.

1. That the Lord has a Sovereign hand therein, cannot be denied, and that in
these two respects, not The severaign^y of Godtrying good and bad.
to insist in all, 1. As it is a trial whereby both men's soundness and
unsoundnesse have occasion to be manifested; This is asserted, 1 Cor. 11. as a
reason of the necessity of schisms and divisions, as may be gathered by
comparing, ver. 18, with 19. But this we insist not on* 2. The Lord has a
judicial hand Chastizing also and punishing.
in it, that is, as He orders divisions for the just chastisement and
punishment of some, even as was formerly said of heresies and delusions; and to
this purpose, we may consider that woe which flows from offenses unto the
world, to relate especially unto divisions amongst Church Officers, as the
subjoyning thereof to the contention amongst the Apostles does evince; and in
the nature of it, and in respect of the consequents that follow thereon, It is
indeed a woe, and a very great woe unto the world, and an evidence of the Lords
displeasure; when thus in His anger, divisions come amongst Ministers or
People, as it is, Lam. 4. 16. Which we will find true in these respects. 1. It
looks angry like against Ministers; for, thereby they become despicable, the
Lords countenance and presence seems to be withdrawn, and much carnalnesse of
frame, and many other evils steal in; which do both eat up much of that inward
liveliness which other ways they might have, and also discompose that
tranquillity and composedness of mind, which love and unity entertain, and
does propose Ministers unto people, as men destitute of that badge, whereby
they may be known to be the Lords Disciples, to wit. love to one another. 2. It
is often a Yea plaguing the world.
great snare to many carnal Professors; for, thereby some are hardened in
profanity, and become Atheists, as if all that is spoken by Ministers
concerning Religion, were not to be believed; Therefore the Lord prays for
unity, and against differences amongst His Disciples, for this cause, That the
world might believe that Christ was sent by God, and that these are loved of
him, Joh. 17. 21, 23. which imports, that this plague of Atheism follows in
the world upon such divisions. Again, others are stumbled so, as they cast at
the Truth preached by them, and thereby become a prey to be carried about with
every wind of doctrine; for preventing of which, Ministers, and union among
Ministers are required, Ephesians. Division burdens the godly.
4. 1, 2, 3. with 11, 12, 13, 14. 3. It becomes an burden, grief and offense
to the weak, such division being a main stumbling block to the little ones that
believe, Matthew. 18. 1, and 6. 4. It proves a Hardens the adversaries of the
truth.
great confirmation and ground of hardening to the adversaries of the truth,
who are thereby exceedingly hardened, and brought to applaud themselves in
their own way, as if such divided instruments could not be of the one body, the
Church, which is guided by one Spirit; And this was cast up by heathens in the
primitive times, as we may find by the apologies of many of the Fathers; and
the same way has been followed by Antichrist and his followers unto this day;
they insult in nothing more than the divisions of the Orthodox* and are more
proud of nothing than their pretended unity, which they make a mark of the true
Church. And when all these are considered, we suppose, it may be evident that
such divisions are, when they are, a great plague unto the Church, and may
justly be called a woe unto the world.

We need not insist upon characters of a judicialllike division, seeing hardly
there is division in a Church, but it is judicial in some part; Yet these
things may be considered to this purpose, 1. When Characters of judicial
division.
the division is amongst the more eminent and godly men, as amongst the
Disciples. 2. If the matter be light comparatively for which the difference is
kept up, as Augustine calls that with some Donatists, parva dissentio, as
to the matter or occasion, which was yet great in its effects, Epist. 203. 3.
If it be for dominion, or pre-eminence, or such things as may look carnal like
before men, like that, Matthew. 18. 1, etc. Or, 4. if the manner of following it
be carnal, or irrationall-like without that respective tenderness of
edification and offense, which rationally might be expected from such men. 5.
When there are many palpable convincing reasons, and that in respect of the
particular time and case, which might draw men from such divisions. Or, 6. when
sometimes healing is essayed, and beyond probable reasons and expectation, it
does break off and turn worse, when it appeared to be near a close. 7. When it
spreads, and comes to occupy and take up Professors, it may be, beyond many
more concerning things. This especially is discernable, when the division
arises suddenly upon the back of a great calm, and after such sins as may
procure the interrupting thereof, and when it comes, in an unexpected way,
from such persons, and upon such an occasion, as, it may be, none could have
looked-for, or thought of; when it is under afflictions, and other cases and
reproaches, as the Jews divisions were, even when besieged by the Romans, and
when under them, as Josephus writes. These and such like may evidence somewhat
to be judicial therein. Because, 1. It does so further what is penal the more
in all the former respects, and it cannot but have such effects. 2. Because
there being no other probable reason how ordinarily such a thing may come to
pass, the Lords hand is to be acknowledged therein so much the more, when even
His Servants are drunken but not with wine, and He has powered upon them the
spirit of deep sleep, and covered even the Prophets and Seers therewith, as the
word is, Isa. 29. 9, 10. and when they are as so many wild bulls caught in a
net, full of the fury of the Lord, and of the rebuke of their God, as it is,
Isa. 51. ver. 20. Whereby it comes to pass, that neither one sort or other
can particularly understand the duty called-for in reference to their healing,
more than if all visions, and directions concerning the same were sealed up,
as, Isa. 29. ver. 10, 11. and Isa. 59. 10. And none of all Zions sons are in
capacity to take her by the hand, Isa. 51. 18. 3. Besides these two, the Lord
sometimes has a wise design for promoving of His work, even by occasion of
such divisions, as thereby to make the Gospel to be spread further than
otherwise it had been; for, by discontents and differences, sometimes men have
been put to go elsewhere and preach the Gospel; and in that instance of Paul and
Barnabas their separating, this is brought about; the Gospel is preached by
both in their several journeys, which had not been so extended had they been
together; but this, and others of this kind being only proper to the Lords
sovereign wisdom, we will not insist on them,

In the second place, If we consider men's own accession Former guiltiness.
who are engaged in such divisions, that is manifold. 1. Men by former
guiltiness may procure the same, as by abuse of former unity, carnalnesse in
it, not improving of it for edification, pride and conceitedness of it as if it
could not be interrupted, not being thankful to God for it, nor praying for
continuance of it. These and such like, may draw on such a dreadful stroke as
division; wherefore not only is there a woe to the world because of offenses,
but also to him by whom they come, Matthew. 18. even when notwithstanding, the
necessity of them is asserted. 2. Some present sinful distemper in Ministers
frame, Present distempers.
or disposition, may have influence upon this, as it were disposing them the
sooner to take fire upon any occasion. As* 1. distance with God, and coldness
of love to Him, without which, love cannot be kept up with others in Him. 2.
Pride, conceitinesse, desire of pre^eminencie, respect and applause, which was
amongst the Apostles. 3. Which follows upon this, envy at the respect which
is given to others, or the weight that they have in the managing of matters,
and carnal emulation at their persons and actions. 4. There is a secret
discontentednesse at men's being slighted by others, or apprehending themselves
to be so. 5. There is a credulousnesse and readiness to receive wrong
impressions, a jealousy or suspicion of others in their designs, ends, or
particular respects to them; All which proceeding from want of charity, that
thinks not evil. etc. they cannot but some way dispose for division. 6. There
is an itching newfangle humor, not after new Doctrines, but after new
expressions, forms, or changes in other things. 7. There is sometimes a
prejudice at severity and strictness, as if it were pride, ambition, or
something that is intolerable; which is marked to be the cause of the Clergy
of Constantinople, their dissension with Chrysostom their (...): Of this kind,
to wit, sinful and disposing causes, are ignorance, imprudence,
tenaciousnesse, or self-willedness, and such like; whereby a Minister is the
easilier engaged, and the more difficul^ly brought off.

3. There are some acts whereby men have accession to the raising and
heightening of division, and oftentimes they are mutual: As, 1. some men's
doing Inconsiderat expressions or actings.
of some inconsiderate act, or writing some inconsiderate expression upon the
one hand; and others, too passionatly and vehemently exaggerating such a fact,
and condemning such an expression by a torturing deduction of absurdities
therefrom, beyond what was intended; So it was between Jerome and Augustine,
etc. 2. When some press severity in Discipline Severity in Discipline.
and Censures, somewhat too hotely, others, with no less discontent, repelling
the same. 3. When Sleighting of the persons, writings, or actings of others.
men sleightingly express their mind of the persons, writings or actings of
others; and they again are engaged by the like reflections, to vindicate the
same. 4. When men study not the instruction of themselves or others
affectionedly, but hunt after a kind of credit Hunting after credit.
to themselves, though with the reproach of others. 5. Little condescending to
remove mistakes Little condescending, etc.
and prejudices, abstinence from society, and fellowship with such as they
differ from in some particular; hasty preaching, and publishing differences of
small moment, as Epiphaneus, and some others, formerly cited, did, no
condescending in particular facts that might be condescended on, and such like.
6. Especially Acts that state schism
such acts as state a schism, and break communion in Government, Worship, and
other Ordinances, are exceedingly isntrumental in this. As, 1. to have
distinct Bishops or Ministers, Governors or Officers, and so to have opposite
Judicatories, and opposite Ordinations, which is often found to be the result
and great cherishment of divisions in the primitive times. Whereupon followed,
2. division in administration of Sacraments, when such and such could not
acknowledge men so ordained to be Ministers, and so could not communicate with
them, if they were ordained in opposition to them, or such as were ordained by
them: And this has a connection with such an act, because the acknowledging of
such to be lawfully ordained, would question their own Ordination. Whence, 3.
follow divided Congregations and meetings, according to the opposition amongst
Ministers, some meeting in one place, and some in another, and so withdrawing
communion one from another, although both do continue in the same Faith and
Government; As may be seen in several of these divisions mentioned at Antioch,
Constantinople, etc. Upon which again followed, 4. opposite preaching amongst
Ministers, each condemning others as Schismatics, and not to be kept commuon
with; one calling that a duty which the other called a sin, and matter of
humiliation, and contrarily: As also, mutual railing and reviling amongst the
followers of such sides, which often has come to tumults; whereby it appears
how great influence such things have upon division. Yea, 5. it has come to
divide families; Often Augustine regrateth in his Epistles, that their division
made the man and wife whom one bed did contain, in an incapacity to be
contained in the same Church, where the same faith was preached, and so he
urges it also in reference to parents, and children, and to masters and
servants. There are many more things might be named, as censuring of men upon
such difference; for, then often some adhere to them, which makes a rent, as
in these instances of Eustachius and Chrysostom is clear, urging the
condemning of some writings and tenants not fundamental; Thus the pressing of
the condemning of Origens writings (which are not supposed by some to have been
so gross as now these which are called his, are) did give much occasion of
contention and division amongst men, who otherwise did acknowledge all the
fundamental truths comprehended in the general Councels, and it is alike
also, did not agree with him in his grossest errors, yet would not judicially
condemn him, and others such like.

CHAP. V. What occasional means may have influence upon division amongst the
godly.
WE come now in the third place to consider, what occasional means may have
influence upon this division amongst godly men; And such may be, 1. Some
talebearers Talebearers
and secret whisperers, who may have much influence to alienate good men's
affections, by misrepresenting the words and actions of others, under pretext
of respect to them, when, in the mean time, it may be some particular
discontent that puts them on: It is marked, that one Serapion had much
influence to alienate Chrysostom and Severinus, who formerly were exceeding
entire, who suggesting to the first, many evidences of the others disrespect to
him, as if he had been endeavoring to draw the peoples affections from him;
and for that cause, picked out some words of Severinus, which being considered
alone, did sound grossly, but being considered in the Sentence as spoken by him*
they were not of such a meaning. 2. Often when differences arise amongst honest
men, there wants not many, who out of particular designs do then foment that
fire, especially such as from some other fear, take occasion to exaggerate such
a difference, because the sostering of that difference is the preventing of
what they fear: As for instance, Chrysostom had threatened the censuring of
many of his Fears of censurs.
Presbyters for their faults, whereupon they took the occasion of the
differences betwixt him and Epiphanius, Severinus, and others, to irritate and
stir up them against him, and to side with them in these differences; whereby
the division against him, and such as followed him, was maintained till it came
to the height thereof, yet were neither the differences betwixt him and these
other men, nor the persons of these other men his opposites respected by them,
further than served to their end of bearing him down, and so of preventing the
threatened and feared censure. 3. Sometimes Magistrates The influence of civil
Powers.
have had no little influence upon this, either by pretending to side with one
party in these differences against the other, when yet it was not these
differences but some other prejudice, as from free speaking or the like, which
did engage them. It is marked in that same case of Chrysostom, that the
Emperor and Empress did concur to bear down his followers, and those that
sided with him, because of some particular discontent at his free preaching,
for which cause they were zealous executers of the Synods Sentence; As these
again that were opposite to Chrysostom of the Clergy, did take no little
advantage of that discontent, which they knew the Empress had at him. Or on
the other side, they are sometimes accessory by weakening Government, and
giving men access to do what they will: when Basilius has regrated the great
differences of the Church in Julian, and Valens their times, and setting
himself to find out the cause thereof, he settleth on this word in the Book of
the Judges, In those days there was no King in Israel, every man did what
seemed good in his own eyes: which he does not speak simply, as if there had
been no Government; but that by such as was, no course was taken, as the
calling of Synods, or such like means, to restrain such things, but rather they
were entertained. 4. Sometimes also the peoples engaging Peoples engaging.
and siding in such differences, has no little influence to heighten and
lengthen the same; hence we find that in some debates, wherein Churchmen have
been alone engaged, there has been some stop; but when it has increased, to
the stating of parties amongst the people, it has ever been more difficult;
because so Ministers were the more encouraged and engaged to be tenacious; vea
sometimes fear of displeasing the people that adhered to them, has not wanted
its weight. Also, so it turned more easily to schism and faction in practice,
when one part of the people would only call such a man of their Judgment;
another part of the people, such another man of theirs; whereupon followed
great dissentions and factiousnesse in Elections, and opposite ordinations, by
Bishops of several judgments: Whereupon followed, 1. a rent in that particular
Church; one part withdrawing with their Bishop and Minister, and the other part
with theirs, and neither keeping communion with, but seeking to overturn one
another. And, 2. a rent among neighboring Bishops and Ministers, according as
they were pleased to admit either side to their communion, and acknowledge or
condemn either of the opposite ordinations. And, 3. Often also, there followed
opposite and eager applications Applications to Magistrates for ratisying
elections.
to the supreme Magistrates and Emperor, to have their own respective
Elections ratified, and that which was opposite, by his Authority, crushed;
which often has been followed with much bitterness, and sometimes not without
calumnies against good men; and also not without prejudice to the Churches
liberty, and advantage to corrupt men or Magistrates, that were not tender of
truth; who thereby had occasion to interest themselves, and advance their own
ends the more; and it is marked of Anastasius the Emperor, who was a
Monothelite, that he took occasion upon hot differences in the Church amongst
Divines, (who did in both sides differ from him, though one of them was but
sound) without respect to right or wrong, equally to endeavor the suppressing
of both by sending them into exile; and when Magistrates were more equal to and
tender of the Church, as Theodosius, Gratianus, etc. yet they were exceedingly
troubled with such adresses, and put to hear such complaint* even amongst and
against men fully Orthodox and sound, only differing in some particulars which
had brought on opposite ordinations, as in the cases of Miletius and Paulinus,
Eustachius and Flavianus, with their respective competitors: all which
concuring with that heat and fervor wherewith Churchmen do usually of
themselves follow their differences, did not a little contribute to the
heightening and lengthening of divisions and rents, upon the smallest
occasions. 5. Occuring Miscarriages of persons.
miscarriages of persons differing, have often had influence to increase and
continue a breach, that is, when some persons on either side become more gross
in other points of Doctrine, or in practice; or follow their designs by means
that seem gross and unwarrantable to the other; or when some of one side
express unjust calumnies on the other: this does exceedingly alienate
affections, confirm jealousies and suspicions, and readily does engender new
Questions and controversies; because some are led to oppose and condemn, and
others to defend such practices; therefore there must be opposite principles
suitable thereunto, and so they multiply from one step to another: whereby it
comes to pass, that often where there is but one difference at first, after a
time many do arise, which does make the removal of divisions to be always the
longer the more difficult: Whence we see, that seldom one difference continued
any time, but there was an addition of many, and that of greater concernment,
that, it may be, stuck, whenas the first rise might have been removed. 6.
Sometimes also occurring dispensations in providence Occuring dispensations of
providence.
will give occasion to this tenaciousnesse, as suppose there be a seeming
advantage on the one side to through their point, and bear down the other
without uniting, it is supposed to be conscience and prudence to make use of
the same: Hence we will find in History men more or less inclinable to unite,
as they apprehended their party to be more or less strong; sometimes also some
singular-like stroke upon the persons names or families of eminent opposers,
proves a confirmation to the others who escape, as if their way were more
approveable, and the others more remarkably condemned; for so are men ready to
misinterpret the most occasional thing, which for other ends may come upon any
with whom they differ. Thus Zuinglius his death did not only prove matter of
insulting to Papists, but even by Luther and others was misapplied; and
Carolostadius his ^oul defection, afterward became an occasion to harden many,
in condemning his condemning of keeping Images in Churches, though without any
worship; because, upon the back of that debate, Luther had set him forth as a
light, unsettled, unstable person, whose judgment was not to be valued; which
accordingly falling out, made many keep up the opinion contrary to his, as if
by his fall it had been ratified; And we think, that if either Chrysostom or
Epiphaneus their wishes to other respectively had fallen out but upon the one
side, it also might have had influence; but seeing both came to pass, we
conceive that thereby the Lord would keep men from being confirmed in their
differences upon such dispensations, and show himself angry at the carnalnesse
of good men, even in their smallest difference on both sides.

In the fourth place, we have to consider, wherein the strength of the
tentation to keep up division does ly, in respect of several circumstances that
may have influence, especially upon Church men.

1. There is engagement, credit, and such like, Personal credit acting under
(...) of zeal for God.
which steal in, and vent in heat and tenaciousnesse under other appearances,
as of (...) ^or Gods honor, respect to the credit of the Ministry, and of the
Ordinances: And in this it seems not to be any personal credit or respect
that s^ayeth them, but zeal for, and respect to the Master, as is insinuated in
the Disciples carriage, Luke 9 in their seeking to be avenged on the place that
would not receive Christ, by fire from heaven, ver. 54. and also in their
forbidding some to cast out devils* even in his name, because they thought it
not for Christ's honor, ibid. verse. 49.

2. The tentation has often with it great confidence Evil grounded confidence.
of the justness and equity of their own side* and of the unreasonablnesse of
their adversaries. There may be in part much ground for this, where the
controversy is some doubtful, disputable thing: How great confidence have
both Job and his friends in their debate, So that both of them are frequent in
desiring Gods decision, when as neither of them in both matter and manner was
fully approveable. Sometimes also there may be a persuasion very satisfying to
the party, when yet it is not from God; this was in Galatia, cap. 5. ver. 8. it
is like on both sides, even when they were biting and devouring one another;
for, we find often in experience, that a disputable thing, being for a time
pleaded for, will become as palpably clear, and altogether necessary to these
who have disputed for the same, because engagement bribes the light, and
perverteth even the wisdom of the just. Hence we see, that the longer one plead
for a thing, he becomes more confident therein, because his own pleading
secretly prevails more with himself* than reasons proposed by any others to
the contrary can.

3. There is a strength in the tentation, in this, that not only the matter is
thought just, but it is thought necessary and of great concernment, if it be,
1. a Question of the most circumstantiall truth, (if we may speak so) it
looks out as necessary, and a thing that cannot be quit* yea, even those who
are engaged to maintain that side where the error lies, will cry up the
controversy as in a high point of Christianity. Amongst the Fathers, these
that maintained the Millenarie opinion, and Christ's personal reign, thought it
a point of high concernment; Iustine Martyr in his Dialogue with Trifo, says,
he is no Christian, Orthodox in all things, who does think otherwise; and in
later Popish Writers, how is the necessity of oil, chrisme, and such like
pleaded for? which shows what impression the appearing weightinesse of such
things will have on them, as if it were a main foundation of Religion. And, 2.
if it be a matter of fact or Government, it is thought of such concernment for
the good of the Church that they cannot quit it, without being accessory to the
corruption and hurt, or to the marring of the authority thereof: Hence so often
are the faults and consequents of the adverse part aggreged; canons and
constitutions alleged to be broken, as we may see (amongst other instances) in
that debate betwixt Rome and Constantinople for precedence before Antichrist
was revealed, one alleging an act of Nice, the other, an act of the Council of
Chalcedon, and Rome pretending the interest of Saint Peter, and the good of the
universal Church. And, 3. if it be a A particular mistake of men^ persons and
actions.
difference about persons, as who is to be acknowledged Bishop or Minister, or
if such be lawfully ordained, deposed, etc. then such as they oppose, are
conceived to be notoriously heinous; and such as they are for, are believed to
be incomparably singular and eminent, and therefore it is no wonder that they
press vehemently their point, as thinking that much of the good or evil of the
Church does depend upon the admission, or rejection of such men respectively,
and this flows inadvertingly from the former differences; because, when they
are confident that themselves are right in a main point, they necessarily must
think these wrong and untender who are opposite in such a thing, and the hotter
the opposition grow, they think still each other the more grossly obstinate: By
this also they are disposed to hear and receive reports and mis-informations
concerning their opponents; whereby they come verily to believe, that they are
even in all other things, and in their very ends and designs, most gross. And,
I suppose, that beside the instances formerly given in all these respects, the
differences that arose first betwixt Luther and Carolostadius, and afterward
betwixt him and such as followed him on the one side, and Zuinglius, Calvin and
others upon the other side, do fully demonstrate this; How little were these
beginnings at first, and yet how were even the smallest differences aggreged,
and the persons differing mistaken, even before these differences came to the
height which they are at? And we may observe also, that this mistake of men's
persons and actions, and bitterness that follows thereupon, is most
ordinarily discernable to be upon that side, where there is least to be said in
conscience and equity for the defense thereof.

4. Add to these a conviction of singleness, that A conviction of singleness
in pro^cuting and adhering.
persons may seem to themselves to have in all the former steps, wherein there
may be no positive, corrupt end proposed, nor any palpable dissimulation in
their professions, entertained or approven by them: but as they have some
confidence of the equity of their side; so may there be an apprehended
testimony of their own singleness in the following thereof: and there is a
great strength in the tentation to continue division, that lies here; for,
when men apprehend their own singleness and straightness, and, it may be,
have access to God, and have liberty to pray, even in reference to such
things, it is not easy for a man to stop himself in that way; and yet it
cannot be thought, but amongst the instances of such divisions that are given,
that men on both sides had a single end and mind, did pray and had access in
prayer; yea, no question, many of them might go to heaven with such differences
on both sides; for, we will find them continue zealous in such, even to death.
Neither ought this to be thought strange; for, the best but know in part, and
are subject to mistakes, and their zeal and singleness is squared according to
their knowledge: It was such zeal, that is not according to knowledge (though
in the most fundamental things) that made Paul and others, with a kind of
singleness, persecute the Church; therefore proportionally, there may be a
zeal and singleness in lesser things when there is ignorance of them.

5. After engagement the tentation is strengthened Fear of losing cre dit by
relenting.
by this, lest, by after* ceding, their former practice in being so eager, be
condemned, and they lose the weight of their Ministry in other things, and
their respective followers, which possibly may be more tenacious and z^alous
than themselves, should be irritated and provoked; which things look to them as
greater pr^judices, even to the work of the Gospel, than ^eir continuing
divided. It is written of Luther in his life, That being in conference with
Melancthon and others in his last voyage, he did acknowledge to them, that he
had been too vehement and peremp^ory in the Doctrine of the Sacrament; and when
they urged him then to publish something concerning h^ same, he replied. That
he feared by that to diminish the authority and weight of what he had else
appeared into for God, (...) therefore did ^orbear it* wit^all allowing
Melancth^n after his death, to do in that as he thought fit:

6. Sometimes also, the tentation is strengthened by Fear of hurting their
followers.
apprehended consequents of hurt and prejudice to these that side with them in
such a thing from others, in case there should be ceding in such and such
particulars for union, or that by so doing, they might make themselves and
their cause odious to others, who possibly may be thought to have more
respective thoughts of them, because of their differing in such things from
others. It is written of Luther, that he gave this as a main reason why he
kept up the Sacramentary difference, and would not unit with Calvin and
others in that Head, because, said he, that opinion which the Sacramentaries
(as they were called) hold, is generally more hateful than that of
Consubstantiation, and will make the Princes and others more obnoxious to
malice and hatred.

7. It strengthens the tentation also, when men The tentation strengthened by
looking-on the failings of opposits.
do not look upon the difference simply in it self, but comparatively with
respect to the principles and carriages of others their opponents, and by
considering things that are displeasing in them and their way, they are made
the more tenacious, and brought to justify themselves the more. Hence it is in
such divisions, that the great stresse of debates lies in reflections,
criminations and recriminations, as if this were the only vindicating argument,
They that are opposite to us in many things of their carriage are wrong,
Therefore our way is right, or we have reason to divide from them; And hence it
is, that almost necessarily such reflections are used in such debates, where
the matter is not of such moment and evidence, as the most convincing defensive
arguments upon either side, as in these debates, between Jerome and Ruffinus,
cited, where there is no dispute on either side but criminations on both; Also
in the Donatists their reflections, this may be observed.

8. In such differences also, men are ready to think Hope of the ceding of
others.
that the other should and will cede to them, and will not hazard division upon
so little a thing. Hence, many have been drawn on to division from small
beginnings, which they would not have yielded to, had they known the
consequents thereof, or had they not expected that the other should have
yielded, wherein being disappointed, the engagement thereto becomes more
strong, and the division more irreconciliable. This is marked of Victor, of
whom it is said, that he had not been so peremptory, had he not supposed, that
in such a thing the other should have yielded.

CHAP. VI. What be the sad effects of division, and the necessity of
endeavoring unity.
HAving now some way discovered the nature and causes of the evil of division,
it may be easily conjectured what will be the effects thereof, which ever have
been most deplorable, as to the torturing of these that are engaged, to the
scandalizing of the weak, to the hardening and breaking of the neck of many
profane light persons, to the spoiling of the Church in its purity, Government,
order and beauty of her Ordinances, and which is more, to the wearing out of
the life and power of Religion; yea, which is above all, there is nothing that
does more tend to the reproach of the blessed Name of our Lord Jesus, that
makes Christianity more hateful, that rendereth the Gospel more unfruitful,
and more marreth the progress and interest of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus;
and, in a word, does more shut out all good, and let in by an open door every
thing that is evil into the Church, than this woeful evil of division does,
according to the word, Iam. 3. 16. Where envy and strife is, there is
confusion, and every evil work. And we are persuaded, that who has read the
Scriptures, and the many and great motives whereby union is pressed, and have
considered the Fathers what great weight they lay upon unity, and with what
horror they mention division, even as maximum malum, or the greatest evil that
can befall the Church; Or, have observed in Church History, the many sad
consequents and effects that have followed upon this, and the lamentable face
of the Church under the same: when friends thought shame, and were made faint;
enemies were encouraged and delighted, and on-lookers were either provoked to
mock at, or pity the same; Or, who have had some taste in experience of the
bitter fruits thereof, will, and if they be not altogether stupid, cannot but
be convinced of the many horrible evils, that are in this one evil of division.
Sure there is no evil does more suddenly and inevitably overturn the Church
than this; which makes her fight against her self, and eat her own flesh, and
tear her own bowels: for, that a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand,
is the infallible maxim of Him that was greater and wiser than Solomon. And
when things are compared, it will be found, there is no more compendious way to
blast the fruit of Ordinances, when they cannot be removed or corrupted, and by
so doing, to destroy and carry souls headlong, than this, That a Church in her
Ministers and Members should be engaged thus, to bite and devour one another,
and to counteract to the actings one of another; This we suppose will not be
denied.

It will also readily be granted, That it is the duty The necessity of
endeav^ring unity, granted by all.
of all Christians, especially of Ministers of the Gospel, to endeavor the
preserving of unity, and the preventing of division, and the recovering of
unity, and removing of division, by healing of the breach when it is made.
Never did men run to quench fire in a City, lest all should be destroyed, with
more diligence, than men ought to bestir themselves to quench this in the
Church; never did mariners use more speed to stop a leak in a ship, lest all
should be drowned, than Ministers especially, and all Christian men, should
have to stop this beginning of the breaking in of these waters of strife, lest
thereby the whole Church be overwhelmed; And if the many evils which follow
thereupon, the many commands whereby union is pressed; yea, the many entreaties
and obtestations whereby the holy Ghost does so frequently urge this upon all,
as a thing most acceptable to Him, and profitable to us; If, I say, these and
many other such considerations, have not weight to convince of the necessity of
this duty, to prevent, or heal a breach, We cannot tell what can prevail with
men, that profess reverence to the great and dreadful Name of God, conscience
of duty, and respect to the edification of the Church, and to their own peace
at the appearance of the Lord in the great Day, wherein the peacemakers shall
be blessed; for, they shall be called the children of God.

CHAP. VII. General Grounds leading to Unity.
BUt now, it may be of more difficulty, to speak particularly, to what indeed
is duty, at such a time when a Church lies under rents and divisions. For,
though the general be granted, yet often, The cure of division most difficult.
it is difficult to take up the particular cure, and yet more difficult singly
to follow the same: It being still more easy to prescribe rules to others, than
to follow them our selves, especially in such a case, when spirits are in the
heat and fervor of contention, whereby they are some way drunken with
affection to their own side, and prejudice at the others, and distracted* as it
were, with a sort of madness in pursuing their adversaries, as that great and
meek Divine Melancthon did express it, so that it is hard to get affections,
that are in such a temper, captivated to the obedience of light. And though we
will not take on us to be particular and satisfying in this, wishing and hoping
that it may be more effectually done by some other; yet, having come this
length, we shall, in an abstracted manner, consider some things in reference
thereunto, and endeavor to hold forth what we conceive to be duty, especially
to the Ministers of the Gospel, that have interest in such a Church; As also
what may be required of others, that may possibly think themselves less
concerned therein: Wherein we shall keep this order, 1. we shall lay down some
general Grounds, which we suppose as granted. 2. We shall premit some
preparatory endeavors agreeable to the same. 3. We shall speak negatively to
what ought not to be done, or ought to be forborne. 4. Positively to the healing
means called-for in reference to several sorts of division, with some questions
incident thereupon. And lastly, We shall consider the grounds that do press
the serious and condescending application of these, or other healing means in
such a case.

The first general ground, which we take for An absolute necessity laid upon a
rent Church to unite.
granted, is this, That by way of precept there is an absolute necessity of
uniting laid upon the Church, so that it falls not under debate, Whether a
Church should continue divided or united in the These? more than it falls
under debate, Whether there should be preaching, praying, keeping of the
Sabbath, or any other commanded duty; seeing that union is both commanded as a
duty, and comm^nded, as eminently tending to the edification of the Church, and
therefore is so frequently joined with edification? Nor is it to be asked by a
Church, what is to be done for the Churches good, in a divided way, thereby
supposing a dispensation, as it were, to be given to division, and a forbearing
of the use of means for the attaining thereof; or rather supposing a stating or
fixing of division, and yet notwithstanding thereof, thinking to carry on
edification? It is true, where union cannot be attained amongst orthodox
Ministers, that agree in all main things, (for, of such only we speak)
Ministers are to make the best use of the opportunities they have, and during
that to seek the edification of the Church; Yet, that men should by agreement
state a division in the Church, or dispense therewith, and prefer the
continuing of division, as fitter for edification than union, we suppose is
altogether unwarrantable. 1. Because, that is not the Lord's Ordinance, and
therefore cannot be gone about in faith, nor in it can the blessing be
expected, which the Lord does command to those that are in unity, Psalm. 133. 2.
Because Christ's Church is but one Body, and this were deliberately to alter
the nature thereof: and although those who deny this Truth may admit of
division; yea, they cannot have union, that is proper Church-union, which is
union in Government, Sacraments, and other Ordinances, because union, or
communion in these, does result from this principle; yet it is impossible for
those that maintain that principle of the unity of the Catholic visibleChurch,
to own a divided way of administrating Government or other Ordinances, but it
will infer either that one party has no interest in the Church, or that one
Church may be many; and so, that the unity thereof in its visible state is to
no purpose: This then we take for granted. And though possibly it be not in all
cases attainable, because the fault may be upon one side, who possibly will not
act unitedly with others, yet is this still to be endeavored, and every
opportunity to be taken hold of for promoting of the same. Union a thing
attainable among Orthodox Divines.


The second ground which we suppose, is this, That as union is ever a duty, So,
we conceive, if men interessed will do their duty, there can be no division
amongst Orthodox Divines or Ministers, but it is possible also to compose it,
and union is a thing attainable. For, 1. We are not speaking of composing
divisions that are stated upon the fundamental things; nor are we speaking of
removing all differences, as if all men were to be one in judgment in every
point of Truth; there may be difference where there is no division, as has
been said. Nor, 3. when we speak of men's doing their duty, do we mean a full
up-coming of every thing in knowledge and practice, and that in a sanctified
manner, though that ought to be endeavored; but it looks principally to the
doing of duty in reference to this particular (if it may be called so) of
attaining union, a great part whereof does consist in outward obvious things,
which do neither require simply sanctification in the person (though in it self
most desirable) nor perfection in the degree, some whereof we may afterward
mention; so that the meaning is, if we consider union in it self, without
respect to men's corruptions, (which will make the least thing impossible when
they are in exercise) it is a thing possible, according to the acknowledged
principles, that sober, orthodox men usually walk by, as experience has often
proven, and reason does demonstrat in the particulars afterward to be
instanced. And this consideration ought the more pressingly to stir up the
endeavor of this duty, although oftentimes through men's corruption it has
been frustrated.

Thirdly, we premit, That in endeavoring union Endeavoring union, does
notinfer union in all points of judgment and practice.
and healing, men would not straiten it to an universal union in every thing,
in judgment and practice, but would resolve to have it with many things
defective that need forbearance in persons that are united, which me may take
up in these particulars. 1. There may be difference of judgment in many
things, I mean in such things that are consistent with the foundation, and
edification; and such a forbearance would be resolved upon, and to do
otherwise, were to think that either men had no reason at all, or that their
understandings were perfect, or at least of equal reach. 2. There may be
dissatisfaction with many persons, whether Officers or Members; and to expect a
Church free of unworthy Officers, or Members, and to defer Church union
thereupon, is to expect the barn-floor shall be without chaff, and to frustrate
the many commands whereby this duty is pressed; for, so this command should be
obligatory to no Church, but that that is triumphant; yet certainly our Lord
Jesus gave this command to His Disciples when Judas was amongst them; and Paul
gave it and practiced it, when some preached out of envy, Philip. 1. and when
almost all sought their own things, and not the things of Christ: And
certainly, if people ought to carry even to corrupt Ministers who yet destroy
not the foundation, as Ministers, in the duties that becomes them to Ministers
in communion with them, while they continue such, Then certainly Ministers
ought to keep that communion with Ministers, that becomes their relations,
seeing they are still Ministers in that respect, as well as in the other. And if
this corruption will not warrant separation in other Ordinances, as was said in
the close of the second part, Then neither will it warrant division in the
ordinance of government. 3. It may also be consistent with many particular
failings, and defects in the exercise of government, as possibly the sparing of
some corrupt O^cers and Members; yea, the Censuring of some unjustly, or the
admission of some that are unfit for the Ministry, and such like: These indeed
are faults, but they are not such as make a Church to be no Church; and though
these have sometimes been pretended to be the causes of schisms and divisions
in the Church in practice, yet were they never defended to be just grounds of
schisms and divisions, but were ever condemned by all Councels and Fathers, and
cannot be in reason sustained. For, 1. there should be then no union expected
here, except we supposed, that men that have corruption, could not fall in
these faults. 2. It is not unlike, but some of these were in the primitive
Churches; somewhat is infinuated thereof, Rev. 2. in those Churchofficers,
their tolerating of Iezebel and the Nicolaitans to seduce the people, and to
commit fornication; yet neither is separation or division called-for, or
allowed either amongst Ministers or people. Sure there were such corrupt acts
of all kinds amongst the Jews Church Officers; yet is it clear, that Nicodemus
and Joseph of Arimathea did continue to govern jointly, notwithstanding
thereof, who yet cannot be counted accessory to any of their deeds; Because
(which is a third reason) men in such cases have access, even when they are
present, to discountenance such corrupt acts, by not consenting thereto, and
testifying against the same, (yea, they may by so doing, stand in the way of
many wicked acts, which by dividing they cannot do) which is sufficient for
their exoneration both before God and men: As we may see in the instances of
Joseph and Nicodemus mentioned* who continue united in the government, kept
the meetings even when Sentences pass against those who will acknowledge
Christ, and orders for persecuting Him and them; and yet they are declared
free, because they dissented from, and testified against the same; yea, their
freedom and exoneration by virtue of their dissent being present, is more
solemnly recorded to their honor in the Gospel, than if they had divided; And
yet the unity of the Church now has the same ground, and no fewer motives to
press Union may stand with some defects in Worship and manner of Government.
it than it had then. 4. It may stand with some defects in Worship, manner of
Government, and rules that are necessary for good government in a Church. It is
like, that many things of that kind, were defective in the Church of Corinth,
where the Sacrament was so disorderly administrated (as has been marked)
confusion in many things of Worship, and some things still to be set in order;
yet does the Apostle no where press union more than in these Epistles, as
formerly has been marked; neither can it be thought that perfection in all
these is ever to be expected, or that union, until such time is to be delayed.
And if there be defects of that kind, it is union and not division that is to
be looked upon as the commended mean for redressing of the same.

If it be asked then, With what kind of defects or With what kind of dejects
union may be made up.
discontents may an union be made up? or, what Rules may be walked by therein?
For answer, We offer these Considerations or Rules,

1. What cannot warrant a breach where there is union, that cannot warrantably
be the ground to keep up a division; Now there are many miscarriages or
defects, which are really gross, and yet will not warrant a schism, as all
that write thereon do clear, and is obvious to all. The reason of the
consequence is, Because making up of a breach is no less a duty, than
preventing thereof; And further, if it began upon such a ground, Then the
continuing thereof upon the same ground, is but the continuing in the same sin;
and it cannot be thought that any party by dividing upon an unjust ground, can
afterward be justified upon the same ground; It remains therefore, that if
the ground was not sufficient at first to warrant a separation or division, it
cannot be sufficient afterward to continue the same.

Rule 2. Such defects as do not make communion in a Church, and in its
Ordinances sinful, will not warrant a separation or division from the same;
for, this follows on the former. It is acknowledged by all, that there is no
separation from a true Church in such Ordinances, as men may without sin
communicate into, although others may be guilty therein; as, suppose men to
have access to Government without such bonds and engagements, and such like,
as may mar their freedom in following the light of the Word, in deciding
whatever shall come before them, even though others should step over the same.

Rule 3. Men may keep communion with a Church, when their calling leads them
thereto upon the one side, and they have access to the discharge of the same
upon the other; this also follows upon the former: for, if some acts of a
man's station lead him to an united way of acting, (as the duties of a fixed
Minister do) then he is obleiged to follow the duties of his calling, whilst
there is no physical or moral impediment barring him in the same, and others
being defective in their duty, will not absolve him from his, which he owes by
virtue of his station.

Rule 4. While the general rules tending to edification in the main are
acknowledged, union is to be kept, even though there be much failing in the
application; because, so there are fit weapons to make use of, and who knows
but single and zealous improving of them, may help the application thereof; and
if there be a failing therein, it is the persons deed, that by his vote so
misapplyeth, and does not involve any other in that guilt, beside that by joint
and united acting much of that misapplication may through Gods blessing be
prevented.

Rule 5. Then there may and ought to be uniting when the evils that follow
division or schism, are greater and more hurtful to the Church, than the evils
that may be supposed to follow on union. I speak not of ills of sin, (for, the
least of these are never to be chosen) but of evils and inconveniences that
may indeed be hurtful to the Church in themselves, and sinful in respect of
some persons, yet are not so to all: Now, in such evils the lesser is to be
chosen, because uniting and acting jointly in a Church Way, does belong to the
policy and government of the Church, wherein Christian prudence is to have a
main hand, So that when things cannot be done as men would simply, they are to
do as they may comparatively, that is, to choose and make use of what may be
most edifying, and least hurtful to the Churches edification (which is the
great end that ought to sway in Government) amongst all these means that seem
probable and possible; So that the conscience may have testimony in this, that
the way that had fewest inconveniences, and manyest advantages to edification,
was chosen; and though some inconveniences fall out afterward, yet the
conscience may be quiet on this ground: Because, sometimes the Lord in His
providence will order so in the matters of Government, that there is no side
can be chosen without inconveniences; As suppose, there is not full
satisfaction in any way that occureth in planting such a Congregation, in
removing of such an offense, healing such a rent, and the like; but whatever
side be looked to, many hindrances to edification appear, yet something must
be chosen, and may be with peace to the conscience; because we are to regulate
our own act suitably to the providence, and cases we meet with, and to the
tempers of these we have to do with; but we are neither to regulate nor answer
for providence, and the distempers of others. Indeed in such a case, the mind
may be disquieted because of fear; and the consolation of the duty may be
diminished, because of such circumstances; and affections may be grieved and
jumbled, because there is not full satisfaction; yet may the conscience have
quietness and peace in its duty notwithstanding; and men are specially to
discern and to put difference between peace of conscience and the former
discomposures: otherwise When inconveniences are on all hands, what side is
to be followed*
there will be many cases wherein it is impossible for a zealous Minister to
have peace, whatever side he choose, yea, whether he do or forbear.

If it be asked then, What way men may discern the side that is to be followed
in such a case, when inconveniences threaten on all hands? Answ. By these and
such like ways. 1. It is to be looked, what side has the most dangerous and
destructive inconveniences. 2. What inconveniences are most certain and
inevitable, and the greatest and most inevitable inconveniences are to be
shunned, and men would not choose a certain hurt to eschew that which is
uncertain. 3. It would be looked, what side duty lies upon, or to what the
command does press; and although inconveniences seem to follow that, yet it
is to be followed as most safe. Now, as to all these, union has the advantage
o division: Because, 1. it is a commanded mean tending to edification, which
division is not. 2. Division has no less nor fewer inconveniences following
it, nor less destructive to the Church, than union in the case supposed; yea,
schism is one of the greatest hurts that can come to an orthodox Church, it
being next to heresy in Doctrine; and therefore no particular evil can be laid
in the balance with it. 3. The ills of division are most inevitable, for the
ills that follow union, through Gods blessing may be prevented, it is not
impossible, but in the way of division it is, because it self is out of Gods
way.

Rule 6. When men may unit without personal guilt, or accession to the defects
or guilt of others, there may and ought to be union, even though there be
failings and defects of several kinds in a Church. The reasons before given
will clear this, because men are to reckon not for other men's car^iages, but
their own, and no such Church State is to be expected as is free of defects.
Beside, can it warrant a man to abstain from his duty because others do not
theirs; whileas there is no sinful impediment lying in the way of his access
thereto. If it be asked, What may be accounted such impediments, as a tender
conscience may be justly scarred by from uniting? It may be answered in these
and such like, 1. If a person be put to condemn any thing he thinks lawful
in his own former practice, or the practice of others, or in some point of
Doctrine though never so extrinsick, if it be to him a point of truth. 2. If he
be put to approve the deed, and practice of some others which he accounts
sinful, or to affirm somewhat as truth which he does account an error. 3.
When some engagement is required for the future, which does restrain from any
duty called* for, or that may afterward be called-for. These and such like
involve persons in the sin of what is past, and also makes them accessory to
the inconveniences which may come; because they are bound up with their own
consent, from endeavoring the preventing thereof in the way of duty, at least
it is so to them, and so defiles their conscience. Therefore such
entanglements are by all means to be forborne; but where no such thing is in
condemning or acknowledging any thing that is past, nor any such restraining
bond inconsistent with duty for the time to come, there may be access to
union, even where there are many public defects, which is the thing laid down
to be cleared.

In the fourth place we premit, That for attaining M^uali condescending
necessary.
of union there would be, and there ought to be, large mutual condescending,
that is, that both sides ought to streach themselves, not only to forbear what
is sinful; nor only to condescend to what may be thought simply necessary, and
may be extorted as duty in any case; Nor yet ought condescending to be upon one
side levelled according to the length that another goes, but condescending
would be levelled mutually according as expediencie calls for, with respect
to the edification of the Church; for which end even many infirmities of others
are to be for born, and things otherwise unreasonable in respect of these men
we have to do with, yet respect to the Churches peace, ought to make men cede
in these; for, if there ought to be condescending for private peace, much more
ought it to be for Church-peace and public edification: and though we cannot
nor will not now be particular in this, yet concerning it, we may lay down
these considerations,

1. In what may involve a man in sin, or in the approbation (...) there must be
no condescending
thereof in others, there is no condescending, but what length may warrantably
be gone, even to the utmost border of duty, men ought to go for this end; so
that nothing ought to be a stop or march in condescension, but this, I cannot
do this and sin against God; otherwise, one ought to be all things to others.
This consideration will be more clear, by comparing it with the former Rules,
and what afterward may be said.

2. This condescension would be mutual upon It ought to be mutual.
both sides, that is, one party would not expect full submission from the
other, for that is not union, but dominion; Hence the Apostle in his pressing
of union in such cases, does ordinarily pray, and obtest both sides. And seeing
affection is the main ground of union, it is fit, there should be condescension
for mutual testifying of respect each to other. This is also confirmed by an
Epistle of Calvines to Mr. Knox (afterward cited) wherein he presses that
condescension be mutual for removing of a division that was in his
Congregation at Frankford.

3. Even that party that seems to be rightest in What (...) ought to be most
condescending
the matter, or to have authority on its side, or to have countenance from
others, ought yet to condescend, yea in some things to be most condescending,
because such are in some sort parents and strong; they ought therefore the more
tenderly to bear and cover the infirmities of the weak: and because they are
more sober and at themselves, they therefore ought to carry the more seriously
toward others, whom they suppose to be in a distemper, and not to be equally
groffe in handling the tender things of the Church, whereof union is a main
one: And considering that Even that which is right and has authority.
authority is given for edification, it is not unsuitable for it to condescend
for attaining its end; for which cause we find often Paul, laying by his
authority in such cases, and entreating and wooing, as it were, even the
meanest dissenters, in this matter of union, as we see him, Phil. 4. beseeching
Euodias and Synti^he (who were it is like but very private persons) to be of
one mind. And in ancient times we will find, 1. sometimes the innocent party
ceding and condescending, as in the case betwixt Basilius and Eusebius at
Cesarea: Basilius, though having the best side, and of greatest account, yet
did first cede, by withdrawing for the peace of the Church; and afterward, for
the good thereof, to wit, the preventing of its being tainted by the Arian
heresy, he did return, and condescend to be subject to him who was in
competition with him, which tended exceedingly to the good of that Church, to
the removing of that Schism, and the great praise and commendation of his zeal
and singleness. 2. We find that oftentimes the most tender and sincere, and
these who were upon the right side, have been most condescending, and
oftentimes They who did the wrong, ordinarily most av^rse from condescending.
these who did the wrong (such as it was) were most averse from condescension,
as in all the Schisms that have arisen upon frivolous grounds will appear. 3.
These who condescended most in such things, have ever been thought the greatest
friends to the Church, even sometimes when they have been deepest in the rise
of the Schism, and when their side was not so justifiable as the other, yet by
condescending they have commended themselves more to the Churches friends than
their opposites. It is marked in that schism at Antioch, betwixt Miletius and
Paulinus, who were both Orthodox, yet had they divided governments, and
Congregations in the Church, because of different Ordinations which had kept
them rent for some time; and although Miletius his Ordination and entry was not
so justifiable according to the Canons, as the others was; yet the parties
tenacious upon either side being strong, there was access to settle it by no
authoritative decision: wherefore it came to a treaty by means of these that
were appointed Arbiters, that so union and communion in the Ordinances might be
made up in that Church; at which conference Miletius overtured, that they might
join together as Bishops to take care of one Flock while they lived, and after
the death of either, he who survived should be only Bishop of the united Flock,
unto whom one only should succeed to have charge of all, for preventing of
division for the time to come; to which overture, Paulinus would not acquiesce,
but stood to the formality of order without valuing the Churches peace, or
proposing any just ground of exception against Miletius person or Doctrine; he,
to wit, Paulinus was counted unworthy to govern such a Church, and removed
therefrom, and the other as more worthy because of that his condescending, was
therefore alone invested in the government thereof. 4. We will find them
sometimes yield in all particulars that do not involve any consent unto, or
approbation of what is wrong. It is marked by Augustine in his Writings against
the Donatists, that sometimes Councels that have condemned men, have for peace
without any satisfaction, again restored them upon after thoughts; and he
marketh it as a great condescension of the Bishops of Spain, that they did so
in the case of Osiu^ when he was found innocent by the French: they did not
(says he) pertinaciously with animosity defend their former Sentences, lest
they should fall in the sacrilege of a Schism, which does exceed all
wickedness; and with that humility, peace was kept, because (says he) they
had rather be against their own Sentences, than the unity of the Church. And he
does upbraid that principle of the Donatists in the case of one Primianus, who
was refused to be restored by an after Council of theirs, because a former
pretended Synod of their own had deposed him, alleging, and abusing that word
of the Apostles for that end, Gal. 2. If I again build what I have destroyed,
then am I found a transgressour; and he does more commend the practice of
Pretextatus and Felicianus, who being condemned (it is like unjustly) by three
hundredth and eighteen Bishops, yet did, (says he) for concords sake, return
and join with these who did condemn them; and by them were without all loss or
diminution of their honor, received into fellowship. And wat ever may be in
the justice or injustice of any of these former deeds, upon the matter, yet
does he only make use of them, to show what condescension ought to be in such
cases for peace, both upon the part of Judicatories and particular persons, how
ever the matter does appear unto them; for he condemns not the rejecting of
Primianus because he was unjustly Sentenced, but because there was not due
respect had to the Churches peace; nor does he commend the Spanish Bishops for
recalling an unjust Sentence, which ought to be done for Justice sake; but that
(though it is no qu^stion they did think it just) they did condescend to remove
it for preventing of a Schism, when they saw their deed dissatisfying to
others. And it is so in the other case also, it is these men's submission to
these that condemned them, as it evidences respect to concord, and not as
considering any equity of the Sentence which is commended by him; this is in
what he writes contra Epistolam Parmeniani. lib. 1. cap. 2 3, 4 etc.

From what is said, we may lay down these negative conclusions, concerning the
upmaking of a breach amongst Godly and Orthodox men, where a Church has
harmony in the fundamental points, Faith, Worship and Government, and where
the thriving of the Gospel is mutually designed.

1. Division ought not to be endeavored to be removed Division not to be cured
by destroying any Orthodox side or party.
in such a case, in such a way as does undo or destroy either side, because
that is not the good of the whole; for every part and side in such a case, is a
part of the body, although it may be not so very considerable, and it is no
wisdom to cut off a member of the body, and that way to cure a distemper
therein, when possibly the purging away of corrupt humors from the body, or
more gentle applications might recover the same.

2. We say, that way of uniting is not to be admitted, but shunned, which may
incapacitate any Minister or member of the body that is fit for edifying of the
same, from having access thereunto; for so the Church is prejudged, and men
are rendered unable for edifying thereof. And this is not only when Sentences
are past, or restraints laid on; But it may be in such like cases. As, 1. when
by the terms of union some person is grieved and weighted, by annexing of some
unnecessary thing which may be forborne, because by this, men go about duty with
heaviness, which is unprofitable to the Church. Union is to be essayed with
due respect each to other without any note of disrespect.
2. It may be, when something that reflecteth upon any side, or person,
unnecessarily, is interwoven; because such things still keep up suspicion, and
make the union the more heartlesse, and does both make such persons more faint,
and also in the lesser capacity to have weight with others for their
edification, and does leave a ground of dissatisfaction with such an agreement,
that is ready afterward to break forth; Therefore union would be essayed with
all due respect from each to other, and without any note of disrespect. No
simply authoritative way is the fit mean to begin the healing of a rent Church.


3. We may gather, that no simply authoritative mean is the fit and only way of
healing a rentChurch: That is indeed the way of governing an united Church, but
not the way of uniting a rentChurch, especially a Church rent in particulars of
practice and government; because the remedy must be extensive to both sides,
and in such cases, at least, as to these particulars, Authority usually is
declined; and though it be unjustly declined possibly, yet when it is declined,
it is unable to effectuate this end; and the remedy is to be applied, not as to
what agrees to a Church that is whole, but what agrees to a Church in such a
distemper; even as a sick body is to be nourished not always with the
strongest and wholesomest meats which agree with such as are in health, but it
is to be nourished with things suitable to its distemper, and are fit to cure
it; yea, sometimes, with such things as may please the taste, when more
healthful things are not admitted. Also when both judgments are to be
informed, and affections are to be gained, there must be prudentiall and
affectionat ways used for gaining these ends. Hence we see, that not only in
Church History, but in the Scriptures especially, the duty of union is more
pressed by persuasions, entreaties, reasons to move to it, ills that follow the
want thereof, and such like, than by an authoritative way, such as is used in
the condemning of Heretics, and other scandalous persons. And indeed union
has such conjunction with the will and affections, that it must be persuaded
and cannot be so commanded. And amongst such persons as are supposed to be in
this difference, private and particular condescension is most becoming that
respect which each ought to other.

Fifthly, We premit, That suppose sufficient condescension Though one side fail
in condescending, the other ought not to fail.
should fail upon one side, yet ought the other to condescend fully the length
that is possible.

1. Because Church-union amongst Churchmen is no civil bargain to use prigging
therein, but what is possible is duty out of obedience to God, who commands
peace in other things (and so, much more in this) as far as is possible, or as
in men lies. And, 2. because respect is to be had to the Churches good, whose
advantage we should seek, even though others were defective; and often such
condescending gains more for the advantage of the Church, and commendation of
the party condescending, than if there had been more sticking, as we may see in
that praiseworthy instance of Basilius his carriage, who stuck on nothing, but
absolutely did lay by what was contended-for, without respect to his own right
or injury, for the Churches good. And oftentimes it is one party their waiting
for the others condescension, or taking occasion from their tenaciousnesse to
stick, that does keep the distance at a height.

6. Oftentimes in such debates as are amongst orthodox Divines and Ministers,
it seems they might be removed if one party should condescend according to
the qualifications and cautions formerly laid down; yea, it seems it were
safer for the Churches good in such a case, that either party should
practically condescend to the way of the other, than that division should be
kept up upon such grounds. For, 1. It is not supposed here, that there is any
matter of faith in question, amongst such, often there was full harmony in the
Confessions of Faith, as in the instances cited. 2. There is no question for
Government simply, nor for Councils and Canons, these also were acknowledged;
none did disclaim the general Councils, nor their acts. 3. The question often
is not amongst them, Whether others should be brought to their opinion or not,
I mean as to the stick of the division; But often it is either, 1. upon some
mistaken expression of another, or error in some lesser point of Truth; And,
in such a case, it is that great Augustines word, Disputable errors, or
uncertain faults, are not in their pursuit to be preferred to certain peace.
Or, 2. it is for some particular act of Government, or other miscarriages by
misapplying of rules, or not walking according to them, or something of that
kind, as was in contrary Ordinations of orthodox men, and such like: In which
cases, we say, (and it will be found from History) That it had been ever better
for the Church, that either side had practically condescended to suffer the
other to rule and govern, and personally to have kept themselves free from
accession to their guilt, whether of crookedness negligence, or the like, than
to have raised or entertained divisions upon such accounts. For, often
orthodox, and otherwise blameless men, have been made, by such divisions,
factious and carnal in their carriage, and much unusefull; who otherwise, had
they been free of that tentation, might have proved sober, and profitable; and,
when the tentation was over, were found to be such.

7. We may observe, that though in the primitive times there were diverse
schisms and divisions, concerning Synods and Government, yet we will find that
these contests and divisions did flow from the matter and particular acts and
actings thereof, and that there was hardly ever division tabled upon the
formality of the constitution of a Council or Synod; nor yet, that much
difference was put betwixt declining of their authority, and of the Acts or
Censures past by them. Concerning which we may observe these generals,

1. If the matter was right and satisfying that was It was the actings and no^
the formality of Synods that occasioned division of old.
concluded by many Bishops and Churchmen, there was an acquiescing in the
authority thereof. 2. If the matter were displeasing and hurtful, of whatever
form it was, and of whatever number, its authority was not much respected,
because it consisted only in adding weight to these things, as we may see in
the Arian Councils, which were often very numerous, and others also that were
erroneous, and otherwise corrupt, although there was no formal declinatour of
them, or protestation against them as null; though there were sometimes some
dissentients in them, yet was not their authority any way confirmed by the
forbearing of such Protestations or Declinatours. 3. Sometimes we will find
worthy men appearing before and answering unto most corruptly constituted
Synods, as was in those same times, and although they were sentenced and
deposed by them, yet did they never esteem these Sentences to have the more
authority, as we may see in the case of Athanasius, Chrysostom, and many
others. 4. Sometimes they did protest against Synods as null, when they saw
violence and iniquity prevail in the^, as was done in the Council of Antioch,
in the case of Eustachius; and was done in the second Council of Ephesus by
Flavianus and Anatolius. Sometimes also upon seen hazard, and designs of
professed corrupt enemies, Protestations were drawn in writ antecedently; as in
that Protestation which the Reformers in Germany gave out against the Council
of Trent, after its indiction; because there was no probable access for Truth
to have liberty in speaking, and equity in judgment; And as Sleydan has it set
down, they alleged Cyrillus for the first practiser of this, in the time that
the Arians prevailed. This we may see is their practice when they have to do
with professed enemies; not sticking on formalities, but on what was material.
And again, amongst themselves, the Orthodox used not to stick upon the trying
and scanning of the formality of any of these Councils (for certainly in such
corruptions as were so universal, Synods corrupt for the plurality of them,
might have been had with all the formalities and solemnities that could be
required in the external constitution of any lawful Synod) but when they had
occasion to meet, they went to the doing of what was for the present good of
the Church, condemning the matter of such corrupt Synods; which they did
account sufficient in such cases: And for difference amongst themselves, when
they were of a right temper, they did also endeavor to redress such
particulars as needed, and to restore persons unjustly sentenced, and the like;
Whereby it appears that the matter both in things of general and particular
concernment, did ever bear most sway.

8. Although such debates concerning Government Debates concerning government
more difficultly removed.
seem most easy to be removed, yet often and almost ever, they have been most
difficulty healed, and have been followed with greatest bitterness and
contention in the Church; for, different Judgments simply, and also different
Ceremonies, and different practices in other things, may consist without direct
opposition or counteracting, and may either be the more easily born or removed:
but when it comes to Government, whose Sentence shall stand, whose Ordination
shall be acknowledged, who shall have place to decide such and such things, and
the like, it is far otherwise. Hence it came to pass that men could keep
union and communion with others that differed from them in far greater points
of Truth; but to persons that did not acknowledge their Authority, or did
acknowledge those that did controvert with them thereanent, they could by no
means so condescend: Because, 1. in Government, men's own particular interest is
more concerned than in points of Truth, and that inadvertently steals in upon
men. 2. Because, in Government the question is not only for what is past, but
there is a fear of what may come: Hence men that have some testimony in
themselves that they are not ambitio^s of Government, yet having taken up a
prejudice against others, they are suspicious that if such had power, they
would miscarry, not only in reference to them, but in reference to public
concernment; And therefore in removing such a division that is in point of
Government, the great difficulty is not so much to heal and remove what is
past, as to prevent the fear of what may come, if such continue to govern. And
this makes, that the result of such division is, Tha^ either they themselves,
or such as they have confidence in particularly, may have the weight of
government upon them, which may indeed be aimed at with some sincerity; because
being someway alienated with prejudice, they do not think it fit for the good
of the work, at least during that time, that any others should have such trust;
and this made the heat of debates in the time of division, to break out mainly
in the ordination of Bishops, and planting of Churches; because by that means
their interest in the government was kept up, whereby there was after-accesse
to the management of every other thing according as this succeeded.

CHAP. VIII. Some preparatory endeavors for uniting.
ALthough we have been somewhat large in these generals, because of the falling
in of several things, yet we conceive it may be useful to the point, and we
may have the speedier progress afterward in loosing this great question, What
an orthodox Church divided in it self in some circumstantiall truths (to speak
so) or contrary practices and actings, when still agreeing in the fundamentals
of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, and having mutual esteem of
the integrity one of another: What, I say, such are called to do for the
healing of that breach? In reference to which, these things, or this method
would be followed.

1. All, especially Ministers, would walk under Walking under an impression of
the dreadfulnesse of such a plague
the impression of the dreadfulnesse and terriblenesse of such a plague; It is
like, if God were looked to as angry at a Church, and at Ministers in such a
time, men would be in the greater fitness to speak concerning a healing. Some
time therefore would be bestowed on this, to let that consideration sink down
in the soul, that the Lords hand may be taken up therein; the many sad
consequents thereof would be represented to the mind, and the heart would be
seriously affected and humbled therewith, as if sword, pestilence or fire were
threatened; yea, as if the Lord were spitting in Ministers faces, rubbing shame
upon them, and threatening the making of them despicable, the blasting of the
Ordinances in their hands, the loosing the girdle of their loins, and authority
amongst the people, the plucking up of the hedges to let in Boars and Wolves to
spoil the Vines, and destroy the flock; and, in a word, to remove His
candlestick, so that Ministers or other persons in such a case, have not only
men that are their opposits to look to as angry at them, but they have the Lord
to look to as their party, whose anger has thus divided them; and the not
observing of this, makes men the more confident under such a judgment;
Whereas, seeing it is a plague, men, even such as suppose themselves innocent,
as to the immediate rise thereof, ought to humble themselves under the mighty
hand of God, with respect to this as to other plagues.

2. Men would also look upon it as a snare; O A fearful snare in division.
how many tentations have such divisions accompanying them, especally to
Ministers; and also how many afflictions, crosses and reproaches, upon the back
of these! Might it not make a Minister tremble to think upon the matter of
divisions, that now beside all his former difficulties and straits, there is a
snare and trial in every thing; in every Sermon that he preaches it is thus,
lest his own affection steal in for the zeal of God, to make him hoter and more
vehement against those that oppose him in such things that are controverted,
than he uses to be in things more nearly concerning to the glory of God, and
lest by discovering his carnalnesse, he make his Ministry despicable before
others, when he hears he is in hazard to be i^ritated by a contradiction; and
though there be no contradiction, he is in hazard to lay the less weight upon
what might be for his edification, because it is spoken by one who in such and
such things differs from him. When he is in any Judicatory, there is a
tentation waiting on, by the least motion of such things, to discompose all,
and make such meetings scandalous and burdensome; by this all conversing almost
becomes heartlesse and comfortless, the most intimate brother is either
suspicious, or suspected; all construction of men's ingenuity and sincerity in
anything, are, for the most part, grounded upon men's interests, as if men after
that had no conscience of sinning, there is a failing of sympathy amongst
brethren, etc. And may not these and many such like, make Ministers circumspect
in such a case, that they may be slow to speak to what may foment division, and
wary in hazarding upon snares. Alas, it is unlike this, when men use more
confidence and liberty in constructing, speaking and acting, and with less
tenderness in times of division than at other times; and were men once
impressed with the fear of sinning upon the occasions of divisions, they would
be much more disposed for speaking of union.

3. Ministers and others would sobe^ly retire to Diligent viewing of our inward
condition.
take a view of their own spiritual condition, and see if they have kept
their own vineyard: and particularly, before the Lord, put themselves to these.
1. How union with him has been prized, and if there has been studying to be,
and abide, in Christ, and to keep themselves in the love of God. 2. If there be
any ground of quarrel in the present strain or by gone practice, that might
have influence to provoke the Lord to smite them in the general. Or, 3. and
especially, If by their negligence and unfaithfulness, imprudency, heat,
passion, tenaciousnesse, addictednesse to other men, and too much loathnesse to
displease them, prejudice at, and uncharitablnesse unto others, or the like,
they have been any way accessory to the bringing in of this evil; for which
cause they would take a view both of the sins that procure it, and the evils
which do dispose for it, and increase it, (which were formerly mentioned) and
would be impartial and through in this; for, it is preposterous for men to
meddle in removing public differences, while they know not how it stands
with themselves.

4. When that is done, there would be repentance Repentance suitable.
suitable to what is found, and extraordinary humiliation and secret prayer to
God, not only for themselves and for their own particular condition, but for
the public, and particularly for healing of that breach, and that thereby God
would spare His people, and not suffer His inheritance to be a reproach. It is
no little furtherance to union, to have men in a spiritual, abstracted and
mortified frame; for, we are sure, if it remove not difference, it will in a
great part moderate the division, and restrain the carnalnesse that usually
accompanies it, and dispose men to be more impartial to hear what may lead
further.

5. Men would not fist in this, but as they have interest, Union would by all
warrantable means be commended unto, and pressed upon these that differ, and by
those that differ one upon another.
and are led by their places, they would endeavor soberly, warily and
seriously, by speaking, writing, obtesting and otherwise, to commend union to
these that differ; yea, even they that differ, would commend it to these that
differ from them. We see the Apostles do this frequently in the New Testament,
and that not only in the general to Churches, but some persons are
particularly by name obtested, as, Philip. 4. 2. And in the primitive times,
Bishops and Churches who were not engaged, did seriously write, and sometimes
did send some of their number to Churches and eminent persons that were
divided, and often their interposing did prove effectu^. And when that
difference between Augustine and Jerome did come to some height, he (to wit,
Augustine) pressed himself so on the other, for the begetting of a better
understanding, and the abating of that difference, that he did prevail with
him, and by their mutual apologies, and better understanding one of another,
they came notwithstanding of their difference to have much respect one of
another. For this end Policarpus came from Asia to Rome, to stay the division
about Easter, which prevailed so far, that it fisted for a time. Also men,
especially of the same judgment, would deal with others with whom in that they
agree, to be condescending, and seriously obtest them; and when they exceed,
would objurgate them for the Churches good. This is often of great weight, and
often also, men that appear most in a difference, will be hoter and carry
things further than less engaged men of the same judgment will allow, and
such ought not to be silent in such a case. Thus Ireneus (though of Victors
judgment in the matter of Easter) yet did boldly expostulate with him for his
vehemence in pressing of the same, to the hurt of the Churches peace, charging
him to forbear and to follow union notwithstanding; which act of his, is still
highly commended, and (as Eusebius observes) counted answerable to his name.

6. Serious and single thoughts of union would be Constancy and singleness
herein.
laid down, and that would be purposly driven as the great duty; so that
endeavors would not principally tend to strengthen a side, or exouer
themselves, or get advantage to others, etc. but to make one of both; and
therefore when one mean or occasion fails, another would be essayed; neither
would men weary or faint herein, although it prove often a most fainting
business.

7. Men would endeavor all this with tenderness With tenderness and respect.
and respect to men's persons, actions and qualifications; for, oftentimes the
rise of a division, is in the alienation of affections between some persons;
which afterward disposes to construct hardly both of their opinions and
actions: and indeed often the stick is here, that men's affections are not
satisfied one with another, and that makes them that they do not trust each
other: Hence we see, that in the Scripture, the commending of love, and of
honoring and prefering of others in honor to our selves, is ordinarily
subjoyned to the exhortations to union, or reproofs of division, as, Philip. 2.
Ephesians. 4. Matthew. 18, etc. And we see in the primitive times* when no mean could
cure schisms, one party showing respect to another, or to some eminent head of
the opposite party, (it may be even after their death) did alley the same, and
engage these that formerly shunned communion, to join with them. It is
particularly observed, That when at Constantinople some had continued separated
from the Bishops government, and the Church thereof, after Chrysostom's
deposition, for the space of thirty five years, and were called Iohanits; yet
Proclus, who by some interval succeeded in that See, by recording Chrysostom's
name amongst eminent persons, and making honorable mention of him, and
bringing his body from the place where it was buried in his exile, and burying
it honorably at Constantinople in the great Church of the holy Apostles, did
so appease and engage those that had disclaimed all the interveening Bishops,
that instantly they did acknowledge him and join with the Church. The like also
is mentioned to have been the end of that Schism at Antioch, because of
Eustachius his removal from them, when Callaudion the Bishop did return his
body honorably to be buried, and went out with his party to receive the same
solemnly some miles from the Town; those also, who out of respect to him (to
wit Eustachius) had continued separated from the succeeding Bishops for above
an hundred years, now seeing the adverse party put respect on him, they also
did from that time forth join with them. Both these are recorded in the fifth
Century; and if respect to dead men be prevalent to engage affections,
certainly mutual respect and evidences of confidence amongst men living, would
be much more weighty. This giving of respect would be manifested in these and
the like. 1. Respective mentioning in word or writ of the persons, and what
concerns those that differ, especially such as are most eminent and leading
amongst them. 2. There would be good constructions put upon their end and
intentions, and sincerity, even in such actions as are displeasing. 3. Men's
opinions and actions would not be loaded with gross absurdities and high
aggravations, especially in public; because that tends but to make them
odious, and stands in the way of a future good understanding, when one has
proposed another as so absurd and hateful a person. 4. All personal
reflections would be abstained, as also sleighting answers, disdainfull-like
words and salutations, and such like, would be shunned; But on the contrary,
there would be love, familiarity, tenderness; and if there have been any
reflection or bitterness to occasion mistake, yea, if it have been unjustly
apprehended, there would be condescending to remove the same. I have heard of a
worthy person, who being led away in an hour of tentation, was by many of his
former friends afterward discountenanced, whereby he was, as it were, engaged
in a kind of discontent to defend his deed, and resent the disrespect of such
persons, which almost grew to a rent: but having occasion to encounter one who
was most opposite to his present way, who yet notwithstanding of all, did
lovingly and familiarly, as ever, embrace him, without mentioning any such
thing; it is said, That his heart melted instantly with the conviction of his
former opposition, and so any further procedure toward a rent was prevented,
when he saw there was yet again access to the affections of the most eminent of
those he did differ from. 5. There would be expressions of mutual confidence
Expressions of mutual confidence.
in one another, which would appear not only in personal respects, but with
respect to the Ministry of such as they differ from, endeavoring to
strengthen and confirm that, which was the thing that endeared Basilius to
Eusebius, that even while he differed, he endeavored to have his Ministry
weighty amongst the people. 6. Respect would be shown to men of that judgment
and side (it being such a difference as is supposed) they would be helped and
furthered, and counted, notwithstanding thereof* (if otherwise qualified) fit
for trust and charge; for, this is not only engaging of a particular person,
but of all the party, and does hold forth a confidence in them notwithstanding
of that; whereas the contrary is disobliging and irritating of all, because it
proposes all of such an opinion or practice to be unworthy of charge or trust,
which no man can well digest; and it some way necessitateth them in a divided
way to endeavor some other way of entering, and to increase their diffidence
of them who so partially (in their esteem at least) manages matters, and
prefers the strengthening of a side, to the edification of the Church; as any
different party cannot but expound it, seeing they seem to themselves to have
some persuasion of their own integrity in the main work. 7. There would even be
mutual visits and Kind visit
fellowship, civil and christian, as has been; yea, rather it would be
increased; for if men have some confidence that others love their persons,
respect them as Ministers, and esteem of them as Christians, they will be
easily induced to trust the other as such also. 8. If reflections and
bitterness be vented by some (as even good men are too ready to indulge to
themselves a liberty in debate to exceed in this) yet there would be no such
meeting given. Luther is censured for exceeding in this, even by such as loved
him; and it is a most excellent advertisement that Calvin gives to Bullenger
and others, thus provoked by him, Epist. 57. That either they would not answer
such a Paper at all, or, in answering it, to remember, That they had a most
eminent servant of Christ to answer, and so not to be provoked by his
vehemence, seeing he also had corruptions; and thus expresses his own
resolution, Etiamsi me Diabolum voca^et, me tamen hoc illi honoris habiturum,
ut insignem Dei servum agnoscam, etc. It is upon this ground, that Augustine
and others, most zealously affected with the schism of the Donatists, yet
because they kept in other things sound in the Faith, they mention such of
them as were sober, very honorably, and carried to them very brotherly; and
particularly he used to visit their Bishops, if he had been going elsewhere for
Ordination or other affairs; and some of them also used to visit him, whom he
entertained most kindly, ever speaking to improve both for begetting a better
understanding, as may be gathered from instances cited out of his Epistles in
what is before and after this. Sometimes also when he wrote to some of them, he
desired them to write so to him, as he might acquaint his people with both
their Writings, and with his own, if they returned no Answer, that thereby he
might constrain them to reasonableness, yet says, it shall be past Discessum
militum, that it might appear he intended not to make them odious. He does also
observe, that a main thing that made the Donatists averse from yielding to
union, was a suspicion which they had, that the Catholics would still
persecute them if they had occasion, speaking of a Conference, Epist. 163. he
says, Dictum erat (meaning by the Donatists) quod adhuc nostri eos persecuturi
essent; which he with many words rejects, showing from Ephesians. 4. that they had
learned to keep union with forbearance: elsewhere also, as Epist. 147. he
excuses the too great vehemency of the expressions of some that were on his
own side in that difference. All which shows the great necessity that there
is to recover affections in the pressing of union, and how far men ought to
condescend in reference thereto, both in order to what is past, and for the
preventing of what may be feared.

8. Then Ministers would not only in their own Stirring up to the life and
practice of Religion.
practice, but in their doctrine, and otherwise, stir up others to the
practice and life of Religion. We ever find the Apostle uses this way upon the
back of his exhortations to union, to press the working out of their salvation
with fear and trembling, etc. And in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, when he
dehorts Ministers from foolish and jangling questions, f^rifes and contentions,
this remedy is either premitted or subjoyned, that they would press the
Believers to be zealous of good works, and careful to maintain these, Tit. 3.
8, 9. That they would follow after love, righteousness, faith, peace with them
that call on the Lord out of a pure heart, 2 Timothy 2. 22, 23. for, when either
Ministers or Professors are exercised and takenup with these things, there is
little access to other things: then also they discern the necessity of union
the more, and are the more disposed for it themselves, and others are the more
easily induced to unite with them. Beside, it is never in such things that
godly and orthodox men do differ, but it is in diverting from these; and
therefore often much heat in particular differences, carries with it, a decay
and lukewarmnesse in more practical things; As on the contrary, zeal in these
material things, does ordinarily alley and mitigate heat and fervor in the
other.

9. It is fit that there were solemn addresses to God for directing and guiding
in the way to this end; for, Solemn addresses to God.
He is the God of peace, and ought to be acknowledged in removing this great
evil of division: Hence the Apostle subjoyneth prayers for peace, unto his
exhortations thereto; and we are commanded to pray for Ierusalems peace, even
Church-peace no less than Civil peace. It may be that the neglect of this is
the cause that sound, godly and peaceable men, who love the welfare of Zion, do
yet continue divided, and cannot fall upon means of healing, that thereby the
necessity of the Lords interposing may be discerned, and that there may be
purposed addresses for this same thing, and that men may not undervalue the
thing, nor their adversaries in it, so as not to account it a rod, seeing it is
God they have to do with, nor be content to lie under it without aiming and
dealing to have it removed by Him, as we would deal for the removal of any
temporal plague, or expect a blessing upon this Gospel.

CHAP. IX. What things are to be forborne in order to uniting.
HAving laid down these general helps, we are now to consider what is yet to
be forborne and abstained from in reference to union: For, as ordinarily
divisions rise and are ^omented, from and by doing and driving of some things,
which others cannot concur in, or come up to; So when such things are abstained
from, there is the nearer access to union; at least, it stops the
impetuousness of division, and makes it to look liker a difference, which
(considering humane infirmity) is neither so intolerable in (...), nor hurtful
to the Church. Beside therefore what has been said for abstaining of personal
reflections, or what may irritate persons, or parties, or what may entertain
jealousy or diffidence amongst them, whereof something has been touched upon,
We shall add these things further,

1. All things that contribute to weaken the repute Avoiding of all things that
weaken the reputation of others.
of others, or to beget an hard impression of them in our selves or in others,
in the general, would be forborne; such as telling of reproachful reports, even
though they be true, much more if they be but reported, yea, or the hearing of
such with any delight, endeavoring to waken up discontents in others against
opposits, by such informations, solicitations and the like. These are condemned
in private men's carriages, and are the causes of continuing such differences
(for, where no talebearer is, strife cease, Prove. 26.) much more amongst
Ministers who ought not to walk as men. Also good heed would be taken to such
as may have influence on advices, counsels and resolutions to that purpose,
lest underhand-whisperers, who really may mind some further alteration in the
Church, and may really be imbittered at honest men for their honesty, should
yet insinuat themselves with eminent men on both sides, and so carry Evil
counsel
on the division, and disappoint the union; As for instance, Some, not
altogether purged from drianism, and imbittered at honest Bishops, as
Athanasius, Osius, and others, did steal in upon the one side of a debate, and
held on the controversy against faithful men; So Epiphanius was entangled by
Theophilus of Alexandria to oppose Chrysostom upon pretext of another
difference; Sometimes again, on the other side, such as inclined to the
Novatians, wanted not influence to strengthen the opposite party, and to keep
them at a greater distance from the other, as being gross in receiving
Traditores (as they called them) unto their society. Sometimes men justly
censured, or fearing censure from faithful Bishops, did spread calumnies
against them, and made them odious, under pretext of their pride, arrogance,
unsoundnesse and such like, even unto other orthodox men; Sometimes again,
time-serving men, by flattering Magistrates did execute their revenge against
faithful Bishops, by keeping up Divisions against them, driving on Sentences
of Deposition, and such like, under pretext of other faults; whereby the
Churches peace has been often marred and her divisions continued, as is clear
in those schisms and divisions at Constantinople, first, in reference to
Chrysostom, and afterward in reference to Ignatius, who, by a faction in the
Church, was deposed, really to please the Emperor, whose incestuous marriage
he would not approve as they did: therefore I say in the removing of
differences, and resolving of duties in reference to union, there is great need
of circumspectnesse in trying and choosing whose counsels are to be laid weight
upon; for, all men love not peace, neither seek singly the good of the Church,
and want not their own prejudices and grudgings at particular eminent persons,
who (where men are not very denied and mortified) will easily steal-in to mar a
public good, under pretext of particular respect to the person, whom, by so
doing, they stir up. It Is marked by Sleydan as the cause of that unreasonable
and unnatural division that brake-out and grew in Germany, almost to the
undoing of Religion therein, betwixt the Elector of Saxony, and Maurice
afterward Elector, that some Counselors not well-minded to Religion* but
favorers of the wicked way of Henry, to whom Maurice succeeded, who for that
cause had hatred at the Elector and those who were eminent for Reformation, and
now having taken on a profession, and insinuated themselves in the counsels and
affection of Maurice, and finding some begun matter of dissension in other
particulars, did so kindle and foster it, till they brought the division to
that height, that one part of the Protestants were engaged with Antichrist and
his followers to destroy the other; and yet so closely carried, that the
difference was never stated upon the real account, which indeed such did
intend. Also men not so nearly concerned in the Churches divisions* as suppose
they be of another Church, or men not so immediately concerned in the debates
thereof, and the effects that follow thereupon; As in that Council of Carthage,
they enact that tenderness be used to the Donatists, and means be used to
reclaim them; and for that end did acknowledge their Ministers, though ordained
in a schism, to be Ministers, although the Church of Rome did write otherwise
to them, and did act otherwise themselves: These would be looked unto.
Sometimes also there are a sort of persons who long not for union; for, as
there is an itching after new doctrine in some, so is there for divisions and
changes amongst others, who may be sound in doctrine, who in this are to be
adverted to.

2. Men would eschew in such a case judicially to engage in such differences,
either by passing decisions in these things pro or contra in Judicatories, or
by Forbearing to engage judicially pro or con.
censuring, or noting with any reproach such as differ from them. For, 1. that
makes the division the more difficultly removable in it self. And, 2. it
engages both sides the more, and proves a let to retiring when men would, and
heighteneth the difference exceedingly. In that difference that was between
Cyprian and Stephanus, and other Bishops of Rome, concerning the rebaptizing of
such as had been baptized by Heretics and Schismatics, It is marked that
Stephanus did press the condemnation of it, did censure and refuse communion
with such as joined with Cyprian in his opinion: On the contrary, Cyprian did
indeed call Synods and decide, but neither pressed any man to his opinion or
practice, nor Censured any that differed in such a matter; And because his
carriage is so much commended by the Ancients, especially by Augustine, against
the Donatists, not because he counted Cyprian right on the matter; for, he
disclaimed that, and owned the contrary opinion; but because he carried in his
opinion so tenderly to the Churches union and peace. We shall observe two or
three passages of his, and of Augustines concerning him. 1. In his Epistle ad
Jubiannum, Haec rescripsimus, inquit, nemi^ praescribentes aut praejudicantes
quo minus unusquisque Episcoporum, quod putat faciat. Et ne quisquam pellendus
a caeterorum consortio videretur (dicit) nos quantum in nobis est propter
haereticos cum collegis and Coepiscopis nostris non contendimus, cum quibus
aivinam concordiam and pacem tenemus. Et Paulo post, Serventur (inquit) a nobis
patienter and leniter charitas animi, collegii honor, vinculum fidei, concordia
sacerdotii. Which words and many others are cited by Augustine de Baptismo,
lib. 6. cap. 17. And in another place, when he has cited this same last
Sentence and other words, giving the reason which the Apostle has, 1 Cor. 11.
If any man will be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of
God: after which a little, Augustine subjoyneth this approbation of his
carriage; Majus quippe in eo robur virtutis eminuit, cum is it a quaestio nondum
discuss a nutaret, quod aliter sentiens quam multi collegae, tantam
moderationem obtinuit, ut Ecclesiae Dei sanctam societatem, nulla schismatis
labe truncaret, quam si omnia non solum veraciter, sed etiam pariter sine ista
virtute sentiret; De Baptismo, lib. 5. cap. 17. This he says, even though
Cyprians opinion was confirmed by diverse Councels of Carthage. Which shows
what influence such abstinence has on the Churches peace, which is the more
observable, that he used this forbearance when he had the generality of the
Church of Africa, and the authority of their Councels for him; and also was
provoked by the vehemence of his opposits, and their Censuring such as were of
his opinion; yet he forbear, not because he doubted of the soundness of his
judgment, but because he respected the Churches peace, and even then did he
write sweetly in many Epistles, and a particular treatise, pressing the unity
of the Church; for which he is eminently esteemed of as an excellent pattern in
such a case by all sober and judicious men.

3. In such cases when union is desired, men would abstain the propagating of
their opinions in any purposed and public way. This is not to restrain a man's
sober, christian and necessary vindicating of himself in a due way. But, 1. All
unnecessary Abstaining from propagating their opinions factiously.
traffic that is principally for strengthening of a party. 2. Publishing in
print, things to that purpose, when there is no convenience for the Churches
good. 3. Making motions in Judicatories that awakens siding. 4. Insisting
thereon in public preaching. And, lastly, (When there is some necessity to
speak or write on such things) all reflections and irritations, would be
abstained; yea, it is fit that sometimes every word spoken, or written upon one
side, should be past over by the other, without reply, for peaces sake.
Because, 1. the broader such differences spread, they take the deeper root, and
increase siding more amongst the people. 2. Because, they irritate more and
keep off men from thinking of peace. 3. Because the memory of these things is
ready to riffle men's minds, Therefore most eminent men have wished, that all
Papers pro or contra in such differences might be buried; for, one difference
begets another, and one paper draws forth another, none being willing that
his adversary should have the last word; and oftentimes papers propagate a
controversy to a succeding generation, to whom it had been good that many
things had never been in writ. Also often, such writings prove edifying to few,
and they but make Church-division the subject of more discourse, and Ministers
to be the more contemptible; and do in themselves often involve many
contrradictions against one another, which readily are not possible to be
cleared in matters of fact, and reflections one upon another; which derogateth
exceedingly from the honor of the Ministry. It is marked of Constantine, that
when at the Council of Nice, there were many opposite papers of differences
amongst Bishops presented, he took them, and having gravely admonished the
Bishops for their contending amongst themselves, would not have one of them
read, but said, he would cover such infirmities as they were bringing to light,
by their contradictions, with his purple. This way also has been followed for
stopping of divisions in diverse reformed Churches.

4. All contrary acting would be abstained, as in Contrary acting.
Elections, Ordinations, or the like, because these fix* as with a nail, the
difference, as may be gathered from history. It were better many a time for the
Churches good, that any one side had suffered the Bishop, ordained by the
other, solely to possess the place, or that none had been ordained at all,
than that opposite Ordinations had been; because, that so the Church was divided
even in communion, and such particulars have been ever difficultly composed,
and ever exceedingly isntrumental to continue a breach, and it led men in
Congregations to be factious, and to seek to gain men and affections to their
party.

5. All separated and divided meetings would be Separated meetings to be
eschewed.
eschewed, whether the separation be total in respect of all Ordinances and
communion in general, as sometimes divisions have come amongst orthodox men to
such a height; Or, whether it be partial, suppose in Government, Sacraments,
etc. or any of these; because so not only way is made to a total separation,
but thereby there is a divided shape put upon the one Church, and occasion is
given for one party to condemn another, and so to beget more strife; and
especially, because it habituateth men to think themselves not of one body,
and, as it were, erecteth a Church or Altar against another (as the Fathers
were wont to speak) and so becomes a drawn line of division, and does really
make the difficulty of uniting the more difficult; because ere union be made
up, that partition must be pulled down. It is fit therefore that either all
such occasions of Fasts, etc. And separated Fasts.
wherein all cannot join, should be forborne; or that they be so ordered, as
there may be union in them.

6. Such acts and principles as put restraint upon Acts and Principles laying
restraints upon either side.
either side, making others incapable of Church-trust or the like, or which
declares them to be so, would be prevented; and if established, would be
orderly removed; because such things make a partition betwixt two, and heighten
such a difference beyond the nature thereof: Also they evidence much prejudice
and alienation of mind, and they seem to constrain men to an union, which is
never right if it be not voluntary. Hence we see that the great friends of
peace have ever endeavored to prevent or remove such; as in the instances of
Policarp, Ireneus and Cyprian, is clear, who did not only endeavor to remove
Censures, but even censurablenesse from persons so differing. This also is very
obliging to the opposite party. In that 163. Epistle of Augustines (which is
much to this purpose) mention is made of one Cenethlius, a Catholic Bishop,
who (says he) was much esteemed of by the Donatists, Quod constitutionem datam
contra eos, compresserit, and effectum habere non siverit.

CHAP. X. What is to be done in order to Uniting.
NOw we may be the shorter in speaking to what is to be done in reference to
particular differences, seeing much may be gathered from these generals
premitted, and it is not our purpose to be particular; Yet we say,

1. That it is the duty of such to be seeking union Seeking Meetings.
one with another, and for that cause to be making offer of, and desiring
meetings and conferences, and to be urging harmony one upon another. In that
Council of Carthage, whereof Aurelius was Moderator, they did appoint
Conferences to be sought for with the Donatists, although they had been long in
a schism; and for that end did appoint Commissioners, and did give instructions
to go from place to place, and to endeavor a settlement, whereof these were a
part, That their former schism and separation And offering fair conditions.
should be prejudicial to none; That Ministers and Bishops should continue in
their charges if otherwise they were worthy, notwithstanding of their former
separation: which is observed not to have wanted fruit in many places, as the
acts and events are recorded by Balsamon. And this is according to the general
rule of following peace, even when it seems to fly from men; And questions
that may engender strife are to be avoided and fled from, when they seem to
follow after men, because, as Paul says, 2 Timothy 2. 22. etc. The servant of the
Lord must not strive, etc. On this ground we find, that many of Augustines
Epistles, direct to Donatists and others, are to this purpose, craving friendly
communings; and when he has had occasion to be in cities where
Donatist-Bishops were, he used to visit them, and enter conference friendly
with them; and if any hope was, he wrote to others to entertain the same, as
particularly may be gathered from Epist. 147. where he honorably mentions
Promelianus in the desire of a conference; and because he knew the too great
vehemence of one Evodius, though of his own side, had offended him, he did
excuse it, saying amongst other things, Id hominis aetati ignoscendum est, etc.
The like he also has, Epist. 163. when he mentions Fortunius, whom he had
conferred with, with this testimony to these he writes to, Quantum enim
arbitror difficilime potestis invenire in Episcopis vestris tam utilem animum,
and voluntatem, quam in isto seen perspeximus; And therefore presses them to
entertain the begun conference, though he might not stay.

2. In carrying on such meetings, respect would be A right way of carrying on
such meetings.
had to union in the ordering of every circumstance; as in the persons chosen,
that they may be men inclined to peace, respected by the other party concerned
in the Churches differences, and free of the suspicions formerly hinted, and
such like, lest by an intended union there follow a greater rent and division,
as oftentimes has been seen in conferences amongst dissentient men. Here also
a special respect would be had to the expressing of mutual benevolence in
words and carriages, lest some hard impression seize on men at the entry.
Choice also would be made of the subject first to be spoken of; as what may be
thought most subject to mistake, heat or contention, would be left to the last
place; and what may be conceived more plausible-like to both, would be begun
at, that it may be rather known wherein men agree, than wherein they differ, at
the entry at least. Possibly also union in fundamental things, being accorded
unto, it may make way for moderating affections in other things less
fundamental. This method was ever urged by Bucer, Beza and other Reformers,
who kept conferences at first with the Lutheran party; because, beginning at
some point of Doctrine, or particular in practice, wherein the difference is
highest, does often at the entry rifle men's humors* and break off conferences
abruptly with the more heat, as experience in these debates at that time did
make too too manifest.

3. Such meetings for conference would be seriously Contention about
formalities to be forborne.
and condescendingly improved for the end designed: As, 1. protractings of
time, or janglings about circumstances would be eschewed; as also
tenaciousnesse, and contentiousnesse about formalities of proceeding, and
particular insisting upon contradictions in matters of fact, because such
things become not the gravity and seriousness of men aiming at such an end,
But the main business would be soberly and seriously gone about, and that
timeously; for, men should not meet to take advantage one of another by such
formalities, but to procure the good of the Church. 2. Criminations, or
objecting of personal faults one to another or difference in particulars,
Personal criminations.
would either be altogether forborne, or left to the last place, and the main
matter would be first handled, and particulars accordingly squared. 3. Their
would be condescending to follow some circumstances, even though they seem not
so reasonable, lest by the wilful adhering of one party to a circumstance, the
end be disappointed; yea, sometimes more material things, at lest till there
be a better understanding begotten, are to be ceded in, when it may be without
sin* if so be it may contribute for the carrying on of such a design, and we
will almost ever find The most tender of the Church, most condescending
these that are most tender of the Churches good to be most condescending in
all these; As amongst other instances, we will find in that conference between
the Catholics and Donatists, at which Augustine was present, and which is set
down by him; wherein, amongst other things, these are clear, 1. That not only
the Catholics sought the meeting, but also pressed the speaking unto the main
business, which the other did sometimes deny, saying, It was not lawful for
the children of Martyrs to meet with the children of apostate or wicked men;
and sometimes by formalities, jangling questions, they protracted time to
eschew the main thing. 2. It is clear, that also the Catholics condescended to
many of their suits, and yielded to account them Bishops, and did not
contradict, but cede at the entry, that Churches should be rendered to these
from whom they were taken, if so be that might have inclined them to union, and
that even by benefits they might be mollified, and stood on no circumstantiall
thing with them. Such meetings have often been disappointed with such vain
janglings, especially when numbers have been confusedly admitted, and when each
party has charged another with former miscarriages, As Augustine observes,
Epist. 163. and therefore has that word to them, Neque nos illis debere
objicere suorum scelera, neque illos nobis. And, because the Donatists
upbraided the Catholics (as the orthodox are called in all these debates) that
they were guilty of persecuting them, because they had proceeded to some
Sentences, and procured commission from Civil powers against them to put them
from their charges, (These times they called tempora Macariana, because of such
a person that was eminent in the executing thereof) And again, the Catholics
used to object to them, beside their schism, Headiness, irregular violences,
and the like, because of the practices of the Circumcellions, who, having
fallen off with the Donatists, went also in many absurdities beyond them;
therefore when he is pressing a conference, Epist. 203. Tollamus (says he)
inania objecta, nec tu objicias tempora Macariana, nec ego saevitiam
Circumcellionum. And in Epist. 107. says, that in his conference with
Fortunius, Placuit omnibus in talibus disputationibus violenta facta malorum
hominum nobis ab invicem objici non debere. And there is no little furtherance
or prejudice to a conference accordingly as this advice is followed or not,
seeing often such bygone particulars will heat more, than that which is of
greater concernment in the main cause.

4. To make the instances more particular, the matter concerning which debate
arises and falls to be the subject of the conference, may be distinguished, and
so more clearly spoken unto: Which is, 1. either a difference in some
doctrinall thing. Or, 2. some particular practice, or some personal
miscarriage. Or, 3. something in Worship. Or, 4. something in Government, or
such like.

CHAP. XI. What is to be done in closing doctrinal differences.
1. FOr doctrinal differences of judgment, there are three ways to close them;
(it is to be adverted, that the difference is not supposed to be in any
fundamental thing) First, By sober and The first way of closing doctrinall
differences.
serious conference, one party may bring another to the same judgment with
them; or, both parties may quit something of extremities, and join in a middle
opinion. This is the most solid union, when men come to think and speak the
same thing, and sometime has been attained. Yet concerning this, we say, 1.
That all union is not to depend on this, as has been said. 2. It has been
very rarely attained, especially when difference has spread and rooted it self
by debating and contradiction, seeing even good men have both infirmity and
corruption. 3. We say, that public dispute, either by word or writ, has never
proven very useful, even amongst good men, to attain this end, But ordinarily
such debates have heightened the controversy, and engaged men more; so that if
any thing prevail toward this, it is friendly, familiar conferences opening
truth, rather than formal stated disputations; because in such, men are (as it
were) upon their guard, and fully do exercise their wit; in the other, there is
more access to inform the judgment, by a loving, grave, serious manner of
speaking of the truth, and that privately to others, especially to such as are
of reputation for parts and ability, and that it be not done in vain, as Paul
has it, Gal. 2. 2. And it is observable that he speaks this in reference to
his way, when he intended the evidencing of his agreement with the chief
Apostles in the matter of doctrine. Also we find meekness and instructing put
together, when there is any expectation to recover one from a difference, 2 Timothy 2. 15. and convincing or disputing is more especially applicable to these
of whom there is little hope, out of respect to the edification of others.
Hence we find the Apostles disputing with false teachers in some points of
truth, but rather entreating and exhorting Believers to have peace amongst
themselves, notwithstanding of lesser differences.

A second way of composure, is, when such agreement The second way of composing
such differences
in judgment cannot be obtained, To endeavor a harmony and keep unity
notwithstanding of that difference, by a mutual forbearance in things
controverted: which we will find to be of two sorts. The first is, to say so
total, that is, when neither side does so much as doctrinally in word, writ, or
Sentences of Judicatories, press any thing that may confirm or propagate their
own opinion, or condemn the contrary, But do altogether abstract from the same
out of respect to the Churches peace, and for the preventing of scandal; and do
in things wherein they agree according to the Apostle's direction, Philip. 3.
16. Walk by the same rule, and mind the same things mutually, as if there were
no such differences, and waiting in these till the Lord shall reveal the same
unto them. This way is safe, where the doctrine upon which the difference is,
is such, as the forbearing the decision thereof, does neither mat any duty that
the Church in general is called to, nor endanger the salvation of souls through
the want of clearness therein nor, in a word, infer such inconveniences to the
hurt of the Church, as such unseasonable awakening and keeping up of
differences and divisions may have with it; Because the scope of bringing forth
every truth, or confirming the same by any authoritative sanction, etc. is the
edification of the Church; and therefore when the bringing forth thereof does
destroy more than edify, it is to be forborne. Neither can it be ground enough
to plead for such decisions in preaching, that the thing they preach-for is
truth, and the thing they condemn is error. Because, 1. it is not the
lawfulness of the thing simply that is in question, but the necessity and
expediency thereof in such a case: Now, many things are lawful that are not
expedient, 1 Cor. 10. 23. 2. In these differences that were in the primitive
times concerning meats, days, genealogies, etc. there was a truth or an error
upon one of the sides, as there is a right and a wrong in every contradiction
of such a kind, yet the Apostle thinks fitter, for the Churches peace, that
such be altogether refrained, rather than any way (at least in public)
insisted upon or decided. 3. Because no Minister can bring forth every truth at
all times, he must then make choice; And I suppose some Ministers may die, and
all do so, who have not preached every truth, even which they knew, unto the
people. Beside, there are (no question) many truths hid to the most learned.
Neither can this be thought inconsistent with a Ministers fidelity, who is to
reveal the whole counsel of God; because, that counsel is to be understood of
things necessary to men's salvation, and is not to be extended to all things
whatsoever; for, we find the great Apostle expounding this in that same Sermon,
Act. 20. ver. 20. I have kept back nothing that was profitable unto you;
which evidenceth that the whole counsel of God, or the things which he showed
unto them, is the whole, and all that was profitable for them, and that for no
by-respect or fear whatsoever he shunned to reveal that unto them. Also, it is
clear, that there are many truths which are not decided by any judicial act;
and amongst other things, sparingnesse to decide truths that are not
fundamental judicially has been ever thought no little mean of the Churches
peace, as the contrary has been of division.

The third way (which is the second sort of the former) of composure, is mixed,
When there is some meddling with such questions, yet with such forbearance, The
third way of composing such differences
that though there be a seen difference, yet there is no schism or division,
but that is seriously and tenderly prevented; as upon the one side, some may
express their mind in preaching and writing on a particular question one way,
others may do it differently; yet both with that meekness and respect to those
they differ from, that it does beget no rent, nor give just ground of offense,
nor mar union in any other thing; Or, it may possibly come to be decided in a
Synod, yet with such forbearance upon both sides, that it may prove no
prejudice to union; those who have authority for them, not pressing it to the
prejudice of the opinion, names, consciences of the other, or to their
detriment in any respect; but allowing to them a liberty to speak their minds,
and walk according to their own light in such particulars: And on the contrary,
the other resting satisfied in the unity of the Church, without condemning
them, or pressing them to condemn themselves; because so indeed their liberty
is no less than others who have the decision of a Synod for them: And thus men
may keep communion and union in a Church, even where by the Judicatories
thereof, some lesser not fundamental error, which does also infer
unwarrantaable practices, is authoritatively concluded. We have a famous
instance of this in the Church of Africa in the days of Cyprian, which by the
Ancients has ever been so much esteemed of. There was a difference in that
Church concerning the Rebaptizing of Heretics and Schismatics after their
conversion, or, of such as had once fallen in to them; Cyprian and the greatest
part thought their first Baptism null, or, by their fall, made void; others
thought it not so, who were the lesser part, yet right as to this particular;
There was meetings on both sides for defense of their opinions. Also in a
Council of near three hundred Bishops, it is judicially and authoritatively
concluded; yet that Synod carried so, as they did not only not censure any that
dissented, nor press them to conform in practice to their judgment; but did
also entertain most intimat respect to them, and familiarity with them, as may
be gathered from what was formerly hinted. And upon the other side, we do not
find any in that Church making a schism upon the account of that judicial
erroneous decision (though at least by three several Synods it was ratified)
but contenting themselves to have their consciences free by retaining their own
judgment, and following their own practice, till time gave more light and more
occasion to clear that truth. And we will never find in the Writings of any
time, more affection amongst brethren, and more respect to peace, than was in
that Church at that time amongst those that differed; And there is not any
practice more commended in all the Church History and Writings of the Fathers,
than this practice; as partly may be gathered from what was formerly touched
out of Augustine. And if we will consider the case rationally, we will find
that it is not impossible to have union in a Church where there is in such a
difference an authoritative decision, even supposing that side, on which the
error lies, to be approved. For, 1. There is no necessity for such as have
authority for them, to press others in their judgment or practice in such
things; neither can it be thought that such a decision can of it self satisfy
all scruples, neither yet that men doubtingly may follow; Nor, lastly, that
such controversies can bear the weight of troubling the Church, by censuring
such as otherwise may be faithful, seeing sometimes even unfaithful men have
been spared with respect to the Churches good, as has been said. And,
secondly, upon the other side, such a constitution of a Church, does not
involve all that keep communion therein, in the guilt thereof, if personally
they be free; as in the instance of the Jewish Church is clear: where, no
question many corrupt acts have been established, yet did it neither make
communion in Worship or Government to be unlawful, where the matter and manner
of carriage was lawful. Beside, this would infer, that no Judicatory could
keep union, where there were contrary votes, or a Sentence past without
unanimity: because that is certainly wrong to them who think otherwise, and if
so, there could be no Judicatory expected either in Church or State; for, it
cannot be expected, that they shall be still unanimous, or, that the greater
part shall cede to the lesser, and rescind their own act. Also, suppose there
should be such a division upon one difference, can it be expected that those
who unite upon the divided sides respectively, shall again have no more
difference amongst themselves? and if they have, shall there not be a new
division? and where shall this end? And seeing men must resolve to keep unity
where there are faults of such a nature, or to have none at all, it is as good
to keep it at first, as to be necessitated thereto afterward. The Orthodox urge
this argument against the Donatists, who would not keep union with them,
because of pretended corruptions in the proceedings of Judicatories and
Ordinations; yet were constrained to bear with such amongst themselves, and
particularly to receive, and unite with the Maximinianists, whose communion
they had once rejected, though a branch of their own faction, because they saw
no end of divisions if they did not resolve to dispense with such things
amongst themselves. And Augustine often asserteth, that they were never able to
answer this argument when it was propounded to them, to wit, Why they did not
give them that same latitude, in keeping communion with them, which they had
given to the Maximinianists, who were guilty of such things as they imputed to
them? We conceive then, that even in such a case there may be union for
prosecuting the main work of the Gospel, notwithstanding of such a
circumstantial difference, if men otherwise set themselves to it; and the
general grounds, formerly laid down, do confirm this.

CHAP. XII. What to do for union in points not doctrinall, but about matters of
fact or personal faults.
IF the difference be not doctrinall in point of judgment, at least only, but
being in matter of fact, as personal faults and corruptions; whereby the one
is ready to object to the other some bypast failings, and miscarriages:
whereupon by inconsiderat upbraidings, pressing of Censures, or condemnation of
what has been done, the Churches peace is in hazard to be broken, and men like
to be rent and divided in their communion. And oftentimes such things prove
exceeding fashious, where men wilfully, or imprudently pursue such things
without respect to the Churches peace. This often waited upon a time of
darkness, or persecution, when men, being in the dark, and in a distemper,
were led away by tentation, and overtaken with many faults, and sometimes
amongst others, made to juffle with, and trample one upon another (as it were)
not knowing what they were doing; and when this time was over, some were ready
to carp at what was past in the dark, and to quarrel at others for such
juffling, when they were so through-other. This indeed was ordinary, but most
unbecoming grave men, to make that a ground of contending, which inadvertently
was done by Contests about these, are of several sorts.
others in the dark (as the great Basilius says) In nocturno tempore, and
densis tenebris. Such contests are of four sorts.

First* Sometimes in general, there is a dissatisfaction with the constitution
of the Church, in respect of the grossness of the Officers and Members
Dissatisfaction from constitution of Officers and Members.
thereof. This cannot be removed upon the one side only, because tares cannot
but be in the Church, and that discernably, as Cyprian says; it is removed
then by meekness and tenderness upon the one side toward such as have
withdrawn, and by their yielding to return who have withdrawn, which when it
came to pass, has been matter of gladness to all the Church. Amongst
Cyprians Epistles ( Epist. 50. edit. Pameli) mention is made of Urbanus,
Maximus, and others of the Church of Rome, who being Confessors and imprisoned
in the time of persecution, and after their delivery finding many gross
Members to be in the Church, and meeting with the doctrine of Novatus that
commended separation to the godly for their more comfortable communion
together, that they came to be tickled therewith, and for a time to separate
from the communion of Cornelius, and others of the Clergy, pretending there
could be no communion in such an evil constituted Church; but afterward,
finding the great hurt that came thereby to the Church, they overcame their own
affections and inclinations, and out of respect to the good of the Church, did
unit, which was exceedingly welcomed by all, as their Epistle to Cyprian, and
his to them, do manifest. And as their fall shows, that it is not impossible,
but that zealous Ministers, who have kept out against defection, may be
overtaken with such a fault; So it gives a sweet copy of Christian
deniednesse and tenderness by others to be followed in the like case. Their
words to Cyprian are worthy the observing. Nos habito consilio utilitatibus
Ecclesiae, and paci magis consulentes, omnibus rebus praetermiss^s, and Iudicio
Dei servatis, cum Cornelio Episcopo nostro, pariter and cum universo Clero
pacem fecisse, cum gaudio etiam The alleging of faults either not true, or not
cear.
universae Ecclesiae, prona etiam omnium charitate.

A second sort of such contests, are, When faults are alleged which either are
not true, or cannot be proven, although possibly they may be both gross and
true, for both of these did the Novatians and Donatists trouble the Church,
insisting long in charging many crimes upon men particularly upon Cecilianus
and Osius, which they could never be able to make out, although they alleged
that such faults were cloaked by the Catholics, and that they were not to be
communicated with. In this case the Orthodox took three ways to remove such a
difference. 1. By pleading forbearance of awakening such contests, and
exhorting rather to keep union, than to hazard to break it upon such grounds,
and so (as Augustine says) ut quaedam incerta crimina pro certa pace Deo
dimitterentur, Cont. Epist. Parm. lib. 1. cap. 3. 2. If that could not be
acquiesced in, they admitted the thing to proof, over, and over again, that by
lawful trial it might be decided, as we will find in the former instances,
the same case of Cecilianus was often tried, even after he was absolved. It is
true the Donatists did not acquiesce, but did separate, (for which cause they
were ever accounted most gross Schismatics) yet is it of it self, a way
wherein men may satisfyingly acquiesce. A third way sometimes used, was, That
when divisions were like to be occasioned by dissatisfaction with a particular
person against whom things could not be judicially made out so as to found a
Sentence, nor yet possibly was there so full satisfaction with him in every
thing, as by owning of him to hazard a rent, where a people were stumbled by
him, they did without judicial processing, or Censuring, interpose with the
Bishop to cede, and wrote to the people to choose another. So in that Council
of Carthage, Canon. 91. letters are written to Maximianus (called Episcopus
Bagiensis) and the people, that he might cede the Bishopric, and they might
choose another; yet there is no mention of any made-out accusation, or
Sentence, but that for the good of the Church, Synodo placuit, etc. There is
mention made elsewhere in history of a Bishop of that place, of that name, who
had been a Donatist, and did return to the communion of the Church; but, if
this be he, or what was the cause of this appointment, is neither certain, nor
of great concernment in this.

A third sort of contests of this kind, are, When Pleading for such as are most
justly censured, or censurable.
crimes are gross and clear, and men are either justly censurable, or
Censured; some (possibly honestly minded) may be engaged to do for them, by
their insinuating upon them, and giving misinformations and prejudices, and so
be brought to endeavor the preventing or removing of Sentences against, or
from, such as justly deserve the same. In this case we find a threefold way of
composure. 1. An endeavor The justness of the Sentence to be cleared.
used to clear to others the justice of such a Sentence when it has been
traduced. Thus when Basilides, and Martialis, were justly deposed by a Synod of
Spain, they did, by false pretexts, engage the Clergy of Rome to own them,
and write for their recovery, which did exceedingly offend the Bishops of
Spain; whereupon they wrote to Cyprian and these in Africa for advice, who,
being met in the Synod, approved their deposition, and advised them not to
readmit them, because none such who had any blemish and were not holy, ought to
minister in the holy things, and that rather they should bear with Stephanus
his mistake, who out of ignorance and misinformation was led to side with such:
Thus Cyprian has it in his Epistles to the Church of Spain, Epist. 68. So that
schism was stopped, and the Churches continued to acknowledge the lawfully
ordained Bishops that succeeded these. And the readmission of such, had neither
been in it self lawful, nor yet had compassed the end of obtaining peace in
these Churches where the people was Or, the Sentence recalled, when the person
might be profitable
stumbled by their carriages. A second way was, When the men were orthodox and
profitable, though failing in some gross particular, yet when they were owned
by others in the Church, Synods did not stand, for concord, to remove such
Sentences, as was formerly instanced in the case of Ostus: Augustine also in a
certain Epistle, 164. does approve the not-censuring of one Optatus, lest
thereby a schism should be occasioned, because of manies adhering to him. We
will find also a third way, That when men have been Sentenced, and some have
continued to own them, and others to oppose them, such have been brought to
submit themselves, and so the division has been removed; It was so in that hot
contest that continued long between the Bishops of Rome, and the Church of
Africa, in the case of Apiratus Bishop of Sica, etc. who being deposed by the
Synod of Carthage, was pressed to be admitted by the Bishops of Rome, whom by
no means these of Africa would admit; at last, these that were Sentenced, came
to acknowledge the Sentence; whereby the division was stopped.

A fourth sort of contests or divisions for matters of Mutual upbraidings for
failings.
fact, is, When both sides have had their failings in a time of darkness and
tentation, some one way, and some another, and after some breathing they fall,
by mutual upbraidings, to hazard the Churches peace; one casting up this fault
to him, and he again upbraiding him with another. The way taken to prevent
this, is most satisfying, when both, acknowledging Removed by a mutual
forgiving.
their own guilt to other, did forgive one another, and join cordially for the
good of the work. In the debates with the Donatists there is much mention made,
not without great commendation of the practice of a Synod, which is called
Concilium Cirtense, wherein the members did mutually confess their faults, and
(says he, to wit, Augustine, in the conference formerly cited) Sibi invicem
ignoscebant ne schisma fieret. And by the scope of the Catholics in urging
that example, and by the vehemence used by the Donatists in denying the same,
it would seem, that they looked upon this as a most excellent and satisfying
way of removing differences amongst godly men, when every one acknowledges
their own fault, and does not upbraid but forgive one another, endeavoring to
have the rememberance of bypast miscarriages rather forgiven and buried in
oblivion, than mentioned. Because good men being but men, usually there are
failings on both sides, and the denying of it, provokes others to insist the
more thereon, as the acknowledging thereof does stop the upbraiding of them
with the same; and usually it is to be seen, that the best men had rather
mention their own faults in their acknowledgements, than hear the same done by
any other. Beza, Epist. 23. also has such an advice as this to a Church that
had fallen into division, Utinam utraque pars acquiescere malit, quam si
curiose nimium and (...) quis sit in majori culpa, inquiratur.

CHAP. XIII. What to do toward uniting in divisions arising from diversity of
circumstances in external administrations, and especially arising from
Church Government.
A Third matter that occasioneth divisions, is, a Diversity of circumstances in
external administrations.
diversity in Worship, Ceremonies, or things that relate to external
administration of Ordinances, when some follow one way in Preaching,
administrating of Sacraments, Catechizing, etc. and others, another. This
ordinarily breeds janglings, and oftentimes troubled the Church, as we see in
the business about Easter and Ceremonies. It is not our purpose to insist in
this, because ordinarily such debates pretend some lawfulness, or
unlawfulness in the thing contended for, and are to be counted amongst the
jangling debates that the men of God are to eschew. And also, because these
things are often fully and clearly discussed, We shall only say concerning
them. 1. That, as there is a necessity of suffering some difference in
Doctrine, So is there also a necessity to bear with some differences in
circumstances in the external manner of Worship* etc. and men would not soon
offend at every difference, nor be displeased if it proceed not from
affectation of singularity, unfaithfulness, or some other corrupt rise. And we
will find great condescendency in the greatest Condescendency therein.
men, both of old and late, in things that are not sinful in themselves, for
keeping of union in the Church: And thus far, the Apostles practice of becoming
all things to all, will warrant. Zanchius in an Epistle to this purpose, gives
both many examples of, and reasons for this. 2. We say, that men especially in
a time of divisions, would by all means endeavor to keep the trodden and
approven way that has been used, and is in use in a Church in such
administrations; because the less men be sticking in the manner of these
things, and the more simplicity they use, and the less they differ from what
is most ordinary and approven, the less will the hazard of division be in
these things, which does arise from the multiplying of them; the changing of
the old, or bringing in of a new manner, the condemning of the way and manner
used by others* as having some Better to forbear some new thing, than to alter
the old, without some considerable reason.
great absurdity in it, and the pressing of their way, even in circumstances,
upon others; These and such things are to be eschewed: and so indeed there is
no way to peace in these things but to forbear; for it is more easy to forbear
some new thing, than to make others alter what is old, except there be some
reason in the matter to move to this*

The great, and usually the most bitter contentions Divisions about
Churchgovernment.
of a Church, as was said before, are in things that belong to Government;
which are of many kinds, and have their own proportionable cures when blessed
of God, We shall instance in these five kinds of contests in this matter. The
first, is concerning the form of Government. The second, is concerning the
formality of Church-judicatories. The third, concerning the matter enacted or
decerned by them. The fourth, concerning particular miscarriages and abuses of
power in Government. And the fifth, concerning the persons who ought to govern,
or to whom the Government is due, and whose determinations are ultimatly to be
obeyed.

For the first, Debates about the nature and form Concerning the form of
Government.
of Government, may be considered doctrinally, and so it is a difference of
judgment; Some think one form of Government lawful, and others not that, but
another. If this difference be fairly carried, it needs make no division in
the Church, as was in the foregoing part hinted. 2. It may be considered
practically, that is, when men not only think so differently in their
judgment, but accordingly they act, driving opposite designs, as if they were
two parties, seeking to get one Church subdued to them, and neither Practical
difference herein makes division.
of them does acknowledge the other. This cannot be without division; for, the
ground of all union and communion in the visible Church in all the Ordinances
of Christ, is, the unity of the visible Church; as even in old time Augustine
did press: So Ecclesiastic union, must be made up and entertained in a
Church, by an unity in the Government thereof; for though there may be a
forbearance and a kind of peace where the unity of the visible Church is
denied, or where there are divided Governments that are not subaltern; yet
there can be no Church-union, nor communion in Ordinances, of Word, Sacraments
and Government, which results from the former, and does necessarily presuppose
the same. We dare not, nor cannot offer any directions for making up an union
here, save that men would unite in one form of Government that can extend to
the whole body, and that in such a Government as is allowed by Christ,
otherwise it can be no union; because so it were not a duty, as union is.

If it were asked, What kind of Government that may be most probably, wherein
men ought to unite? Answ. We mind not to digress to a doctrinall debate; yet
these characters may be given of it. 1. It must Characters of Government fit
for uniting.
be a Government that can extend unto, and reach all the body; for, one main
end of Government is union, Ephesians. 4. 3, 10, 11, etc. and the removing offenses
which make divisions, Matthew. 18. And this union is not to be in this or that
particular part of the body, but in the whole, 1 Cor. 12. that there be no
schism in the body: therefore it must extend to all, or be in a capacity to do
so. 2. It would be in a proportionable fitness to remove these causes that
breed divisions, (for, there cannot be union in a Government that is not fitted
for that) and therefore must be able to purge corrupt teachers, and the leaven
of corrupt doctrine out of the whole Church, or any part thereof. Hence, both
in the Scripture, and primitive times, and all alongs, there has been still a
joint authoritative concurrence for removing these causes of this evil in
whatsoever place they did appear. 3. It must be such a Government as has an
unity amongst the whole Governors for this end, and so it must answer to the
unity of the body: Hence, in the Epistle to the Galatians, Paul commends the
remeeding of that evil to them all in a joint manner, as being one lump,
without respect to their subdivision in particular Churches; and if this
Authority did not imply unity amongst the Governors wherever they lived, and a
capacity to act unitedly upon occasion, there could be no access
authoritatively to remove such evils from the Church, nor such weight in the
mean applied. 4. It must be a Government wherein there is a coordinatenesse
amongst the Governors; because so not only the union of the Church is made up,
but her communion is represented; and to place the Government in one, as
Papists do in the Pope, does not make an union in the Government, which
implies a mutual and kindly co-ordinatnesse and associating one with another;
but whatever they pretend of union in it, it is really but tyranny, and such
as the most arbitrary ruler may have, when by violence he seems to keep down
all divisions under him, neither so can that body be said to be united in him.
And we see in the primitive times, even after Bishops and Patriarchs were
brought in into the Church, that still the supreme Government, whereby union
was entertained, did reside in a mutual co-ordination, and combination, even of
such Bishops, Metrapolitans, Patriarchs, etc. acting in an united and joint
way: whereby manifestly it appears, that such a Government as is to be united
into, must be extensive unto the body, at least be in capacity so to be
extended, and it must be in a coordination and consociation of many Church
officers together; and that such subordinations as mar this coordination and
equality, must be swallowed up, ere there can be an united Government for the
preservation of the union of the Church, because the supreme Government and
decision must be in many; and many of different degrees and places, cannot be
so one as these who are of the same order, to speak so.

Yet we think, that where such an union cannot be had in Government, men that
have liberty, without entanglement to their own consciences, to follow their
duty, ought to do it with all tender respect to the edification and union of
the Church wherein they live, and to make the best of their particular case
that may be for that end. But seeing the wisdom and goodness of God has made
it our lote in this Land, to live under a Government, to which the
abovementioned characters do well agree; it is hopeful, if as we ought we
conscionably adhere to the principles thereof, we may, yea, shall unite in the
Lord.

Secondly, Supposing, that men agree in that same supreme government, to wit,
Councils and Synods, there Debates about the constitution of Synods.
may be some debate concerning the formal constitution thereof, what is to be
accounted a rightly constitute Synod, and such as ought to be acknowledged so?
It cannot be denied, but that there is a right and a wrong in this, and that
there are rules to be kept, and that also de facto they may be broken, even
where there is no failing in the matter. It is true also, that we will sometimes
find worthy men quarrelling the constitution of Synods, and declining them, as
was formerly hinted, refusing to appear before them, till some persons were
removed from them, as Chrysostom and forty two Bishops with him, did in
reference to that particular Synod at Chalcedon: and sometimes their Acts were
declared void, because the meetings were not numerous, as Balsamon does
instance in the case of one Johannes Amathuntus, whose deposition was declared
null, because all the Bishops of Cyprus were not conveened to his trial, which
might have been; and because, in strict reckoning, there was one fewer at his
deposition than was allowed by the Canons. Yet concerning this we say, 1. That
it will be found Defects in constitution cannot easily annull without defect in
the matter.
very difficult to pitch on such defects in the constitution of a Synod, as
will make the same null without respect to the matter thereof* seeing there may
be many defects that will not infer this. 2. It will be hard to gather from
Church History, or Writings of the Ancients, or Canons of Councils, what has
been a peremptory rule to them to walk by in such a case. Their In ancient
Councels soundness of matter more regarded than formality or number.
practices in this are so various, that it appears, the matter has ever been
more headed by them* than the formality of the constitution. And therefore, 3.
We will find their practice to be according to this; When the matter was sound
and profitable, it was accepted, and the Synod was reverenced, although it has
had less formality, and has been of a fewer number; So the Council of
Sardica, Laodicea, and some particular Provincial Synods, have ever been of
great authority because of their matter, when more numerous Synods, with more
formalities, have never been so accounted of, nor reckoned amongst the General
Councils, although their number has been far greater than many of these other.
4. When they come to determine any thing after the close of corrupt Synods,
they do not usually sift the constitution thereof, but examine and condemn the
matter thereof, and do repeal their Sentences, and account them null from the
beginning; not because of questioning their Authority that did it, but because
of their doing the same unjustly, as in the cases of Athanasius, Eustachius,
Chrysostom, and Ignatius, that followed him in the same See: All whose
depositions were accounted null, because of the unjust violence that was used
in them. 5. We say then, that hardly it will be observed, that this
consideration of a particular Synods constitution, has been the rise or ground
of division amongst godly and orthodox men agreeing in the same Truth, Form of
Government, and Rules for constituting of Assemblies or Synods. But we will
ever find where Declinators or Protestations are mentioned, 1. That the party
declined has been palpably corrupt in fundamental doctrines. Or, 2. palpably
driving on that general design, and violence against particular persons, as
subserving the same. And, 3. it has been also, after many evidences of such
corruptions and violences, as in the former instances that are given of
Declinators is clear; where we find, that Synods have been acknowledged, and
yet upon the discovery of their corrupt designs and violence, have been
declined and protested against as null, as that second Council at Ephesus was.
Whereby it appears, that if their proceedings had been acceptable, their
constitution and authority had not been called in question.

If it be asked upon supposition, That a difference concerning the constitution
of a particular Synod, and a division upon that account fall to be amongst
godly and orthodox Divines, agreeing in the same Truths, form of Government,
general Rules, for constituting of Synods, etc. What should be done for union
in such a case?

Answ. It would seem there should be no great need What should be done for
union, when division arises about the constitution of a Synod.
to give directions here, the difference being so narrow; certainly many of the
Ancients, and also of our Reformers, and eminent Divines, who have groaned and
do groan under many sad pressures, corruptions, and divisions in the Church,
would have thought, and think it a great mercy to have had, and to have the
difference brought to such a point, and betwixt such parties; Yet, seeing it is
too too possible to be stood upon, we do conceive it is no such thing as may
make union, amongst parties so differing, impossible. We say therefore,

1. That such would consider the little usefulness Little usefulness as to the
Churches edificationin the thing controverted.
and weightinesse, as to the main of edification that is in the thing
controverted whatever way it be decided: For, 1. the declaring of such a Synod
valid, or null, as to its constitution, does not corrupt any point of Truth,
nor bring-in any new Form of Government, nor alter any Rule concerning the Form
agreed in; because the question is not in thesi, what is the form and rule
according to which a Synod ought to be constituted? that is agreed upon: But
the question is, Whether such a particular Synod be agreeable to such a Rule?
and respect to the Rule makes the one that they cannot approve it, and the
other that they cannot condemn it: And is it of great concernment to the main
of the Churches edification to say it is so, or not, considering it abstractly,
or supposing it should never be determined at all? 2. We say, That it is not of
much concernment, even to Government, to say that such a particular Synod is
right or wrong constituted: for, though a Church cannot want Government, and
that cannot be casten; yet a Church cannot lose much by questioning the
constitution of one Synod, suppose rightly constituted, abstracting it from the
consideration of its matter contained therein; and if its matter be
warrantable, it has weight in it self without such consideration of a
constitution, if it be not warrantable, such a consideration of a lawfully
constituted Synod cannot make it warrantable. Again, upon the other side, The
counting of a particular Synod to be rightly constituted when it is not, cannot
be of great hurt to the Church where the Rule is acknowledged. For, 1. It does
not alter the nature of the matter; Nor, 2. does it alter the manner of
constituting Assemblies, because one particular failing in misapplying the Rule
cannot incapacitate a Church for all time to come to keep the same, especially
if it be guarded that no precedent be drawn from that pattern, to bind any new
sense upon the rule. 3. We say, that it would seem if any debate be such as
decision may be forborne therein, this may be accounted of that nature, to wit,
Whether such a particular Synod be rightly constituted, or not? because, if
more corruption and inconvenience, that may be feared, follow, there are more
material things to debate, and to differ upon; if more follow not, but that
there may be access to an united Government whereby these suspicions may be
put out of question, then it seems unsafe to mar that, and the fruit which
may follow by the disputing of what is past.

But more nearly to take notice of such a difference, we may consider it two
ways. 1. As it implies a This difference is either in judgment, and may be
forborne.
difference in judgment. 2. As it infers a different practice. First, then,
As it infers the difference of judgment, there ought certainly to be a
forbearance, seeing such things are often involved with many difficulties and
contradictions in matter of fact, that it is not possible, by debating fully,
to convince either party to assent to the other, especially where heat and
prejudice has someway fixed and preoccupied the judgment; and certainly,
forbearance here cannot be inconsistent with the duty of Ministers, although
there were not such a motive to persuade it. By forbearance we understand, 1.
That none peremptorily press the other either to acknowledge the validity or
nullity of such a constitution. 2. There would be a forbearance of public
debating of it, or of any thing that may occasion the same, as pressing of the
Acts thereof, if no other ground support the same, but the Authority of such a
Synod. And we conceive in the by, this occasion may be prevented by a mutual
condescending, or joint authoritative enacting, that such and such things, as
possibly may be useful afterward, be of force to all, if not by the former
constitution, yet by the present appointment, and so both may agree in the
matter. 3. A condemning of others for approving or disapproving the former
constitution, would be forborne; and seeing the question is so little and
inconsiderable in it self, it would not be odiously aggreaged or insisted upon.

Secondly, Considering it as it relates to practice, Or it relates to
practice, and so something is to be tolerate and something done.
something is to be forborne, and something is to be done. 1. For forbearance
What might involve either party in the matter of fact contrary to their
judgment, would be abstained; and this forbearance in practice would be as
broad as forbearance in judgment, that, as Cyprian says, (in another case)
differing brethren may both have their judgment and practice in such things at
their own free arbitrements, as to such restraints. Neither can this
forbearance mar the peace of any, because if such things be indifferent, and
although lawful, yet not necessary, the preserving of the Churches peace, and
the preventing of what offense would follow, is ground enough to abstain from
such things, out of respect to the consciences of others. If the thing be
necessary, then indeed it is not to be forborne, neither is that pleaded-for
here; yet the doing of it upon the account of such an authority, is not
necessary; but the matter of the thing or some uncontroverted ground may be had
for warranting the same. 2. That which is to be done, we conceive, is this,
That there be endeavors to have some united, uncontroverted authority
established, by whose authority things necessary may be done, without
infringing the authority of what was past in respect of those who acknowledge
the same, and also without leaving the weight of the authority upon the former
to those who question the same: And we conceive this being done, neither is
there any conscience straitened, nor any thing necessary for the Churches good
omitted; yea, by this means there is access unitedly to seek the Churches
edification, without any prejudice by the former contention; because by laying
this new foundation posteriour to the former, the Church is put beyond that
stumblingblock, and carried over, or by the same; And therefore there is no
reason to fear falling upon such a difficulty, but rather with the greater
speed to make progress when men may win by it and leave it behind them. This
was the way that the Ancients took in the primitive times, even when Synods in
this respect might have been said to have been corrupted, when God gave
opportunity they set themselves to rectify the matter, and to do upon it what
was fit for the good of the Church, without mentioning the nullity of the form
thereof, or insisting thereupon. And indeed, the doing otherwise seems to lay
too much weight upon the authority or constitution of a Church-judicatory, as
if when the same is every way regular, it could add something, or ought to
have weight, where the matter is not in it self approvable; which has been
eschewed by Orthodox Divines both of old and late, who ever therefore looked
most unto the matter determined or decided.

If it be asked, What usually was done in such What usually has been d^ne when
Authority was declined.
cases where the Authority seemed to be declined? From what is said, the Answer
may be gathered, to wit, That both sides satisfied themselves with the
rectifying of the matter wherein there was any grievance. And therefore* 1. it
will hardly be found, when such a Declinatour was expressed in one Synod that
any mention is made thereof in the next ensuing Synod that did rectify the
matter, but instantly they fall upon that. 2. We will find, that where ^o
express Declinatour was, yet did not that any way strengthen such an
Authority, nor mar the condemning thereof more than in other Synods where it
was, and therefore neither is so much weight to be laid upon it, whether it be
or not; for, its standing does not weaken Authority where it is, and its
removing or not being at all, does not add Authority where it is not, because
Authority must stand and fall according to its own intrinsic grounds and
warrant. And we conceive that it is not suitable to the Authority of Christ's
Ordinances, and the nature of His Courts, that either the removing or standing
of such a legal formality, should be rigidly pressed, and it makes
proceedings in Christ's Courts to be involved in too many subtilties that are
used in humane Laws. And also supposing, that a corrupt constitution may be
without such a formal Protestation, it seems to give too much advantage
thereto, as if there were less access afterward to condemn the same; And upon
the other side, supposing that a lawfully constituted Synod should be declined,
as the Synod of Dort was lately by the Arminian Remonstrants, the pressing too
vehemently of the removing thereof, does suppose some way the constitution to
be less valid if such a thing should stand. This is only to be understood in
the case presupposed, to wit, Where the question is not about the authority of
Synods simply, but of this Great difference between the declining of Synodicall
Authority simply, and the constitution of a particular Synod.
or that constitution of a particular Synod: the first indeed, that is, the
questioning of Synodical Authority, has been thought intolerable in all times,
because it struck at the root of Church Government and Order, without which the
Church cannot subsist; But the second, which acknowledges the same Government
in general, and Rules of Constitution, and professes respect to that same
Authority, is indeed not so intolerable, because it does suppone still the
Church to have power, and the exercise thereof to be necessary. Hence we will
find, that in the primitive times they did utterly condemn appellations from
Synods simply, that is, the betaking them to another Judge, as more proper
than, or superior unto, such Synods; and there are several Canons in the
Councils of Africa that threaten Excommunication to such as decline their
Authority and appeal to Rome, or any foreign power as a superior Judge; Yet
we will find, that the Councils do allow Appeals from a lesser number to a
greater, or from particular Councils to a general. Yea, from their own
particular Synods to a more general hearing of others in the Province; yea,
they allow even adjacent Provinces to be appealed to in case corruptions should
be in one particular Province: This was enacted in the Council of Sardica, and
Bishops are requested by several Canons not to think this derogatory from
their authority, because this did consist well with respect to Church Authority
and Government in it self, but tended only to prevent or remedy exorbitances
and abuse therein; which of it self, if it be not abused, is not ill.

CHAP. XIV. What is to be done in order to union about divisions concerning
doctrinall determinations.
THe Question may be concerning the matter enacted by some Synod, even when
there is no exception against the constitution thereof, that is, when the
matter approven by it, is unfound, or when a truth is condemned, at least it is
judged to be so. We are not here speaking of such matter as is fundamental,
but such as is consistent with soundness Doctrinall, not fundamental, or nigh
the foundation.
of judgment in the main, and piety in these who may be upon either side. Such
as were these debates concerning the rebaptizing of Heretics, and
Schismatics; or for the admitting them unto the Church by confirmation only,
and questions of that nature, which may fall to be amongst orthodox men. I
suppose it were good, that judicial decisions of such things, were not
multiplied; yet upon supposition that they are past, somewhat would be said.
Such determinations are of two sorts.

First, Some are merely doctrinall, and of this kind are such questions as are
concerning the object of Predestination, order of Gods Decrees, and such like,
and others, it may be, which are of lesser concernment than these. These being
merely doctrinal and inferring no diversity in practice, or Worship, there is
the easier access to union notwithstanding of such, respect being had to the
mutual forbearance mentioned, so that none be constrained to acknowledge what
is enacted by virtue of such a decision, because such a determination in matter
of Doctrine is but ministerial, and declarative: And therefore as one man may
forbear another to speak his own mind in some things that differ from his, and,
it may be, from truth also, and not instantly divide from him, or much contend
with him; So ought he to bear with a Synod and not to divide from them upon
that account, he having access so to declare his own mind and the reasons
thereof, and otherwise to carry himself, as may keep him free of that
apprehended guiltiness; and so a Synod ought to bear with some particular men
that differ. But by adding the second kind, there will be ground to speak more.

The second kind is of such determinations as have not only a doctrinall
decision, but also some practical Some doctrinal decisions infer division,
others but diversity.
consequents following thereupon: which we may again distinguish these ways.
1. They are either such consequents and practices as infer a division and
opposition, or a diversity only* some consequents infer a division or
separation. As suppose a ChurchSynod should enact, that no persons should keep
communion with such as they judge not to be godly, nor join in Ordinances, nor
so much as sit down with them; Or that no persons, thinking otherwise, might
lawfully be ordained Ministers, or admitted to that office, as sometimes
appears, has been determined in very numerous Synods of the Donatists.
Indeed the standing of such Sentences in force, and having execution
accordingly following them, are such, as there can be no union had upon such
terms. Again, some practices imply no division in Worship, or Government, but
only something which possibly is in it self unwarrantable, as that Act of
rebaptizing was, which was determined and enacted by several Councils in
Africa: which kind of determination may be considered either as peremptory, and
exclusive, that is, allowing none to do otherwise, or to be admitted to
Ministry and Ordinances which should not engage to do so; Or moderated. so as
though it held forth such a determination concerning the fact, yet does not
peremptorily press others beyond their own light. Of the first sort were the
peremptory Acts of the West-church concerning Easter, holy days and other
ceremonies; Of the last, were these Acts of the Council of Africa concerning
the rebaptizing of Schismatics wherein none were pressed beyond their own
judgment.

Again, such consequents and practices that follow Some determinations are of
things daily practicable, others only for an exigence, scarcely ever again
occurring.
Church-determinations, may either be presently necessary to be practiced and
daily practical, as suppose a Church should make constitutions for
administration of Baptism and the Lords Supper, by mixing in with the
essentials thereof, such and such corrupt ceremonies and additions; Or, they
may be such practices as are only supposable and possible; but it may be
exceeding improbable-like, at least for the future, that there shall be
occasion to put them in actual exercise; though, it may be, there was some
present exigent giving occasion to such a determination, which possibly may
never recur; As suppose, a Church should determine, that a converted Jew, or
Turk, should not be baptized in the manner that others are baptized, but some
other way; it may be there was some Jew or Turk to be baptized when that
determination passed; but that particular Act being by, there is no probability
that ever there may be access to put the same in practice again, although it
be not simply impossible. Now there is great odds betwixt these two; and in
effect this last case, does look liker a doctrinall determation when the
occasion thereof is past, than any way to be practical.

Further, we may distinguish these also in such practices, that are positively
enacted to be practiced, by an authoritative Act, ordaining in such possible
cases, that it be so done, that is, when such a case occurreth, men should be
astricted to follow the same, and Ministers should accordingly act; Or they are
such cases, as do not ordain any practice to be done, but do declare such a
thing to be lawful; As suppose they should declare, a Minister might lawfully
baptize a Jew so as is formerly said, without any peremptory ordaining of the
same, which is still, rather a doctrinall decision than a positive ordinance.

We may yet add one distinction more, which is this, Some determinations are
for Ministers practice, others are answers to the questions of Rulers.
determination is either to declare such a thing lawful to Churchmen in some
Ecclesiastic matter, as suppose (as was sometimes in the primitive
persecutions) upon some Querie from some Ministers, it should be enacted, that
in such and such cases Ministers might fly, sell the Church-goods, or use such
and such shifts and means for their escape and deliverance, as others, it may
be, would think unlawful. Or it is, when the practicing of the supposed case
belongs to Magistrates, or men in civil stations; as suppose, upon some Queries
from Magistrates or others, enquiring if it were lawful to admit Jews to dwell
in such and such places merely for civil traffic; or if they might eat and
drink with an Ambassador of the Cham of Tartaria; or help Chinas against the
Tartars; or such cases, which possibly, beside the occasion of the Querie,
might never occur: now supposing the case to be decided affirmatively by a
Church-judicatory, and a rent to have followed thereupon, and to continue after
the case is not probably practical, because of the former decision, and so in
the rest of the former suppositions, it is to be enquired, If? and, How union
may be win at in them respectively?

Now these distinctions being premitted, we come to consider accordingly, How
union may be made up, where division stands upon such accounts?

In reference to all which, in the general, we say, That peremptorinesse and
self-willednesse being excluded (which are expressly prohibited to be in a
Minister) it is not impossible to attain union amongst faithful, sober, and
orthodox men, who will acknowledge that mutual condescending and forbearance
is necessary; which by going through the particular steps will appear: wherein
we may relate to the former general grounds laid down, and be the shorter in
instances and reasons, because this draws out in length beyond our purpose;
and also, because Verbum sapienti satis est: and these especially that are
concerned in this, need not by us either to be instructed, or persuaded to
their duty, many of whom the Lord has eminently made use of to teach,
convince, and persuade others. We shall only, as in all the rest, offer some
things to their view, which may occasion the remembering of what they know, and
the awakening of the zeal and affection that they have, to act accordingly.

To come then to the first sort of determinations, More doctrinal decisions in
smaller points ought to ma^e no division.
which are doctrinall; it may appear from what is said, that there can be no
just ground of division upon that account; for, in such things a Church may
forbear particular persons: and again, particular persons may forbear a Church.
It is not to be thought, that all orthodox Divines are of the same mind in all
things that are decreed in the Synod of Dort, particularly in reference to the
object of predestination; yet the Synod has not made any division by Censuring
of such, neither these who differ from that determination have broken off
communion with the Church, but have kept communion: and union in the Church
has not been thereby interrupted; yet these who apprehend themselves to be
right, cannot but think the other is in an error: and if this forbearance be
not allowed, there can never be union in the Church, except we should think
that they behoved all to be in the same mind about such things, and that there
should never be a decision in a Church, but when there is absolute harmony; for
supposing the plurality to decide right, yet these, whose judgment were
condemned, were obliged according to their light to divide, seeing they are in
their own judgments right, It is true, I suppose that it is not simply
unlawful, or hurtful to truth for a Church-judicatory, out of respect to peace
in the Church, to condescend abstractly to wave a ministerial decision without
wronging of the matter; As suppose these in Africa, for peace had waved their
judicial decision of the necessity of rebaptizing in such a case; or these who
determined the contrary, might have waved theirs, yet neither of them had hurt
their own opinion. Or suppose, that in the decisions that were concerning
Easter, upon both sides of the controversy, either had past from their
decisions, and left the matter in practice to men's arbitrament without any
decision, I suppose this had not been a wrong to truth (supposing it to have
been on either side) And indeed considering what is written in the History,
something like this may be gathered. For, first, It is clear, that there were
determinations on both sides, and particularly, That the West Church, and these
that joined with them, did determine the Lords Day necessarily to be kept for
distinguishing them from the Jews. 2. It is also clear, That Policrates, with
many Bishops in Asia, did judicially condemn that deed, appointing the
fourteenth day of the month to be kept, So that necessarily both decisions
could not stand. And* 3. this is clear also, That the way that was taken to
settle that difference so stated, was, That judicial decisions should be
waved, and men left to their own arbitrament to observe what day they thought
good, whether in the East or West Church, whereupon followed an union; and
Policarpus did communicate with Anicetus at Rome upon these terms, Ut neuter
eorum sententiam suam urgeret aut defenderet (as the Centariators have it out
of Ireneus) that is, that neither of them should urge or defend their own
opinion: and upon this there followed peace notwithstanding of that difference.
It brake up again more strongly in the time of Victor, and although Ireneus was
of his judgment, yet did he vehemently press him not to trouble the Church by
pursuing such a determination, and did exceeding weightily expostulat with him
for it; He wrote also to the other party, that both of them might forbear the
pressing of such decisions, and that the thing might be left to men's
arbitrament, without prejudice to the Churches union, as formerly it had been
used: this is clear from Church History, and that word of Sozomen, lib. 7. cap.
19. is weighty, Frivolum enim, and quidem merito, judicarunt, consuetudinis
gratia, a se mutuo segregari eos qui in praecipuis religionis capitibus
consentirent, that is, They judged it, and upon good ground, most frivolous for
men to be separated or divided one from another, because of a custom, who did
agree together in the main points of Religion. And though this matter be of it
self no controversy decided in the Word, (at least as it was stated) yet
considering their thoughts of it, and the grounds which they allege for it, it
was not so to them: and that peremptorines of Victors, who afterward would not
be reclaimed from that second determination, is condemned by all, as being the
ground of that following schism. And indeed in such cases, where two parts of a
Church are divided, having independent authorities as to one another, and there
being contrary determinations in the same question, it seems convenient and
necessary for peace, that either both should wave their decisions, or that both
should permit the decisions of each other to stand and be in force, to such
only as should acquiesce therein, and willingly acknowledge the same.

Again, where there is nothing like a party or equality, How the smaller number
should yield to the greater.
but the division is in the same one Church betwixt a greater and smaller
number, and the greater will not be induced to remove their determination; It
is no way sinful to the lesser to join with them notwithstanding thereof, they
having their own freedom and liberty cautioned, as was formerly said; Yea, this
seems not unexpedient that they should do for the good of the Church. 1.
Because it is not so readily to be expected, that men who have such an
advantage will cede to these who have it not. 2. It may have inconveniences,
if a smaller dissenting number should necessitat a Church to wave former
determined truths, though possibly not fundamental, because of their
dissatisfaction therewith, who esteem them not to be truths, and strengthen
others in a schism, as if they could not keep union and communion with a Church
where any thing contrary their mind were determined. Also, 3. it seems most
agreeable to reason, that in sinlesse cedings, the lesser number should cede to
the greater. And, 4. because by so doing, this accidental confirmation of an
opinion, by having the plurality of a Church or Synod for it, is left open to
the other side, when they may be the plurality. Hence we see generally, that
the minor part cedeth to the greater (if the not pressing of the removal of
such a decision be a ceding) yea, even when the plurality were wrong, as in
that case of Africa, these who differed, did not press the rescinding of that
determination, having their own liberty: Nor did these that had the plurality
then for them, impose any bond to keep the other from rescinding their
determinations, if they should come to be in such a capacity, but both kept
peace for the time; and afterward, in the days of Augustine, we will find
Councels of the Church of Africa, determining the just contrary concerning that
case of Baptizing, and yet still entertaining peace and communion amongst
themselves, although the authoritative decision stood always upon the side of
the plurality.

CHAP. XV. What shall be done in order to union about such decisions, as have
practical consequents following thereon.
TO come to the second case, to wit, anent such decisions as have some
practical consequents following thereupon; For the more short answering, we
shall lay down these Assertions.

Assert. 1. In such practices as are opposite, and infer Contrary practices
build a wall of separation.
division in the cases mentioned, there can be no union or communion expected,
as we see in all the cases where such have been practiced, as of the Novatians,
Donatists, and such like; there may be more or less heat and bitterness
betwixt men that differ so: but there cannot be union, because, such
determinations and practices do draw a line, and build a wall of separation
betwixt the one and the other, and so makes one side to be accounted as not of
the same body.

Assert. 2. Where the consequents only infer some Diversity there may be
without division.
difference, or are not peremptorily pressed, they do not infer necessarily a
division, as we see in the cases of Africa, and others mentioned; and Sozomen
in the chapter cited, gives many instances of diversities of this kind in
Churches, without any breach of communion, and says it is necessary, because,
Neque easdem traditiones per omnia similes, in omnibus Ecclesus, quamvis in
omnibus consentiant, reperire possis, that is, Ye will hardly find the same
traditions alike in all things in all the Churches, even though they agree in
all things that are material. And, upon the matter, such determinations are but
indeed as if they were doctrinall to such as acknowledge them not, and men are
accordingly to walk in them.

Assert. 3. In such practices as are daily practicable, Great folly to make, or
keep division for what is rarely or never practicable.
in respect of the occasions thereof, union is more difficult (though not
impossible) than in such cases where the occasion of practice is not probable,
because there being no present occasion to practice the same, it looks most
unwise like, to bring in, or keep in, a more certain and greater evil in the
Church, for eschewing of what folks may never be put to; and suppose the case
to be past, that may probably never recurre, it is more for the Churches good
by abstaining the approbation of such an act, and by not being involved in the
apprehended guilt thereof, to make up again the communion of the Church, for
the preventing of a greater hurt, because that continues to be a duty, and is
necessary to edification; and the thing being past, ought not to be the
occasion of a present and following division, as was formerly said.

If it be said, How can there be union in such a case upon the principle
supposed, till (as may be said by one side) those who have decided and acted
corruptly should repent, and (as may be said by the other) till those who have
divided unjustly from the Church, and wronged the authority thereof, should
acknowledge their offense, without which there cannot be union? For answer to
which we say, 1. What if neither party shall ever be brought to repent or
acknowledge an offense? shall the Church in such a case never attain to union?
Repentance implies a conviction, and this implies information and clearness
in the judgment that such a thing is wrong. Now, Union is not impossible
notwithstanding diversity of judgment.
it being often seen that it is impossible to get men of one judgment
concerning such a thing, Must therefore union be impossible till men be of one
judgment? This has been formerly disproved. 2. What if this had been the mind
of the Churches and Servants of God from the beginning of the world? there had
never been publick-ecclesiastick, nor privat-christian peace; for they were
never all of one judgment: and to assert or write what is supposed to be an
error, is proportionably a sin and an offense, as to determine it judicially;
and it would infer the necessity of repentance* even in such cases, for the
attaining of peace and making up of differences; And shall we thus at once
condemn the generation of Gods People, who have, without proposing, or, at
least, pressing of such a thing, entertained peace and union amongst
themselves? 3. This would enervate all the former grounds that plead for union
with forbearance, and such like, which, I suppose, will not be warrantably
done. 4. This way is indeed either to make union the more impossible, or if
union be attained in any measure, both the less hearty amongst themselves, and
the less profitable unto others, as has been formely cleared. 5. We are not
to respect in this, men's particular carriage or desert (which possibly would
not be thought of great concernment by others, not engaged in that debate) but
the Churches good is to be looked to, and what it does require, as we may
gather from what has been formerly said. And if Church Censures (such as the
enjoining of public repentance, or acknowledgment of an offense, are) be to be
abstained from, even in reference to open corrupt teachers sometimes for
respect to the union of the Church, and for the preventing the stumbling of
those that are weak, and prone to divide or miscarry (if such should be
censured) as we see in Paul's abstaining to censure the false teachers, Gal. 5.
and 2 Cor. 10. (spoken to in the former part) much more are Censures of any
sort to be abstained from upon that ground, in the case proposed, as it is
considered in its matter and persons differing. Hence we may find what
condescendence has been formerly used in such cases, when union has been
closed, or proposed to be closed, (in matters possibly of greater moment than
are supposed) Sine detrimento honoris, aut charitatis, that is, without
prejudice to reputation, or charity. 6. We therefore say in opposition to that
objection, That union is to be studied, by endeavoring to join in what is for
the good of the Church, and by burying the resentment of each others wrongs,
rather than (as Beza says in that forecited Epistle to Grindal concerning
division) There should be too curious, and, as it were, contention-affecting
enquiry made, who is most in the wrong, and thereby a bringing the matter to
that pass, that the whole body cannot be saved, but by cutting off of some
members. 7. We add* If repentance be necessary, will any think that division
is the way or mean to attain the same, which does imbitter and confirm men in
their opinion and opposition respectively, as formerly has been said?

It will be now no great difficulty to answer in the last two cases, to wit,
When the decision is a simple declaration of the lawfulness of a thing,
without any positive appointment that such a thing should be put in practice,
etc. For, if upon the former grounds union may be attained, and division
removed in the former cases, it may be much more in this; most of all, where
the matter determined, concerns such practices as actually are to be
performed but in some extraordinary case by Civil Powers. Because in such cases
men may more easily condescend to forbearance, than in matters of greater
necessity and concernment; and there can be but little prejudice alleged to
follow unto the Church (to be put in the balance with the Churches peace)
either by condescending that such a determination should be waved, or stand
with the qualifications foresaid; It Is true that tenaciousnesse in the least
particular, and peremptory refusing to condescend therein, will breed a rent
and schism, and make union as impossible, as if it were the greatest matter
that were the ground of distance; yet it would seem, that in the case
presupposed, (especially these last three being put together) that judicious,
sober, and godly men should be very easily induced to condescend to each other,
with the qualifications foresaid, for the Churches peace.

For, 1. The matter, although it has a right and wrong in it, yet it is among
the least of the truths that may be accounted to relate to the foundation. 2.
It Is in a matter most improbably practicable, and which may possibly never
occur. 3. It Is a determination, or an exercise of Church Power that has least
influence upon Church Matters, seeing it positively ordains nothing. 4. It Is
in a thing most extrinsick, which might have been put in practice, and usually
is put in practice without the Churches intermedling therein, either pro or
contra. It seems therefore unsuitable that such a determination in reference
to such practices, should be greatly contended-for, when neither the standing
of such a decision can procure, nor the removing thereof mar, the practices
concerning which the decision is. 5. Supposing the qualifications foresaid, the
standing of such a decision does not strengthen the affirmative opinion,
because it does not infer any bond or obligation upon others who do not of
their own accord acquiesce in the same; nor does it give ground for alleging
such a decision to any but to such as of themselves are swayed with the matter
thereof: And therefore seeing it has no force to bind more than would be bound
with the matter if it were not; nor can infer that it is the judicial decision
and judgment of such a Church, more than this, to wit, That it is the judgment
of the plurality for the time, yet so as it is not acknowledged by others, and
who are not to be constrained to any alteration in their judgment, or in their
practice, by that determination, more than if it had never been (which is a
necessary qualification of the forbearance mentioned) and supposing the said
decision to be waved, these particulars would be true. Again, upon the other
side, The removing of that decision does not strengthen the negative (for that
cannot be intended by such a composure that either side should be strengthened)
nor does the standing thereof weaken the same; because* according to the
qualifications foresaid, not only there can be no Censure following upon it,
but even as to the Determination it self, though it be not formally removed, to
be no decision simply, it is no decision to them, nor can be alleged to them
against their opinion, more than if it were not: And thus it becomes of equal
extent with those who approve the matter, and so it does bind only such as
account themselves bound; and if men account themselves bound, the removing of
such a decision, will not loose them; and if they account not themselves bound
otherwise, the standing thereof in such a case, will not bind them; and
therefore, upon the matter, we suppose, it is hardly imaginable that there can
be a lesser ground of division, (the qualifications necessary for union in the
cases of greater concernment being granted in this) sure we are there was never
division continued upon a lesser account, to whatsoever side we look; for, in
effect, it is for the time to come as if that decision had never been, as to
its efficacy and weight in producing any effect. And we are sure that the
great Divines that have so eagerly pursued, and so much coveted union, would
have thought themselves happy if they might have had it by condescending and
yielding either to the one side or the other. And though the moderate divine
Bucer, was thought to thirst after peace in the Church so vehemently, that some
zealous men said, that out of love thereto he was like almost haurire foeces,
that is, to drink down the dregs with it; yet I am confident, that had the
state of the controversy come so near, and in such matter, and amongst such
men, as is formerly presupposed, he would not have been so charged by the most
rigid, although for the peace of the Church he had drunken-over all the dreggs
that might be in both the cups, the mentioned qualifications being observed;
For, I suppose, that the removing or standing of such a decision in the former
respects, will neither be found inconsistent with any Confession of Faith, even
the most full that ever was in any Orthodox Church; nor with the Fundamentals
of Religion that are laid down in any Catechisms or Writings of any sound
Divines; nor with the Constitutions and Acts that have been thought necessary
to be enrolled amongst the Acts of any Council or Synod; nor, for ought we
know, will be found to have been the matter of debate, even in the most
contentious times amongst Orthodox Divines: It would seem then, that if there
be a latitude allowed without hazard for one to condescend to another for the
good of the Church in any thing, it must be in the case presupposed,

CHAP. XVI. The remedies of divisions, arising from misapplication of power in
ordination of Ministers, and admitting to, or debarring from, communion.
THe fourth matter of controversy in reference to Government, is usually some
misapplication of that power, or what is apprehended to be so in some
particular acts. As, 1. Ordaining such as were not thought to be worthy. 2.
Deposing others (as was thought) unjustly. 3. Admitting unto, or debarring from
communion without ground respectively, and such like cases. Upon the first
ground arose the great schism of the Donatists, because of the Ordination of
Caecilianus, esteemed by them to be a Traditor. Of such sort also were the
schisms frequently at Antioch, Constantinople, Alexandria, and other places,
because some were ordained to the dissatisfaction of others. And sometimes the
dissatisfaction was well grounded; because the persons ordained, were not
worthy: Sometimes it was groundless; But often it tended to double Ordination,
and Separation in the The Ordination of a person worthy of the Ministry,
ordained by Church Officers, is not to be accounted null for some defects.
close. These things had need to be prevented, so as there be no just ground of
dissatisfaction given by the Ordination of an unworthy man in such a time, nor
any opposite Ordination to fix a schism; because these things are more
difficulty removed, as has been said: Yet supposing them to be, these generals
may be proposed for healing of the same. 1. We will not find an Ordination
easily counted to be null, even though done in a schism, as all the instances
do clear; yea, the Orthodox stood not to account the Bishops and Presbyters
ordained amongst the Donatists, to be such, because they had the essentials of
Ordination, and were ordained by Church Officers. 2. We suppose it needful for
peace, that there be no rigid sticking to have some particular Ordinations
rectified, to the prejudice of the Church in general, especially, where the
unfitness or unworthiness of the person is not easily demonstrable. 3. It
seems right and just, that no Ordination of such a kind should establish one
that is unworthy in the Ministry: for, that is not to be dispensed with;
although it be not a valid ground to keep up a division, where the removal of
such a person cannot be attained: and the most unquestionable Ordination for
the form, cannot make one a worthy Minister, who otherwise is not a worthy
person. In the conferences with the Donatists, the Catholics offered to
quarrel the Ordination of none amongst them that otherwise was worthy, nor to
maintain any amongst themselves who were not worthy. 4. Yet Union would not be
suspended on such trials.
union would not be suspended till this be done, but it is to be made up, that
it may be done, as in the instance formerly given. Because, 1. this trial is
the work of an united Kirk, and will require joint strength and concurrence for
the same. 2. Because union is a present duty, although there were defect in
such a trial, and a defect in that, will not warrant a division. 3. It is not
only a duty commanded, but it is a mids necessary for promoving the trial and
censuring of unworthy Ministers, for times of division are ever times of
liberty, and thereby Authority is weakened, men are discouraged to follow it,
and are otherwise diverted, etc. 4. Because division can never be looked upon
as the mean to effectuate that trial, but it strengthens the person who is to
be tried, and lesseneth the number of zealous pursuers of such a design, and
incapacitates men for this duty, who otherwise might be instrumental therein.
5. Beside, if the guilt be not so very palpable, as it may be demonstrated to
be in persons, at such a time, it is safer to preserve certain peace in the
Church, than to hunt for an uncertain crime, as has been often said.

Fifthly, Where a persons being in a place, is the ground of contention, and
things look not satisfyinglike in his way, even though grosnesse be not
demonstrable, we think it not unbecoming the authority of Church-judicatories,
which is given for edification, to appoint the removal of such a person from
such a place, (as was formerly hinted) for, it looks sad like, that a
Minister's being in such a particular place, should be more obstructive to
edification and to the Churches peace, than if he were not a Minister at all.
And it becomes well that singleness that a Minister ought to have in seeking
the edification of the Church, to yield to such an advice and appointment, or,
of himself willingly to overture the same. For, Ministers are not to plead
interest in a Congregation simply, as a man does his particular right; because
every thing of this kind ought to be done with respect to the edification of
the body, the promoting whereof, ought to regulate both entries and removals.
It Is true, there would be wariness here, lest dangerous precedents be given;
yet considering, that a Minister who may somewhat peremptorily plead interest,
and that jure in the Ministry, that yet cannot with that same strength of
reason plead it in such and such a particular Congregation; and considering,
that it is a public good that is respected, and not the satisfaction or
dissatisfaction of some in a particular Congregation, we conceive the former
assertion cannot be simply denied.

Where contrair Ordinations are, it is more difficult; Yet it would be
considered that all these things we speak of now, are but particular: and
therefore although full satisfaction should not be obtained in them, yet ought
they not to be stumbled upon to the prejudice of union in general, in which
the good of the Church is more eminently concerned, as has been said; Yet
where peace is intended, we suppose this difficulty may be win over, one of
these ways, which have been formerly in use in such cases. As, 1. Sometimes
one person did willingly cede to another for the good of the Church; So did
Basilius in a case formerly mentioned, for which his condescendency he is ever
highly commended. Neither can this be thought to be a casting by of the care of
such a people, but rather the contrary, it is more their good, that they should
be united under one orthodox Minister, though the more weak man, than to
continue a division with two that are more able. 2. Sometimes where two were,
it was thought good to unite them in their meetings, and that the longest liver
should alone be acknowledged, if no other occasion offered, and neither were
unworthy of the place, as in a case at Antioch formerly mentioned. 3. Sometimes
both have been laid aside, where neither have been worthy, or factions have
been strong for either party, and so rooted prejudice of the adherers to the
one side against the other. This overture is offered by Augustine to the
Donatists, for composing that difference of opposite Ordinations, which was
frequent amongst them, each city almost having two Bishops; And this way has
been followed in composing many schisms, even of late. 4. Sometimes the party
offended and wronged by an opposite Ordination, has kept division down in
some respect, by ceding, or withdrawing, or hiding their offense, till some
probable or regular way has occurred; rather choosing never to possess such a
place than to do it by wronging of the Church, in keeping up an irregular
schism, when there was no access orderly to redress it. Thus Eusebius being
offended that Lucifer had ordained Paulinus a Bishop in Antioch to a party
disclaiming him, who were called Eustachians* he moderated his carriage and
withdrew, waiting to have had a lawful decision, and resolving to be submissive
to that. Where men mind the good of the work, it is not like but some such way
will compose these things; and if these fail, we will find also adjacent
Bishops traveling to compose the same; Yea, sometimes men of authority coming
from very far; And also some by civil Authority appointed to treat therein, as
in the closing of that schism at Antioch; for, schisms, arising from such
discontents, are not ordinarily by mere Authority removed, because there is
often something both of affection and conscience in the business: there is
need therefore of mutual friendly conferring for giving and receiving of
satisfaction therein.

CHAP. XVII. Remedies of divisions arising from the misapplication of power, in
censuring, or sparing Ministers, real or supposed.
ANother part of the exercise of this power (which often in its misapplication,
or its being pretended to be so, is the ground of Church-divisions) is The
matter of censuring and deposing of Ministers, and that two ways.

The one is, When some good men are deposed, or such as are supposed to be so,
whereby persons that apprehend the injustice of the fact, do disclaim such a
power, and adhere to such a person notwithstanding. Thus did the schism at
Constantinople arise for the unjust deposition of Chrysostom, and his adherents
were called Ihoannitae, as if they had been of another Religion; Such also was
that of the Eustachians at Antioch; which being driven against honest men, and
there being no condescending, at least what was once condescended unto, being
again recalled, there was no In what cases extremities are to be shunned.
stopping of such divisions, till in the manner, formerly hinted, and that
being after both their deaths. In such cases extremities are to be shunned,
for, its extremity that makes rents, that is, too little condescending on the
one side, and too much tenaciousness on the other.

One extremity to be eschewed, is, When Churchjudicatories are too tenacious of
a past Sentence, or the formality of some legal advantage which seems to
justify the Sentence, as in that case of Chrysostoms, almost all the weight
was laid on this at first, That he refused to appear before them, or
acknowledge their Authority as they were constituted: and although both the
people and others did adhere to him, yet there was no condescending, which
occasioned a great schism* and was exce^dingly condemned by the generality of
faithful men in these days. Another extremity is, upon the other side, When
for satisfaction of a Judicatory too little is ceded; or upon supposition, even
of an unjust Sentence, a schism is stated, to the Iudicatories wi^ely remitting
rigor.
hurt of the Church. In this case we may observe these things, 1. That
sometimes the Judicatory has condescended to re-admit a person, otherwise of
esteem, although possi^ly some particular slip has been, that in strict
justice might have deserved the Sentence: this was in the case of Osius
formerly cited. It is true, there is no mention of the cause wherefore the
Synod of Spain did depose him, nor is it clear whether it be that famous Osius,
whom the Arians deposed and whipped till he approved Athanasius his deposition;
yet this is clear, that he being a man esteemed of in the Church, though
possibly out of infirmity having fallen in that fault, he was for concord
restored, Sine detrimento honoris, without prejudice to his credit. 2. Where
men have been deposed upon the breach of some legality, or contempt, if
otherwise they have been men of gifts, and approv^n integrity in the main,
though possibly thought proud and rigid by others, as in that case of
Chrysostom; they were again received into the Church, and the Sentences with
consent laid by, as appears in the readmitting of Chrysostom after his first
deposition (of the justice of whose Sentence of deposition, because there was
no convincing evidence to satisfy the people, Severinus in preaching did say.
That his pride was reason sufficent) which for a time removed the division, and
brought a cheerful calmnesse, till shortly after his old enemies interrupted
it, and did enter a new process with him, because he had re-entered his
Bishopric being once deposed by a Synod, and not having their authority;
(which was grounded even upon the constitutions of Arian Councils) this being
the second time driven-on against the entreaties and obtestations of many
worthy Bishops and good people who adhered to him, did again renew and fix that
schism. 3. When the men Corrupt, gross, and profane men, for no interposition
to be received.
were otherwise corrupt, or discovered to be gross and profane, although
many other orthodox men did interpose for them, yet by all means it was
resisted; because they still supposed such worthy men that sided with such to
be misinformed. And it is observable, that the most peaceable Synods who did
most for union, as those in Africa, and that of Spain, who had received Osius,
because of the Churches of France their interposing, by that to prevent a
schism, yet were they most peremptory, as it were, in this, and refused to
receive Barsilides and Martialis, as that of Carthage did refuse Apiarius,
notwithstanding that Rome interposed for them, giving this reason, That there
was a necessity of having the Churches provided with faithful and holy
Ministers. 4. Sometimes, and oftentimes men sentenced, though possibly with too
much rigidity, if not with injustice, have yet submitted with respect to the
Churches peace, either totally, and upon that ground have again been admitted;
or partially, by abstaining to act any thing contrary to such a Sentence, but
for reverence thereunto waiting for some legal redress, as in history is
frequent; and it is fit it should be so in such cases where the hurt is
particular, and proceeds not from a common design of undoing all faithful
Ministers; because the making of a schism, does more hurt than the contending
for their particular Ministry does edify in such a case; and therefore
sometimes though some men have been pressed to under value an unjust Sentence,
and to continue to officiate notwithstanding, Yet out of respect to
Church Authority and order, have refused till they should be admitted orderly
unto the same. Indeed when the Arians drove on the deposition of their most
eminent opposers, it was otherwise, because (as is marked in the Council of
Sardica) in bearing down of them, they endeavored to bear down the truth which
they maintained: But, where the controversy is not such, but the men orthodox
and sound on both sides, though possibly there may be some particular faults or
mistakes; in such a case, it is safer for either side to cede in part, or
wholly, than to keep up a division: and we conceive, when one side cedeth not,
if the other should cede wholly, it would be most to the advantage of their
cause, and to the commendation and strengthening of their authority in the
Churches of Christ.

The other occasion of bebate in such Church Matters, Debates about conniving
at guilty men
is upon the defect, that is, when some are really, or are thought to be,
connivers at guilty men, or at least defective in putting of them to trial:
others again, may be thought too forward and precipitant in that, whereupon
arises difference; and if one cede not to another, it becomes the occasion of
division, as may be seen in instances formerly given: Concerning which, we say,

1. That men would remember, this is but one particular of many, that tend to
the Churches good, (though indeed a main particular) and so ought not to be the
rise of a division, nor of continuing thereof, to the marring of the Churches
peace in other things, but men ought singly to do their duty, and therein to
acquiesce, without partaking of the faults of others, whether it be by being
defective, or by exceeding in that matter; and seeing there may be no corrupt
design in either who may be upon these extremes, it would not be so highly
aggreaged on either side.

2. We say, that as often difference in this, may breed divisions; so again,
divisions do occasion men's differing more in this: and it cannot be expected
where division is, that men who are men and subject to be biased, can be so
single in receiving testimonies of the innocence of these that differ from
them, or of the guiltiness of these that agree with them, as if there were no
division at all: And again, it is impossible, that where there is a difference
in some other thing, that men can think others differing from them so single
and unbyassed, as they suppose themselves to be, but are still ready to
construct their differing from them in this to be occasioned from some former
prejudice; for, as was said, division breeds jealousy, suspicion, and
distrust among men, and men are naturally inclined to suspect that others drive
the design of strengthening themselves by the sentencing of such a person,
whereby they are secretly induced, even unawares, to disappoint such a supposed
unstreight end, which makes them on both sides suspect every thing, dispute
every thing, and readily reject every thing that comes from the other.

3. We say therefore, that union would not be suspended Union rather to be
followed that satisfaction herein may be had.
upon satisfaction in this, but rather union would be pressed, that
satisfaction in this may be attained; because satisfaction in this cannot be
expected till there be mutual confidence of one another integrity: and till
there be some walking together, and some further evidence of the sincerity of
each other in the main business, this mutual confidence cannot be expected:
and again, this cannot be obtained without an union, and so consequently union
would be laid as a foundation for attaining of satisfaction even in this.

4. It would be considered, that oftentimes such apprehensions of extremities,
which are imputed to honest and zealous men, are most groundless; but there
being something in them as men, it is conceived on the other hand, because of
secretly entertained jealousy, to be much more. There was nothing more casten
up to the Orthodox by the Novatians and Donatists, than that they were
defective in this, in admitting to, and retaining in the Ministry, men that
were corrupt, Yet after many trials they were never able to prove what they
alleged upon some eminent persons when it came to trial, even when such
things were generally accounted true amongst them. This would In times of
division, aumours concerning eminent persons, not to be so regarded.
be adverted, that every general rumor be not accounted a truth, especially in
the times of division, for so, few of the most eminent on both sides should be
innocent. Again, on the other side, it occasioned much heat against Chrysostom,
that he had censured many of his Bishops, and threatened many of his Clergy;
this did exceedingly provoke envy against him, and made such men to vent many
calumnies on him, which were too much regarded, even by some orthodox and good
men, who differed from him upon another account (as Epiphanius did upon the
occasion of Origens writings) yet in no history it is recorded, that he aimed
at the censuring of any unjustly, though he did censure with a natural
vehemence, as he did every other thing; but the history says, men spoke much
of the number of these that were sentenced by him, and of the vehemence of his
manner in reproving and censuring of their faults, which they accounted to be
pride, not considering the faults for which he did censure them; But men having
conceived prejudice at him, were the readier to admit of their accusations
against him, as if they had been unjustly dealt with by him, and upon that same
ground of prejudice at him, were the more inclinable to restore them whom he
sentenced. Zeal in justly censuring, well consistent with a spirit of union.


5. It is to be considered also, That zeal against such as are justly
censurable, is most consistent with a spirit of union in the Church, as
appears by the former instances of men most tender of union, and yet most
zealous in this: yea, these two go together; because zeal for the Churches
edification, constrains to union, and does also press the removing of
corrupt unfaithful Ministers, which, next to division in a Church, is the
greatest plague of a Church. Therefore these things would be adverted, 1. That
the purging of the Church of such, and the work of union, would be jointly
respected, otherwise if union be slighted, it will hazard the falling in too
nearly with the schisms of the Novatians and Donatists, which have been so
hurtful to the Church. 2. Union when it is Yet union is to be preferred to the
censuring of some unfaithful men.
in competition with the deposing of some unfaithful men, and both cannot be
obtained together, it ought to be preferred, as we see the Apostle does, 2 Cor.
10. 6. who will not censure in such a case, lest he state a schism; for, the
continuing of such in a Church, is indeed a hurt, seeing they are useless, and
in a great part hurtful, yet so, honest Ministers may have access to do good
beside them: but when schisms enter, the hurt thereof is more comprehensive,
and they do render unusefull the Ministry both of good and bad. 3. It would be
considered also, that the division being in the case supposed, where men are
orthodox and pious on both sides, it is not so exceedingly to be feared, that
either men, palpably corrupt in doctrine, or conversation, should be
entertrained upon the one side or that men useful in the Church, and blameless
in their conversations, should be crushed upon the other. 4. It Union no
prejudice to the purging out of corruption.
would follow also, that union should be no prejudice to the ridding of the
Church of corrupt Ministers, but that it should be studied where there is need,
because it is a fruit of the same spirit (to be zealous against corrupt men)
from which meekness and moderation toward these who are not such, do proceed;
and therefore if there be any such object of zeal, as an unfaithful Minister,
(as it is not like that ever the Church was, or shall be free of such) then
ought men to bestir themselves faithfully in the removing of such. It is marked
and commended in the Angel of Ephesus, Rev. 2. v. 2, 3. That he was eminent in
patience and enduring, and yet so zealous in this, that he could endure no
unsent Minister, but tried such as called themselves Apostles, etc. which
contemperature or mixture is exceedingly commended: And in reference to the
scope which we are upon, zeal in this, is not only a duty as at other times,
but a special mean having influence on the procuring of union; because so, one
of the great stumblings that has been in the Church to make the Ministry
contemptible is removed, and a practical evidence of men's zeal is given, which
tends to lay a ground of confidence of them in the hearts of others; so, also
men are kept from falling under the tentation of luke-warmnesse, and
forgetting of every duty, but the supporting of the side, at least, that which
usually is imputed in such a case, is removed; and also by this, men would find
the necessity of bearing with many things in others, who may in the main be
supposed to be honest: And however, it is the way to be approven before God,
and to have a testimony in the consciences of others. All which conduce
exceedingly to union; whereas universal cessation from this, as if there were
no such matter to work upon, and obstructing formally, yea, or materially or
virtually any thing thereof, does exceedingly tend to the fixing of division,
and cooling of the affections of many that look on, without which, that is,
warmed affections, there is little access to hearty union.

6. We say, that this duty of purging would not be Purging not to be much
pressed till union be fixed.
so in its vehemence pressed, either under a division, or while union is not
confirmed, as when a Church is in a good condition; because, that were to give
strong physic to an unsettled weak body, that might rather stir the humors to
the prejudice of the whole, than remove them: Therefore we conceive, that
sobriety and prudence would be used here, in moderating of the exercise of this
duty, till the union be confirmed, and, as it were, by preparations the body be
disposed for the same: Therefore if faults be not gross, evidences clear, and
a persons unfruitfulnesse or hurtfulnesse demonstrable, (in which cases no
difference amongst such parties as are to be united, is to be feared) It is
safer for the Church to abstain the same, than to hazard the opening or
ruffling of a wound scarcely cured, by the unseasonable pressing of such a
duty. The Apostle does in several cases spare consures of unfaithful men, out
of respect to the Churches good, as has been formerly hinted; and as the
judicious divine Mr. Gillespy (who yet cannot be branded with luke-warmnesse in
this duty) in his Aarons rod, makes out, and does give instances of several
cases, wherein this forbearance is called-for. In sum, we suppose that having
to do in such a case with such persons, it is more safe for men to do their own
duty, keeping the peace of the Church, and to leave others to do according to
the manifestnesse of things as they shall answer before God, as to their
seeking the good of His Church; and if this prevail not with such men for
ordering them in their duty, will any think that the keeping up, or threatening
of division, will prevail?

Lastly, It would be considered, if such ends as any side would propose, either
in keeping in, or purging out of men who are thought fit or unfit respectively,
can be attained without union, so as with it. Therefore seeing that is a thing
which belongs to Government, and men are to be swayed in such Acts by what
conduces most to edification, when they cannot attain the length they would
(as we suppose men shall never do, in this matter of purging) they then are to
walk by this rule of choosing what comparatively is most edifying, as was
formerly said. Sometimes also difference has been about the excommunicating of
persons, or readmitting again to communion: but what concerns this may be
somewhat understood from the former grounds, wherein extremities would be
shunned, and the Churches peace, and the Authority of the Ordinances studied:
Also, we have otherwise beyond our purpose become so long, (and possibly ad
nauseam usque) in other things, we shall therefore forbear particular
descending into this, but proceed in the generals proposed.

CHAP. XVIII. The fears of mis-government for the time to come, and remedies
thereof.
THe last thing in Government, which was proposed, as that whereabout
differences and divisions do arise, is, in reference to Government for the time
to come, and resolves in this, Who shall have chief hand in the decision of
matters that after may fall out, supposing the union to be made up. This
resulteth from the present diffidence and prejudice which each has in
reference to other, and from that impression that men have, that there will be
a driving of sides, according to power, even under a concluded union: And
indeed somewhat may be feared and expected, at least for a time, considering
men's distance in such a case; for, if diffidence and suspicion be come to that
height under divisions, that one will not trust another in some petty
particular fact that is past; or lay by jealousy where no proof is,
notwithstanding of all solemn attestations; it is no marvel that in matters of
greater consequence which are to come, they do not easily give them credit.
This is often the greatest business to be composed in a difference: hence it
is, that sometimes bygones, which have been the rise of the division, may be
removed, when as yet this cannot be composed, because there is no way
conceivable how both parties may have the chief hand in Government, and neither
being willing to cede to the other, either from a secret ground of sleighting
one another, or from that root of suspicion whereby they conceive all lost that
the other is able to carry over them, whereby from fear of hazarding the
Churches good condition, they run here in a certain prejudice, and, in some
sense, fall in that inconvenience, which a Writer observes on the contending
of two Bishops, expressed in this as the ground of their division* ^nus ut
prae^sset alter ne sube^et. sed neuter ut prodesset; which is oftentimes, on
the matter, too true in all such contests, this last being a consequent of the
former two.

This difference may be considered two ways, 1. As it pretends a
dissatisfaction with the persons who are to govern; some, upon the one side,
thinking it unfit to join with profane men; some, upon the other, disdaining
to join with Schismatics. In this strait were the Fathers of the Council of
Carthage in their dealing with the Donatists; some of them asserting, on the
one side, That there was no uniting with such as the generality of the
Catholics were; and Augustine often cites the word of P^tmianus, given-in to
them as an Answer to the desire of a Conference, Indignum est ut in unum
conventant fi^ii Martyrum, and progenies traditorum; that is, It is a most
unseemly thing that the sons of Martyrs, and the brood of Traditors should
assemble together in one place. On the other hand, they were pressed from Rome
and parts adjacent, not to unite with these Schismatics the Donatists, as may
be seen in that Council; yet did they find it their duty to seek union with
them notwithstanding, and to admit, that such of them as were put before from
their Churches, should be repossessed by him that was appointed Cognitor, and
deputed by the Emperor in that Conference, Ut eo modo eos ad conferendum etiam
beneficiis invitaret; that is, That so he might invite them to conference at
least by such benefits. This principle, we suppose, ought not, nor will not
stick in the hearts of such men, and in such a case, as is presupposed, and it
leads to a These, That there is no communion in Government to be kept,
where, upon any of the former accounts, men are displeased with such persons as
are joined therein with them: and though affection, and sometimes inclination,
being stirred with prejudice and discontent, will be ready to make some such
practices to be plausible, which do infer this; yet, I suppose, the Thesis it
self will not be maintained, more than such a ground will warrant Separation in
any other Ordinance; and the grounds formerly laid down in several parts of
this discourse, will not admit of such a principle, which, if admitted, would
exclude union for ever, We shall therefore pass this.

The second and main difficulty then, is, In the ordering of things so for the
time to come, as the ends of union and government may thereby be obtained, and
that nothing that may be justly feared by one side or other, may be altogether
slighted. In reference to this, it will not be expected that we should be
particular or satisfying, yet not to leave it altogether imperfect. We shall,
first, propose some general considerations, to mollify the sharpness of
division upon this account. 2. Offer some general helps, which in such cases
may be thought on. 3. Lay down some advertisements upon supposition that full
satisfaction be not obtained.

We propose these considerations to be thought on concerning this, 1. In such a
thing it is impossible It must be such a satisfaction as neither is fully
satisfied.
that men on both, or either side, can expect full satisfaction to their mind,
or even simply to their light; because men have not the carving out of what is
good to the Church simply before them, but comparatively and in reference to
such and such a circumstantiate case; and therefore must resolve, that respect
must be had to the satisfaction of others as of themselves; for, it is not the
satisfaction of one side that makes up union, but of both: and therefore it
must be resolved to be such a satisfaction to both, as neither is fully and
simply satisfied therein; and for that cause it is not to be expected that in
such a case all inconveniences which are possible, can be satisfyingly
prevented, or questions concerning the same answered. I doubt if in any case
there will be full satisfaction as to these.

2. Let it be considered* if the abstaining of uniting will prevent these
inconveniences upon either side, and if it does not rather bring on greater,
and more upon the Church; and if inconveniences sway, which are lesser and more
uncertain in the one case, those which are greater and more inevitable, ought
to sway more in the other; for, it is already presupposed, that joining does not
make one guilty in these inconveniences, more than abstaining does.

Yea, 3. Let it be considered, if by continued division, men be not necessarily
guilty of the inconveniences that follow it; because (to say so) they follow it
per se, or naturally and necessarily, whereas the other follows upon union but
by accident at the most: Other considerations, formerly mentioned, are also to
have weight, and ought to be remembered here.

We come now to consider the helps which may in The thing feared is not corrupt
doctrine nor a wrong Government.
part be useful to prevent these fears. In reference to which we would, 1.
consider, that the matter feared, is not the bringing-in of unsound doctrine in
the general, nor the altering of practical rules to the strengthening of
prophanity, But it is the misapplication of good rules already made, especially
in reference to these. 1. The admitting of unfit Officers in the Church. 2. The
deposing of such as deserve the same. 3. The decision of some particular
differences that may occasionally occur in the carrying-on of Church Affairs,
wherein men may apprehend and fear partiality, as they shall occur: which
grounds of fear upon either side, we may gather from what has been formerly
hinted.

Concerning the matter of deposition, we have spoken already and shall say no
more. Concerning the other two points, we may consider them either as they are
concerning things past, before the union be madeup during the division; or, as
they relate to what may occasionally fall out afterward.

Concerning what is past in such debated particulars we have spoken already,
and, it seems, one of these three ways must be taken in reference thereunto. 1.
Either by waving of these things (if they be such as may be waved) so that
without insisting in them, they may be buried; or, by one parties ceding; or,
by a mutual composure, they may be instantly settled. 2. If that cannot be, the
union is not to be suspended Union not to be suspended upon every particular.
thereon, but some mutually may be appointed to labor in the same afterward,
that with consent it may be brought to a point, which is not to be thought
desperate, although it be not ended for the time. This way of mutual
conferring is natural, as being an approven mean for composing of differences
of any sort, in any place, at any time. 3. If that please Some particulars to
be referred to some acceptable to both
not, or attain not the end, the matter may be amicably referred to some
acceptable to both, who may be trusted with the ultimat decision in such
particulars: neither is this unbecoming Church Authority so to condescend, nor
Ministers in such matters to be submissive. For, 1. it is no matter of doctrine
wherein they are to decide, or wherein either party is to acquiesce, but it is
in some particular practical thing. 2. The Submission is not in a difference
betwixt a thing sinful and a thing lawful, but betwixt two things that are
lawful, which of them comparatively is the most expedient to the Church in
such a case; wherein I conceive, it were not implicit walking, though men
should acquiesce in the judgment of some others in such things, more than in
their own. 3. It would seem, that that advice of the Apostle's, 1 Cor. 6. ( Is
there not a wise man amongst you? etc.) is proposed in the general, to prevent
all such strife and contention, as does bring scandal with it; and therefore
ought not to be excluded in this case, seeing there is a gift of prudence and
wisdom given unto the Church for the governing of her self, and is more
eminently given to one than to another, even as the gift of knowledge is for
doctrine; and therefore we conceive that in such cases, such may warrantably be
trusted with such particulars, seeing it might be expected that they would
endeavor to make the best thereof for the good of the Church. In that
conference with the Donatists, we find that the Donatists are desired to name
one for themselves, who might join with the Cognitor appointed to judge of such
particulars and matters of fact, as were in debate betwixt the Catholics and
them; and their refusing thereof was looked upon as an evidence of their not
desiring an end of the controversy: Neither is it to be thought, that
Augustine and nigh 300. Bishops with him who yielded thereto, did undervalue
the matter in debate between them, though they were content to have differences
in fact so decided. We find also, that for the removing almost of all the
forementioned schisms, there were particular men, either deputed by Synods, or
commissionated by adjacent Churches, or called by themselves, for the composing
amicably of such practical differences as were the occasion of their rents:
And, it may be, that were this more used for composing of Church-differences,
the height that oftentimes they come to in particulars, might be prevented.
Such things are not to be decided by a mere authoritative way.


We here think not fit, that such things should be decided by
Church-judicatories by a mere authoritative decision: not out of any
dis-respect to ChurchJudicatories; but because, as was formerly hinted in the
general grounds, Church-judicatories are fitter for preventing such divisions
than for removing of them: And further, a Church-judicatory being in all
public divisions a party, such decision would look liker submission (which men
are not so easily induced unto) than union. Beside, such a way i^ more ready to
breed heart-burnings in such things as have been the matter of contest
formerly, and so is palpably in hazard to brangle an union scarce begun: Also,
men will more easily bear any decision wherein themselves have a consent,
though it were mediately by committing it to some others, than where there is
only a necessity of obeying* and especially where such prejudice is conceived
to be in the Judge, as in the case supposed. This may be clearer from what may
be said afterward.

For regulating things which may occasionally fall Better for a time to forbear
many things, than to brangle union.
out, for the time to come, we may propose these general helps to be
considered. 1. That there be an abstinence from what may readily seem to prove
the occasion of any difference, at least for a time: and it is better to
forbear many things, than to brangle union, or grieve a party with whom we have
united; Yet generally it appears, that it is driving and not forbearing, that
breeds division, and also grieveth men after union, and tempts them to rue
the same. Neither is this a bar to any from a necessary duty, it only
regulateth men in the doing of necessary duties, so as they may eschew the
guilt of renting the Church, or grieving of others; or, at most, it relates
but to the tyming* manner, or some other circumstance of a necessary duty: As
suppose in the matter of planting a Church, a division should in all appearance
be like to arise, It is more fit that it should be for a time suspended, and
other endeavors for facilitating the same used, yea, ere a breach be, that
even other persons be sought out; for, though it be duty to plant the Church,
and that with none but such as are worthy, yet it is not always a necessary dut^
to plant such a particular Church at such a time, and in such a manner, and
with such a worthy person; Yea, it were better for the Church, and more peace
to the persons mind, that such a particular place should vake for several
years, than that the peace of the Church, or composedness of her Judicatories,
should be marred thereby, and so in other matters wherein forbearance is
called-for.

2. In such a case, doubtful practices would be abstained; Doubtful practices
to be abstained from.
and whatever side men choose in any occurring particular, it would be such,
and in such a manner done, as may be convincingly approvable unto any of
whatsoever side; for, it is often uncertain things, or disputable at the most,
that breed differences amongst judicious sober men: men therefore would someway
confine themselves within unquestionable things for a time, and not only have
respect to their own consciences in such things, and to what is right in it
self, but also to others, who want not their own suspicions and jealousies, and
who by their deed may either be soon tempted, or grieved; both which they ought
to shun.

3. We conceive, that it is useful in such a time to Many brotherly
conferences to prevent abrupt surprisals.
have many brotherly consultations, and conferences, concerning such things as
may be moved, that things come not in abruptly; for, so sometimes men may be
surprised with somewhat they have not heard of, and become jealous where there
is no ground: Also, it is an evidence of respect so to communicate thoughts,
and men may thus know what is fit to be moved, and what not; whereas
otherwise, men may be soon engaged in opposition to a motion, and not so
easily brought off. This communication would not so much be by appointment of
others, as voluntary, and out of respect between particular persons: Also, it
would be respectively done to the person with submission to his reason, that
is, if he seem reasonably dissatisfied therewith, and do not relish the same,
the motion would be forborne, at least for a time, and the other waited upon
therein, till he come up to it, or at least connive at it; this would breed
confidence and make the designs joint. And this way that is to be followed in
the first moving of things, would also be continued in the promoving thereof.

4. Matters of difficulty would rather be committed Matters of difficulty
rather committed, than instantly decided.
to deputed persons than instantly decided* especially in superior
Judicatories. The reasons are. 1* Because ordinarily superior Judicatories
cannot wait the time that fretted spirits will require to bring businesses of
difficulty to any cordial close. 2. It seems respective like when they are so
taken notice of, and sleighting like when things are hastened. 3. Neither so
are all after-murmurings and risings of heart prevented, when things are not
heard to the full. 4. Because time may do many things, and that may be easy
ere long which is difficult now. 5. In such deputations there is more access
to have respect to the appointing of such persons, as may most probably
effectuate the thing for the Churches good; and, no question, a
Church-judicatory is to take the way which may do the thing best, as well as a
particular person, and they are to abstain from debatable things and hasty
conclusions, even as particular persons are: and oftentimes experience
teaches, that such Commissions expede many things, which more frequent
Assemblies could not so well do. Hence we will find, that it was ordinary in
the primitive time upon such grounds, to give Commission to some few to do
things, and particularly, that often-mentioned Council of Carthage did think
good to dissolve, and to depute so many for deciding that, in matters of
discipline, which they could not by themselves so well be able to compass. Not
unfit, some persons were designed for a time to com pose occasional
differences.


5. We conceive also, that it were not unfit in such cases (for a time at
least) to have some designed by mutual consent, who might compose such
occasional differences as possibly might arise; or, who at least might have so
much power as to restrain and keep down the same from being a new ground of
division to the Church, or matter of great grief to any party. This is not to
constitute a new Judicatory, but according to the light of nature to provide a
mean for keeping up of order, and preventing of confusion, when, in respect of
the present distemper of spirit, there is no possibility for attaining that end
by the constituted Judicatory: Nature in such a case teaches all men to seek
for order in every society, and it being supposed that there cannot be a
joining in ordinary Judicatories without this, and that it might be attained
with this, it is hard to think, that that is denied to the Church which agrees
to all other societies; or, that it can be said, that it is better to want
union in Church-judicatories, than to have it so qualified. Sure some Churches
would, and do think much to attain this length, as appears by the many
voluntary associations which worthy men have been led unto, for the keeping of
order, and attaining of some union, who are yet good friends to
Churchgovernment; and the reason that warranteth them in their deed, to wit,
the necessity of union and order in the Church, and the impossibility that
there is of any further mean for attaining the same, will warrant this practice
in the case supposed; for, the question is not simply, What is the best
constituted Government of a Church in a good condition? but it is, Whether a
Government with such a qualification, be better than no Government, or a
divided Government, it being supposed that no other in the circumstantiat case
can be attained?

It would be considered also, That such a voluntary reference to such persons,
does not include any authority, as to ordain Ministers, or depose, etc. but it
is to be in matters of fact, as in the fitness or unfitness of such a
Plantation, of such a Process, and the like; which was mentioned in reference
to differences past; for, what was said there, is also binding here.

Neither can this be thought any limitation or weakening of Church Authority and
power: For, 1. It does make that authority and power stronger than formerly it
was without this, in the case so circumstantiate; and the question still is to
be considered not in thesi, but in hypothesi. 2. Because this is This tends
to recover strength to Iudicatories,
for the recovery and strengthening of an authority that for the time is not in
exercise, at least in such an extent, and it is to give the same a being, as it
were, and to bring it to its former luster; as if a weak man should be led, or
get a staff in his hand till he recover; or, as if a disjoynted leg should be
fenced about otherwise than one that is whole, and so be the sooner in
capacity to walk without these. 3. This is but a temporary accessory help, and
is not pleaded-for as an essential of Government, but only as a lawful
expedient when it cannot be wanted. 4. It may be considered that possibly no
use may be thereof, and if so, it can be no encroachment; and if there be need
thereof, so as things cannot cordially be composed otherwise, Is is not
expedient then, for the preventing of a further inconvenience? 5. I suppose it
is not inconsistent with Civil Authority, when union is made-up betwixt two
Nations, or in the same Nations, especially where Authority has been brangled,
that some by joint consent be chosen for deciding of such things as may
occasion a new breach: and there are many instances of this in history; for,
the being of Authority is cumulative to the means that men are naturally
furnished with, for the preserving of union and order, and therefore it cannot
exclude such prudential considerations.

Neither can it be thought inconsistent with the nature of Church Authority and
Government: For, 1. If it be agreeable to the principles of nature and *And is
consistent with Ministerial Church Authority.
sound reason, it cannot be inconsistent with Churchgovernment, which has its
own policy grounded upon these: And although the form of Government be not to
be gathered from these, nor the ends which they should aim at who govern, yet
the manner how such a Government is to attain these ends is in positive things
to be regulated by them: hence sometimes men are to use entreaties and
persuasions* sometimes threatenings and authoritative means, according as the end
may be attained. 2. Although Church Government in the general be determined,
and men be not free to associate or not, yet there is much* as to the exercise
thereof in associating, and the particular manner mutually agreed upon, which
still may regulate circumstances, though they cannot alter the nature of the
thing. 3. It is not necessary that Church Authority should be always exercised
in every thing; for, it is not to be exercised but when it is to the Churches
edification, and there is no such Church Authority as edifies not; and
therefore, if in such cases the interposing of Church Authority in the ultimat
decision of matters be not edifying, it is no encroachment upon it to say it
should not be exercised in that case; and so at the most, that which depends
upon this reference, is, only prudentially to discern and judge, if in such and
such a case, it be fit for the Churches edification, that Church Authority
should decide in such a particular matter, wherein not the authority or power*
but the prudence, zeal and faithfulness of such persons are to be respected
for the obtaining of a forbearance. 4. We will find the great Apostle
oftentimes condescending The great Apostle often lays aside Authority.
to lay by his authority, and to entreat and beseech, especially in the matter
of union; and sometimes to advise, when he thought his entreaties might more
kindly prevail; or, when he thought his authority might be questioned, or his
authoritative acting hazard a schism: which grounds, being moral, may warrant a
Church in such a case unto the end of the world to follow his example. 5. Seeing
union is maintained when it is weak by the same means by which it is begun,
(for union is not completed when some agreement is closed) and seeing, as we
said, an authoritative way is not fittest for conceiving and bringing forth the
same; So neither will it be for giving of it suck and milk till it be able to
abide stronger meat. 6. Seeing Church Authority is parental, and that of the
tenderest sort, it is not unbecoming that it condescend even to the weakness
and childish distempers of some members, supposing there be such standing in
need thereof; and if such condescending may join them in and keep them in, in
their own place, and prevent even their snares and miscarriages more
effectually than authoritative means will do, which are for the time suspected
by them; ought not such means to be followed? And if they should continue in
their infirmity to stumble at the peremptory using of authoritative means and
the denial of this; will it be thought a sufficient ground to exoner men from
having accession unto their fall? or will it look like that tenderness and
condescendency which mothers and nurses ought to have to children, even in
their childish and unreasonable moodes? 7. This also mis-states the question,
because its here to be considered (as was said) not what is the nature of
Church Authority simply, but comparatively, what is fittest for procureing the
edification of the Church, and for a time to be a mean for recovering her to a
full authoritative manner of acting, which is now supposed to be brangled.
Beside, if the recovery of Church Authority be a duty requiring means to be
used suitable to that end; then the use of this mean must be a duty: because,
in the case supposed, it is the most probable mean for attaining to that. If it
be said, that it is a more easy way to acquiesce in the authoritative
determination, and it were more fit for men to submit to that. Answ. That
supposes no present distemper to be, and answers not to the case stated,
which is upon the supposition that men do not that; Is not this more fit for
present edification, and more probable for attaining to a full authoritative
way of acting, than the continuing of a division without condefcending in this?
In the last place, also it may be considered, That the exercising of
Church Authority in particular cases, hic and nunc, is an affirmative precept,
and therefore does not bind ad semper, according to the common rule of
affirmative precepts; it cannot therefore be unsuitable to it, or the precepts
by which it is commanded, to add such qualifications as are mentioned in the
case presupposed.

CHAP. XIX. Some advertisements concerning the overtures proposed.
TO come now to some advertisements accordding as we did propose; we must
shortly put them together, lest we be too prolix in every thing.

1. Then it would be adverted, That there is no peremptorinesse urged in any of
the former helps or remedies, but if other means may be found more effectual,
all these are to cede. Only this is intended, that if no more probable and
effectual means be found out, or applied, that it is better on such like
grounds to unite than to continue a division.

2. It is to be adverted, That there may be, and ought to be such a
condescending, in the concluding of, and fixing on the means, (especially for
the time to come) as by the expressing of time, manner, and other particular
circumstances of things, the fears of both may be someway guarded against, and
each by showing respect to other, may endeavor the removing of their mutual
jealousies; for* seeing jealousies are mutual, it will be too much for one side
to think that the other should wholly credit them, if there be no condescending
by them.

3. Although there should be fears that things should again break out, and that
therefore it is to no purpose to undertake a way of union, not every way
satisfying; yet it would be essayed, and if the Lord prevent that fear, such an
objection is loosed; if some interruption come again to hazard an outbreaking,
these who are accessory thereto, will be the more guilty, and others who are
innocent therein, may have more peace* than if it had not been essayed.

4. If union cannot be completed in every thing, then their would be
endeavors to fix it so far as is attainable, and to prevent the increasing of
division, that if there may not be a positive union, at least, a positive
division and opposition may be shunned.

5. It would be endeavored, that notwithstanding of such divisions, men may
mutually concur in that wherein there is no division for the edification of the
Church: for, division in one particular ought not, nor will not warrantably
hinder mutual acting in other things where there is none: As for instance, if
it be an interruption in carrying on the work of God jointly in Government,
because of some difference concerning that; vet if there be access to promove
the edification of the body by an united way of preaching, that is to be
followed and improven, as we see it is done in some places where Government is
not allowed.

6. Whatever the case be, we suppose it is duty to make the best thereof, when
men cannot win the length they would.

CHAP. XX. What is incumbent to Magistrates and People for remedying this evil.
IT rests now that we should speak something, to what is incumbent to
Magistrates and People, for remedying of such an evil in the Church; but being
kept so long on the former, we cannot enter on this; We shall only lay down
these few generals,

1. That neither of them ought to be offended or stumbled at such divisions, or
thereby be brought to have less esteem either of the Gospel, the Ordinance of
Government, or Worship, or the Ministry and Ministers of Jesus Christ; much
less would there be insulting over, or advantage taken against, these upon
this occasion, as is recorded to the infamy of several persons; but on the
contrary, all would be affected therewith, as with a most dangerous snare, and
fearful plague: And to this purpose Augustine does seriously press his
Boniface, Governor of Africa, that he should not stumble at the divisions of
the Church, and particularly Epist. 50.

2. All would search if they have had any sinful influence upon the procuring
of such a stroke; for, if it be a plague and woe to them, they would look back
to the rise thereof; who knows but the sins of Magistrates or People in their
fretting at the Ordinance of Government, despising of the Ministry, not
receiving of the Word nor walking answerably thereto, and such like may have
procured this division from the Lord, as a judicial stroke on them to harden
them in their former sin, and thereby to strengthen their tentation to despise
all the Ordinances more to their own ruin, as may be gathered from what has
been formerly spoken?

3. All would be careful to abstain from what may further or heighten the
breach, and by all means endeavor not to be engaged in such sidings; for, that
often encourages others, and increases and fixes a rent; and in experience
it is seen, that these schisms were ever most dangerous, and most difficultly
removed, wherein people came to party, and side with opposite sides in the
division: and seeing the Spirit in the Scripture, does forbid people as well as
Ministers to divide, this must be their duty, not to join in such a division.
Also, it unfits them to get good from Ministers, or to do good for removing of
a rent amongst them. And we are sure, If doubtful disputations, vain
janglings, and such like questions, that tend not to edification, be to be
eschewed by people, then we conceive that such as are in the cases presupposed,
may be so esteemed of.

4. They are by all respective means seriously to press the abstaining from,
and composing of such differences, by their serious representations of the ills
thereof, and exhortations, according to their places to have the same remedyed.
And were this more amongst people, upon occasions in due manner, to testify
their sober resentment of such evils in the general, and desire of union, and
condescendency for attaining the same, so far as is fit, it would much more
become the sobriety of tender Christians and be much more effectual for this
end, than to be heightening and aggreging the miscarriage of any one party to
another, or carrying reports or informations true or false, which may kindle
humors to a flame that are hot and smoking already. It would affect a heart
to hear the regraits and expostulations that Constantine, Gratian, and others,
have anent the divisions of Churchmen in their times and their exhortations to
remedy the same.

5. All sorts would endeavor to be in good terms with God, in respect of
their own particular conditions: and when all fails, they would still be
instantly dealing with God by prayer for healing of the same, as accounting it
a great plague* even to them, while this continues.

CHAP. XXI. The grounds and motives of the desired union.
THe last thing proposed to be spoken to, was, the grounds whereby union on
such like terms, in such cases, might be pressed: but seeing somethings to this
purpose have been already here and there inserted, upon several occasions; and
seeing these who are mainly concerned in this, are supposed to be most tenderly
zealous of the Churches good, and so not to stand much in need of many motives
to persuade to this which does so nearly concern the same; and fearing to heap
up too many words in a matter so clear, we shall forbear to insist, and only
propose some considerations to the conscience of the tender Reader, especially
in reference to some particular circumstances, which sometimes may occur in the
case of division. And let God Himself, who is the God of peace, of love, and of
order, put them home to consciences with a strong hand.

First, The conscientious Reader may consider, when all is well weighed that is
formerly proposed, with what may besides occur to himself, If the study of
union be not a most necessary thing, and if without the essaying of these and
such like means, according to his interest and calling, he can have peace, as
being sufficiently exonered in his duty, in reference to this great end; and if
there can be solid quietness to continue division upon the grounds mentioned,
and to slight the pursuing after union, if attainable, upon these or such like
terms as are proposed, especially in these and such other cases.

1. When a Church is under external crosses and afflictions, and by Gods
dispensation is cast into the furnace; to be therein struggling and wrestling
one with another, and, as if it were in the time of the Churches greatest peace
and calm, to be contending for matters of such concernment, O how unsuitable is
it! Though indeed condescending be called-for at any time, yet certainly* much
more and in an especial manner at such a time. The judicious, and great Divine
Calvin, does, upon this account, exceedingly aggrege the divisions amongst some
English in Frankford, who being banished in the days of Queen Mary for the
same Religion, did even there contend for matters of little moment. This (says
he, Epist. 200.) was exceeding intempestiv^, or untimous, and exceeding
offensive to the Church of Christ, and unbecoming their case: And although he
utterly disapproved these ceremonies, as unbecoming the Church of Christ; Yet
does he ( Epist. 206.) press moderation on both sides, using these words,
Sicuti autem eos qui a vobis dissentiebant hortatus sum, ut qua possent
moderatione inflecterent; ita mihi displicuit, nihil vicissima part vestra
recedi vel remitti, that is, As I did exhort these who were not of one mind
with you, to stretch themselves with all possible moderation; So it did
displease me, that there was upon the other hand by you, nothing ceded or
remitted.

The second case is, When a Church by division, is laid open to gross
heretics, who wait the occasion of such a division, that they may make (as it
were) an infall upon her. Division should be shunned at any time, but in such a
case, union should be at any rate* of warrantable condescendency* purchased. In
that difference between Eusebius and Basilius, at first it was sufficient to
eschew division; for which end at Nazianzens desire, Basilius removed; but when
the Arians were like to take advantage thereof, he did again return, and by his
condescending made up a perfect union, thereby to stop the door against the
inbreaking of error upon that people: Which fact is ever highly commended,
even in respect of the seasosonablnesse thereof, in reference to that tentation.

3. A third case wherein union would especially be studied* is, When there is
little help from without, to the sustaining of the Government and order of the
Church; but men in that respect, have and take liberty to act as they will:
because then union is the only wall, and if that fall, there is nothing to
guard* Hence it is, that necessity, especially in such a case, has made men
think upon associations and mutual bonds, for the establishing and confirming
of union.

4. It is* when some of the Ordinances, especially the Ordinance of Government,
is questioned, or when they are despised, and someway made contemptible before
men: in such cases, for respect to the Ordinances of Christ, men ought to
condescend to the uttermost, and to endeavor the recovery of the Ordinances of
Christ to their former beauty, which is impossible to be attained without this;
because division makes all to appear contemptible.

5. It is, when there seems to be some special nick, or choke, or crisis (to
speak so) that is, When, if there be not present uniting and gripping, in all
probability, the division and breach will grow greater and wider and be more
difficultly removable. In such a case men ought to stretch themselves with all
the moderation that is possible (as Calvin's expression is) if they may now, at
least, through Gods good hand upon them, come to some agreement, and taking
grip (to say so) while it is possible. And if each of these alone, strongly
press the study of union, even beyond what is ordinary; O how very strongly
will all of them* put together, press it! And how actively should men, zealous
for God and His precious Ordinances, and tender of the edification of souls,
bestir themselves to follow after peace in such a vehemently urging case?

The second thing that would be seriously considered and thought upon, is, What
is the possibility, and feasablenesse, and access to attainment, of such a
desirable end. It is true, tenaciousnesse in some, may make union in the least
things impossible, especially such as may by his grace, gifts, esteem, or the
dependence of others upon him because of these, have some special stroke and
influence upon the thing: But the Reader would consider,

1. If someway the stick be not at himself, and if there be not something
possible to him, in reference to union, which yet he has not condescended to;
for, although he has not power over the wills of others, yet has he over his
own.

2. Let him consider, If the ills that follow division be not great and
certain: and if so, if the stopping at any step of the condescending
called-for, will bear out the conscience against the cries of so many
reproaches that are casten upon Ordinances by some; against the many challenges
that will arise upon the miscarriages of others, that are occasioned by such
divisions; and against the impression that the weighting and sadning of many
honest hearts, will have with it one day? And if he dare step in to judgment,
without fear of being found faulty in any measure in respect of the
forementioned inconveniences; if his condescending, as is called-for, might
have prevented them.

3. He would consider, if at the appearing of Jesus Christ, when all such
affections shall be laid by, and disputings will not have place, nor
recriminations be admitted; if, I say, in such a case he may not have more
peace in condescending upon either side, as is proposed, for the good of the
Church, than by refusing the same to keep up the division.

4. It would be seriously pondered, whether union by such condescendency, or
division without it, may be most profitable and edifying to the Church; and if
any of these things be of such consequence, as to stand in the way of the
Churches further edification.

5. The Reader may consider, if ever in the practice of the primitive times, or
in the writings of orthodox and sober Divines, old or late, any so
circumstantiated division will be found warrantable, or if, out of the heat of
debate, they would probably have stuck at any condescension that is here
required upon either hand.

6. It may be considered, If all the present reformed Churches being appealed
unto in such a case, were singly and impartially to give judgment thereanent,
whether it could upon any ground be thought, that they would judge such
condescending unlawful upon either side, if by it and no otherwise union were
to be attained?

7. It would be considered, That if all that ever have written on this subject
of old or late were consulted, that (for ought I know) it will be found that
the condescension that they allow for attaining, and preserving of union in the
Church, will be of a larger extent, than any thing in this case required; And,
I suppose, hardly will it be found, that from such writings there will be a
sticking allowed upon any such thing as is proposed. And will it be safe, at
once to condemn so many?

8. The Reader may reflect on himself, and try what are his thoughts of former
divisions, and if he does not approve most ordinarily these that were most
peaceable, and always these that in such a circumstantiated case did study
condescendency; and if he does not within himself judge, that it had been more
for the Churches good, that such divisions had been removed upon such like
terms, than that they should have been continued; and if there be not in his
bosom a kind of indignation at the rigid drivers of such a division, whereby
he may know and discern what is fit to be done in the present case, if he were
as impartial in it, as in the other.

9. He may consider, If union be not made up upon such or the like terms; and
if upon other terms it be impossible, What will follow, or what usually does
follow in such cases? Does not bitterness grow to a height amongst orthodox
men, as if each of them were enemies to the truth of Christ, and enemies to one
another persons? names also are often imposed upon each by the other, as if
they were not both of the same body; or, as if it were good service to God, and
advantage to the Truth, by such designations to render one another odious*
contemptible and useless: As these that refused to join with the Church of
Rome in Easter, were called Quartodecimani; whereupon follows abstinence in
communion with one another, turning aside unto error and novelty amongst some;
indulgence if not connivance at, and compliance with gross and corrupt men
amongst others; coldness in zeal to God, and love one to another; and
upsitting in the power and practice of godliness amongst all, and many such
like woeful effects. And shall, alas, shall the weight of all these sad and
Religion-ruining consequents, be stated upon the refusing of such
condescendency as is here called-for? G^d forbid.

10. It would be seriously considered, what may be the thoughts of the
generation that shall succeed? Shall such a division be propagated to them, and
they made heirs thereto? Shall not they either continue miserable under such a
condition, and that for ever, with such heightening circumstances as cannot but
follow? (and will any ingenuous and posteritycompassionating Reader think of
this, and not be affected therewith?) Or they must endeavor the recovery of
union with much more difficulty than it may now be; and if so, certainly that
generation will be in hazard to curse these that went before them, who did
bring them forth under the necessity of continuing under the sin, snare, and
torturing-plague of divisions; or, at least, of being in so greatly-puzling and
perplexing straits, ere they could expede themselves out of the same.

11. If yet the Reader be not convinced positively to join and further union in
such a case, let him yet consider if he has sufficient clearness to oppose
and cry down the same as sinful, and if he has liberty and freedom to cry
down all that ever have approven or do approve the removing of a division upon
such terms as these proposed? and if he dare with confidence from his own
particular dissatisfaction, mar the same amongst others? and if possibly he
might not have more freedom negatively to lie by, and neither directly nor
indirectly to be the occasion of such an offense; and if the Church might not
have more profit, and he more peace in so doing? and if he be satisfied, he may
consider whether it were not better to endeavor such a composure, though to
the dissatisfaction of some (who possibly may afterward lay by their
discontent) than out of preposterous respect to them, to hazard the ruin of
all? which is, as it were, to bring a leaking ship to land in a storm, though
some of the company, upon some mistake, oppose the same.

12. Let him consider, if ever condescending in such things has been observed
to bring any hurt to the Church; whereas selfwillednesse (whereof a Minister
especially should be free) has always been dangerous. It Is true, (...) in
points fundamental, such as that which Anastasius pressed, has been most
zealously opposed as hurtful, because thereby the foundation was stricken at,
and error in fundamental things got equal footing with truth; But can ever
this be said in such things as are supposed in the case laid down?

Lastly, The Reader may consider, if in soberness, and in an abstracted manner
extra aestum disputationis, he were giving his advice to a Church so divided,
and immediately thereafter to step in to judgment, he would not readily incline
to commend union on these or such other terms, as necessary for the good of the
Church, credit of the Ordinances, and the removing of stumbling blocks from
before the people, especially in the cases formerly mentioned; and if he might
not have more peace to step to judgment after such an advice, than if rigidly
he should inhibit such condescension. And we shall leave the judicious,
conscientious, and tender Reader, to answer these and many such things to
himself, and accordingly to do: and if any, out of prejudice, (as we hope none
will, and heartily wish none may) shall not conscienciously ponder the same, we
leave him to consider that he must reckon to God therefore, and shall only
obtest him that he will have more respect to the Churches peace, than to his
own inclination; and that he will at least by some other lawful, possible and
probable mean essay the removing, or at least the prevention of the growth of
such divisions; and that he would withal construct well of the essays of
others, till we come all before the common Judge, who, we are persuaded, loves
the Truth in peace, and has joined these together, which therefore ought by no
man to be put asunder.

FINIS.

