DIOMEDES, The Dutch Rogue.
depiction of Diomedes de Lebechea

The Dutch Rogue or, Gusman of Amsterdam Traced from the Craddle to the
Gallows: Being, the Life, Rise, and Fall of D. de Lebechea a DECAYED MERCHANT.

Containing many fraudulent Practices, notorious Villainies, and audacious
Enterprises, with their various events.

Illustrated with Copper Plates.

Out of Nether-dutch.

AUSONIUS de variet. Fortunae.

Is qui condiderat, postquam non repperit aurum, Aptavit collo quem repperit
laqueum.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Greg. Hill, 1683.

To the READER.
EVery day is a Mirror, and the World it self a Stage, whereon we see the
Variety of Fortune lively displayed, the Vicissitudes of Dignities and
Preferrments, the Alienations of Thrones and Scepters. The vast Globe of the
Earth (according to the Hypothesis of Copernicus, upon which the Magnetic
Philosophy is, or seems to be founded, is in perpetual motion, and consequently
all visible Creatures which have their Oecema or habitacle here, seem also
subject to the same Instability. This Opinion of his, although received by few,
yet if taken in some sense is not so strange, to wit, That the Earth and
Temporal Delights, in which some place their Summum bonum, or Chiefest Good,
are subject to Change, rolling and turning upon slender Occasions and less
powerful Causes, apt to rise, and not unapt to fall; so that all the Race of
Mankind are as it were altered by a Secundary motion. Some times it is
conspicuous in one and the same Man to be advanced from Poverty to Wealth,
promoted from Shame to Honor and elevated from the Dungeon to a Throne, and on
an instant depressed from Riches to Extreme Wants, abased from the highest
pitch of Reputation to the sink of Dishonor and reduced from the Scepter and
Chair of State to the Oar and Galley. Remarkable was that Change of C. Marius,
a Person of obscure Parentage, and beholden to his valor for his Advancement,
who was for 6 years together Consul of Rome, and in the 7th went about to ask
an Alms. No less worthy of observation is that of the famous Duc de Luna, who
carried Inconstancy in his Name and Title, who was raised from a poor and mean
Fortune to be a Favorite and Minion of the most puissant King of Spain, yet in
a moment, when in the height of Grandour, was beheaded upon the Scaffold, and
his body suffered to ly three days in the streets without Burial. Small was
the intervall of time between the Royal Favors of that great Persian Monarch
in conferring such honors upon Haman, and the direful effects of his
Displeasure, which hurled him out of the World, by a scandalous and ignominious
Death: short, I say, was the time between the Queens Banquet and the Gibbet.
But what need we go so far as Rome, Madrid, or Shushan, or search old Annals
and Registers for an Instance, when as every Man is either more or less to
himself an Example of Change, a Mirror of Inconstancy and the Tennis-ball of
Fortune, who wheeling about throws down with her left hand what she sets up
with her right. But all the wiles and Projects that Ambition and Covetousness
use for Implements in aspiring to those ends they aim at, were fitter to write
whole volumns of, than to go about to recount them in a Preface to a Schedule
of such mean Importance as this little book is. Many times they miss of their
aim who nevertheless seem to have laid a fair Foundation, and manage their
Project well and prudently to the very Catastroph of all, and as often do they
who are careless and remiss, in the midst of their Security and Supine
negligence exchange Fortunes with the former, and therefore fitly said Ausonius,

Thesauro invento qui limina mortis inibat,
Liquit ovans laqueum, quo periturus erat
At qui, quod terrae abdiderat, non repperit aurum,
Quem laqueum invenit, nexuit, and periit.
We have here a Precedent of one subject to many Changes, raised as it were
from a Dunghill to the Spire of Fortune, on whom she has shown all the Effects
of Chance and Change. The name under which he is shrouded may seem to diminish
the Credit of the matter, yet we concluded it better to be a little injurious
to our selves in being liable to such a censure, than to give the very and true
name of the Party himself, which might crack the Reputation of many honest
Friends of his, who bear the same name, and their Posterity in after times, who
might also receive some disadvantage and blemish by it: for the Rule of a
Satyrist is equally proper to us, Parcere Personis, loqui de vitiis; To spare
the Persons and treat of the Vice.

Others there were also, either imbarqued with, or interrested in him, whose
real names we have supplied either with Anagrams, or otherwise, for the like
reasons; for it is not our Province to cauterize the whole Stock for the
impiety of one Rotten Branch, for so we might blast the best of Mankind.

The Scope, I believe, of the Dutch Writer was only to give a caution how to
beware of such as under fair pretenses of Religion, which some make a Cloak for
Knavery, endeavor to defraud the World, as also that the Golden appearances
and glittering shows by which many are deceived, may not prove a
stumbling block to such as are simple and of an upright dealing; whereas many
fraudulent and obscure devices are laid open to the view of all.

Nor need it be censured as any detriment to Merchants, for whom all the World
has a special veneration; since the best Society in the World had an impious
Member, and if it be lawful to meddle with Holy Writ in a Profane Treatise,
we may instance how that Judas was included in the number of the 12 Disciples,
or if we may be so worthy as to record or turn to the serious Histories of the
Public-weal of Rome, we find a Catiline, a Laelius, Yea, a Nero among the
Emperors; was it then a shame for a Theodosius or a Constantine to have such a
Predecessor? for Wisdom judges of them as Men, not as Emperors, and regards
the Person, not the Condition of men. But what have we to do with Emperors?

But we had almost forgot to say something by way of Apology as to the Protocol
in the Title Page, for that some may take offense at the name of a Dutch Rogue;
but since we meet with an English, a Spanish and a French Rogue written by the
Natives of those three Countries which never, that we could ever hear, gave
dislike to any particular Person, so we hope this will not be offensive to any
of the Dutch Nation to whom we are too much obliged to cast any aspersion upon
it. Farewell.

S. P.
Gravesend, May 18. 1863.
THE Life, Rise, and Fall of the DECAYED MERCHANT.
When Triumphant Holland like the victorious Tritonia was mounted on her
pompous Chariot, molded of Spanish Silver by the valorous Enterprises of her
renowned Admiral Peter P. Heyn; and her fatal solitudes seemd to give way, and
allow her access to the Temple of Joy: there dwelt in the famous City of
Amsterdam one Justinius, a youth, whose mind upon the report of this most
gallant Exploit, and the noise of such an invaluable prize seemed to be
bewitched out of the bounds of Continency; The universal display of an
atchievment so noble, created in him another frame and temper of spirit,
insomuch that it bereaved him totally of the blessed fruition of Contentment in
his proper vocation; adjudging it too mean a Medium to render him a participant
of so big a Fortune; and an occupation not able to do him the lest service in
the acquirement of his ambitious ends: so that contrary to the vulgarly known
(yet solid) Document of Apelles, Let not the Shoemaker go beyond his Last, he
arrives at this Conclusion, That some other course must be taken whereby he may
attain to the scope he aimed at: yet all his Resolutions were as impracticable,
as his End was vain and inaccessible; to carry it on in Honor and Valor, was
a sphere too sublime and redious for him to move in, as Theft and Cheating was
base and perilous; The former difficult, because he was not endowed with that
acuteness of a Genius, which is requisite in endeavoring to gain the ascendant
of those with whom he would willingly be had in repute; and the Party in
perpetual danger of discovery, and the sequel. Thus the more he consulted with
his Wits, the less satisfaction and product he reaped from a continual study
and screwing of his Brain; so that sometimes to indulge his disquieted mind
with ease and cessation of thoughts, he would betake himself to a Temple
hallowed to the name of Bacchus, to whom he as often prostituted himself a
Votary. In this Temple was a Priestess who had great interest and acquaintance
with a certain Lady, who lived in the neighborhood. These two frequently
keeping together, gave Justinius an Opportunity, now and then of seemg the
latter, till at last he was caught in Cupids net. As for her form, she (in his
judgment) surpassed all that ever he had seen in his life time. To give you a
relation of his deportment were a needless undertaking, since the World
affoards us so many Copies, in those who are possessed with that bewitching
Doemon, although every one have not the good Success our worthy Patient had,
for greatly to his satisfaction he entered into Conjunctions with his imagined
Deity, and had indeed a competent sum of money to boot, whereupon in an honest
and temperate way he might have lived a contented-life.

Thus having obtained the full enjoyment of his desires, was in some measure
content with the Merchandise he had purchased with the surrender of his
freedom; hoping that his gains in time would be a hopeful issue, as indeed it
was, for shortly after she presented him with her pourtraiture, which he had
molded after the Original, and was so well imitated in lineaments and
Symmetrie, that had not the Dimensions had imparity, it had been hard to
determine which was the Copied, which the Copy, as far as regards the Figure:
an offspring which seemed by the kind Heavens to be endowed with Sprite and
Livelyness. But that his Fortune should not be too redundant in the effects of
liberality, so soon as his son was produced from behind the Curtains of Time,
his worthy Consort, as having perfected her Duty to him, and paid her Debts to
Nature, expired her last, and took her leave of the World; which now involved
the sad Father into so much Grief and Sorrow, that he was very prompt to submit
himself to the Tomb: but far mistaken, for Clotho had yet a little Flax to draw
before his fate would allow A^ropos to break the thread.

The Child being born, his Father thought it a duty incumbent on him to baptize
him, which he also did, and under a name wholly conformable to his then
afflictions, which we are desirous for this time to wave, the more because we
are not willing to give any offense to his Friends and Alliance, many of whom
are still living, much less, to be the occasion of any disadvantage, or be
injurious to their Estate or Reputation: but (notwithstanding the just merits
of his wicked practices might not deserve it) we will shroud him under the name
of Diomedes de Lebechea: which we borrow from an Appellative that exactly suits
his drift and humor; for the word Lebeche imports as much as the Southwest
Wind, to which he may be fitly compared, being vain and light in his thoughts
and projects, and managing his affairs and actions without any Foundation; and
as the Sun of Earthly Fortune sometimes shone with his acceptable rays upon his
thoughts, being (as it were) Westerly, but wavering from the point again
produced him (like a south wind) a shower of Tears, as is frequenty conspicuous
with those who settle their Foundations in the wind, not tilling nor
cultivating their mind, but willingly content themselves with those weeds,
which are the proper products of nature.

At first he grew up in Strength and health, being of a good and handsome form,
both in body and visage, and in every thing else promising enough; from which
his father received no small complacency, but after that depth of grief and
sorrow which he had upon the decease of his endeared consort, he began to
comfort himself with the life of her only son and offspring. After a few years
he put put him out to School, where in a short time he had made himself master
of Reading, Writing, Arithmetic and Merchants Accounts, partly by the
Diligence of good Masters, and partly by the help of his own forwardness and
wit. His Father, who hereat was well satisfied, determined after this his happy
Progress, in that kind of Literature, to put him forth to some Trade or other,
and in as much as he was in his Childhood very artificial at plating of hair,
he judged it best to put him to a Perriwigmaker, as soon after he did to one at
Bruxels: Diomedes had no great Contentment in this trade, thinking himself
never able to gain so much by it, as would answer his Pleasures, or to maintain
him at such a rate as he desired to live in, at once to enjoy both plenty and
ease.

Scarcely was he arrived at the 14. Year of his age, before his Father got his
Quietus est, and bad adieu to the World: and inasmuch as he lived a merry life,
so it could not be supposed that he should leave much behind him, as he did
not, save a Catalogue of Credit; which gave Diomedes little occasion of hopes
to advance his future Fortune by his Patrimony: Yet still was he prompted with
a groundless Opinion, as that something considerable might be reserved for him
in the Cabinet of Chance, as usually is observable in many who are prone to
judge according as they would willingly have it to fall out, and so was
constant in considering with himself how he might quit that mean and irksome
employment of his, and undertake some other course to bring him in a way to get
riches, and live a splendid life. No measures he could imagine seemed better to
like him than Merchandise, which he had often heard his Father speak of, who
had consumed a considerable sum that way, by a negligent managament of his
affairs therein: willing for that very reason to instruct his only son in some
honest Mechanical Calling or other, as more stable and sure, though very much
disagreeing with the inclination of the Youth.

Amongst several Projects he devised, one he pitched upon, which without much
loss of time he put in practice; For, upon a morning betimes he rose up, and
going into the Shop he privately took six, or seven of the best Perriwigs he
could come at, which he put up. The evening before, he had expostulated very
hard with his Master, to take one days recreation or two, with some friends of
his, who desired him to accompany them a little on their Journey, which after
some earnest entreatys his Master atlast assented to, hoping according ^othe
solemnity of his promise, he would return again in a day or two: But much on
the contrary, for Diomedes took his last leave both of Master, Shop, Trade and
Service, and came with all expedition to Amsterdam, with full intent to spend
the remaining years of his youth there; And taking Antwerp in his way, he met
with a good market for his goods, for he sold all his Perriwigs there, save
only one, which he kept for his own Nodle; and as soon as he came to
Amsterdam, put himself into a suitable garb, purposing to apply himself to some
Merchant or another, as by chance i^ fell very opportunely out: For, after he
had been there a few days, he accidentally fell into discourse with a
Wine-Cowper which he met with in a Tavern: and after they had exchanged a few
words he entered into an agreement with him for a certain sum of money, half of
which he was to pay in hand, and that he should be instructed in that Mystery
and Traffic, and during the time of his service to have his Diet and Lodging
with his Master.

This Merchant had an only daughter, called Aemilia, of a reasonable Stature,
and a more than ordinary Beauty, which Diomedes took a great fancy for, though
more for the circumstances of her purse than person; insomuch that he began to
bend his study, how to please her; which (as he was himself sensible of) could
not be with such ease accomplished, by one who had not an Estate to command, as
some of his Corrivals had; however, hap hazard, he resolvs to put the work in
practice, and totally dedicated the sum of his inclinations to her, and under a
color of Virtue, Love and Fidelity he brought the business so far, that, he had
fully insinuated himself into her favor, and began to assure himself that he
would shortly become Master of her Estate. She manifested to him, by many
mutual affirmations, a reciprocal kindness she had for him, and that nothing
should obstruct the course of her affections, if he could but procure the
Consent of her Father to the Making up of the Match, Diomedes, now reckoning
the Town more than half Stormed, assumed the liberty shortly after to make the
Overture and Proposals to her Father; though met with a Reply that put him into
no small disorder, for she was absolutely denied him, and he threatened to boot
that if ever he attempted the like afterward to be turned out into the wide
world: Diomedes swore that this refusal should cost his Master dear, and that
he would reward him with a recompense equivalent to this affront, cost what it
would cost, as shortly after he was as good as his word: for,

Among the fellowship our enraged Lover was wont to keep company with, was a
young man, whose parents dealt much in Sait, whom Diomedes seeing, was
thereupon put in mind of a notable revenge; and making use of his opportunity,
he bartered with this youngman for two Barrels of Salt, giving him almost the
value in wine, and the Overplus in money, The Salt thus bought, he had it
privately conveyed into his masters Cellar, and poured into every Tun and
Hogshead a competent quantity, so that the Wine seemed rather Brine than Juice
of the Vine. No^ long after the Merchant meeting with some customers, brought
them home to give them a taste of some Wines he highly approved of; he whose
turn it was to taste first took a swindging draught, after which he was sensible
that liquor was fitter to provoke thirst than to quench it, cried out, what
Devils drink have I got here in my mouth? surely this is fetched from Styx or
Cocitus, or is it the piss of Cerberus, the dog of hell? Is this the wine you
told of, Wine! Are these the Tears of Bacchus? sure his Godship has cried to
think you have not given him his due, or lodged him here in the dark as not
worthy of light; Nay Sir, keep this wine till Latter Lammas for me; believe me
you may keep it yet a hundred; years before it will stink if you salt it at
this rate. The Merchant himself was no less astonished, being almost besides
himself, in meeting with so strange a Metamorphosis. The first thing he did was
to examine his servant whence it came; but he, who was never at a stand for want
of Impudence, gave him a resolute answer, That he knew not: Probably, added he,
it may be a divine Blessing that is light upon you above all others that deal
in Wine, when as they in these dead times are fain to keep their Wine so long
till it begins to stink, but you are out of danger of yours, it being well
tempered with Salt, which renders it a commodity not so easily damnified with
keeping as theirs is. Hereat his Master was in such a fury, that if those
honest Genlemen, in whose presence it happened, had not stopped the course of
his rage, he had sent him at one blow to Salute his Grandsir. The Master
excusing himself in the best wise he could to his Customers, went to another
Hogshead, which he found was no better then the first, and so on to every
piece, one by one, but to his great astonishment found them all in the like
pickle, being almost three Cellars full, and the best not worth a groat, where
we will leave them to make their bargain.

The same evening Diomedes went to three Laborers, who had helped him the day
before to smuggle some Wines, gave'um four Ducatoons a man, and told them that
his Master had ordered it for their former help and service, and that about a
month after he would have the like occasion, and would give them the same
wages, provided they would by writing acknowledge that that money was given
them for their past service, and that they would serve him again for the like
sum: Or if they were not contented so, only to give a discharge under their
hands for the money received; which last was accepted: whereupon Diomedes
returned to his Master, and boldly demanded his Daughter, the Master in a hot
passion bad him be gone out of doors, or he would break his pate for him.
Diomedes then to use the advantage he had against him, threatened to discover
his Stealing of Custom, Excise, etc. if he would not give his assent to what
he demanded; which the Master not much regarding but persisted still in his
wonted humor, at last got him worsted out of his house. Diomedes immediately
went to an Officer of Justice (whose duty it is, here, to take notice of such
Delinquents) and informed him about his Masters practice, signifying the like
to the Farmers and Commissioners of the Impositions of wine, who ruminated his
Cellars from end to end, and thoroughly examined the matter of the Laborers,
that had been assisting in the running and conveyance of the Goods, adding well
to the matter, by declaring upon what account they had received that money;
which when they had thoroughly inspected found the Vintner tardy, as well from
the clear Confession of those men who had received the Money as from the number
of the Pieces of wine he had in his Cellar which he had never entered; insomuch
that these Gravaminas requiring an Expiation too heavy for him to bear, was
fain to retire, and leave his Counting house and Goods to the Mercy of the
Officers and Farmers of the Impositions. Neither did he ommit to make Complaint
against the wicked practice of Diomedes, in damnifying his wine with salt,
demanding Justice against him, and satisfaction for the Injury received; whom
when he began to look for, found that he had made his escape, and taken his
dear daughter along with him, (being as it seems oversway'd by the vigor of
Love) and about five hundred Ducats of Gold, which he no sooner perceived but
he fell into a strange Fit, in which he lay several hours before he came to
himself. The loss not only of his Wine and Money, but also of his only Child
and Reputation, brought him into a Consumption, which cast him just to
deaths-door: Nevertheless, desiring before his death that his daughter should
be enquired after: if possibly by the sight of her, and the restistitution of
part of his Money, he might add a little to his Days; but finding no means to
get her again, unless he would frankly forgive Diomedes, of those many crimes
he was factious of, and so with his full consent ratify the Marriage between
him and his daughter, he was forced to comply; and so accordingly they were
called home, the Match in every point confirmed and the young Couple received
into their Fathers house and Favor; although the Father notwithstanding all that
Physicians could praescribe or apply expired his utmost; and left Diomedes in
full Possession of his Estate, which was no small cause of Joy to him. After
the decease and Interrment of the old man, Diomedes mourned Court fashion, not
in a purple weed, but in making many Jovial hours, every day holiday and good
cheer, leaving the direction and management of his Merchandise of wines (which
he still continued) to the care of two servants of his, who served him as
faithfully as ever he did his Master before him.

Neither was it indeed possible for Diomedes to leave the tricks he had learned
of his Master, or Father in law: Nay, he esteemd it a sin to pay full Excise
for his Goods; being ever ready to accomodate and deal with those that had a
mind to smuggle; and that not only with persons of the meanest rank, but also
with the most eminent in the Town, some through an insatiable desire they had
to wine, others who out of Generositie were so liberal to good fellowship and
acquaintance, as that they were ashamed that it should be known at the Excise
Office what wine they consumed. Diomedes considering this, played upon the other
hand, and made a mixture of his Wines with water.

The old woman had not sought her daughter in the Oven had she not been there
herself; a proverb as true as ancient: Diomedes knowing himself never too
guilty of Fidelity, must needs sometimes harbor and entertain some suspicion
of the like deportment from his men, which even now have the same opportunities
he had once himself; his Jealousy moved him to come upon them at unawars for
several times one after another, but finding no ground for his Jealousy, he
from thence forward reposed more confidence in them than before, thinking for a
certainty they did not transgress their Duty.

It happened on a time when he had occasion to deliver some Wines, which having
brought into Lighters, before they came to the Boom (or Water-bar) it was
locked, so that they could not get through to the stream, and were fain for that
night to keep aboard the Lighters and watch the Wines. This opportunity fell
out very well for the servants, who invited four or five of their fellows to
bouze a glass with them, who made not many refusals; so to 't they went and
were all equally paid off before the Sun rose, and although the Tuns were
without Cocks or Spiggots, yet to supply that defect they made use of their
Crane or Pipe, wherewith they of that Mystery are wont to exhaust wine out of
Casks, and made use of their hats till about midnight, when they found 2 or 3
foul glasses, which they rinc'd and made use of: these were in a perpetual
motion till the morning began to appear and commanded their dissolution, and
each to do his duty, although they were fitter to go to bed by far. When the
Water-bar was open, they went forth in good order, but whither they knew not;
till at last one of them espied a ship riding off in the stream, ready to set
sail, concluded absolutely that that was the ship ordained to take in the Wine;
and so one of them called out, Oho, the Fly boat, Ehey they aboard the ship
saluted them with the like voice, and asked what they would have; We have
brought here the Wine (quoth one of them) that our Master, Mons. de Lebechea,
was to send aboard you, pray let us be discharged with the first, for we must
be back again with all expedition. The Master of the ship seeing the Gentlemen
between Hawk and Bussard, and so much wine presented him without the freight,
he pitied them and took in the Present, and presently after both wind and
weather favoring he sit sail for the Texel, in Order to proceed on his voyage,
and let the lighter and men find the way home. The men that were aboard the
ship being all English, save the Master himself, thought that it was some
Merchandise he had bought for himself, not well understanding the Netherdutch
Language. But to return back again with the Lighter and guide them home;
Diomedes seeing his men in such a pickle began to fear all was not well. He
asked them on what ship they had delivered; they told him aboard the Engglish
ship that lay (ready to set sail) off in the stream; being neither able to give
any better description of the ship, or what she had in her stern. Hereat
Diomedes was in such a passion that nothing could appease him, though all to no
purpose; he went immediately to the New bridge with his men, and with a pair of
Oars went to enquire of all the ships, that lay before the pales of Amsterdam,
where he found nothing more than what he lest sought; continuing still railing
against his men who were in a condition fit to take a nap, needing neither
Diacodium nor Opium for a provocative. At last Diomedes seeing an English
Ketch, he made toward her and very bluntly asked them about the Wine they took
in that Morning, and whether it belonged to them: The men swore they had not
taken in any wine: Diomedes overswayd by his Fury jumpt out of the boat and
aboard he went, bidding the Master to show what goods he had aboard, or he
would brand him for a Rogue, and show what he had to do with him. The
Englishman not a whit behind him, began to threaten him as fast, and told him
that for his uncivility he would not resolve him in his doubt, but as he had
Stigmatized him under the mark of a Rogue he would break^ the pate of the Rogue
that said it: To be sho^ the words on both ^ides rose to that height, that they
fell together by the Ears, and the Englishman with the help of his men gave
Diomedes a gentle toss overboard to cool his Passion. the Ferryman seeing this,
made all the have he could to take Diomedes up, concluding then for a certainty
that the Wine must be in that Vessel, and in that persuasion went in all have
to the Water-bailiff, to whom he made a large complaint, how the English man
had taken in his wines, and abused him, etc. Whereupon the Gentleman went with
Diomedes, who if he had given way to what Diomedes urged and aver'd, would have
taken the English man into Custody. The Bailiff coming aboard the Vessel asked
them if they had taken in any wine? requiring them to show what they had
aboard: They made answer, That they were not obliged to show what they had
aboard, adding that they were not under any duty or engagement to give them an
account whether they had taken any wine aboard or no; that it concerned not
them if they had, for what they had was paid for, etc, These words made
Diomedes the more suspicious, absolutely thinking himself in the right,
together with what his men did affirm, that it must needs be that, and no other
vessel, hereupon the Officer took the Master into Custody, at the Charge of
Diomedes, who took it upon him, and bringing him ashore committed him close
prisoner. But shortly after the English Master brought in a clear Exhibition,
when, where and of whom he had bought the Wine, and that it was paid for, with
which the Court were fully satisfied, and so granting him Enlargement, he was
at liberty again; condemned also Diomedes in 300 gilders damage, for hindering
the ship on her Voyage, and for reparation of the credit of the Master whom he
had so disgraced, by imprisoning him; which Fine was distributed in 3 parts,
one part for the Aggrieved party, another for the Schout, or City Bailif, and a
third to the use of the Poor: he was further ordered by the Court to pay all
the Charges, which besides the great loss of wine that brought him to this
inconveniency, he was perplexed now more than ever, threatening his men to lay
all to their reckoning, and place it to their account; but finding they did not
much value his threatening, and that he could not help himself much, he was fain
to rest contented, and now and then wash away sorrow with a glass of wine.

Emilia his wife coming to hear of the business, was greatly dissatisfied, and
could no longer enjoy her self so long as this Course of life was held: she
continually twitted him in the teeth with these things, ascribing the cause of
all these misfortunes to his negligence and carelessness, many times repeating
the great likelihood there was of their being brought to poverty and ruin, if
he continued in Junketting and Company keeping; lamenting her direful fate, and
the unhappy hour that she first saw him: assuring him for the future that in
case he would not attend his business with more diligence, she would never own,
or regard him as her husband: and follow what cour^es she liked best; but
Diomedes, who was well acquainted with such Tempests, took not much to heart
what she said, but on the contrary, from that time forward haunted Taverns and
Gaming more than ever, where day and night he passed away his time, playing
some times for 20 or 30 Ducats a throw, insomuch that he used to come home not
only monyless but also without Cloak, Gloves or Cravat, to the unspeakable
grief of his Wife, and detriment of his whole Family.

Besides all this he had a custom to change his servants, whom now and then he
would Chide and turn away for their negligence, taking new in their place,
amongst which he met with one Salvatius, to whom Aemilia took a great liking
and fancy; and could have found in her heart to transgress with him; loving him
better than her husband, and ever studious how to please him; which he
presently began to smell out and perceive: so that in process of time he sought
his Opportunity, and undauntedly made the attempt to bring her to his will,
which she (without the least opposition) gave way to, rendering her self
prostitute* and freely imparted what she had to him, No sooner was Diomedes
abroad but they were at their sport, and never out of Town but they were a
Junketting together, without having respect either to Money, Virtue, or
Reputation.

It chanced once that Diomedes had occasion to go for Rotterdam, to direct some
business he had there then depending in dispute; hereupon Emilia (glad to see
his backside) made a noble banquet to her men and their Companions: not
sparing money or pains to prepare this Collation, which was made up of the best
delicacies, as Pheasants, Partridges, Pullets, Geese, Turkies, Ha^es, Rabbets,
and what not; each dress't after sundry manner: during the Banquet was good
plenty of Sherry and Rhenish wines, or what sort the guests were pleased to
call for: after all several dishes of Comfits and Sweetmeats: so that nothing
was dreamed on, but Eat, drink and play and every opinion condemned save that
of Epic^rus. When the meal was over, and they had recreated themselves with
playing, dancing and kissing, they unanimously resolved to go all to bed, and
take their ease a little etc. Hereupon the Blades began to mi(...) themselves
with the Gentlewomen all in a body, and blowing out the candles, every one
catches by guess whom he could meet with by the hand, went each into a chamber
apart, and what they committed there (if Bacchus had not cheated Venus of her
due) becomes us rather to leave it to your conjecture, than to pronounce it any
plainer.

The two maids of Emilia not well satisfied with the issue of this merry night,
the more because (perhaps) there were no Offal^ for them, resolved to be
revenged some way or other: here-upon they called for Two neighbors, who dealt
i^ Goatshides, and pretended to court these two maids, who after a small
consultation together resolved upon a stratagem, which was this. They took two
large hides of a Goat, in which so fitly as they could, they shrouded
themselves, with the horns upon their heads and the tail between their legs,
and the legs made fast to their arms: that done they took Paper, and made it
into long small pipes, which they filled with Gunpowder, and bound it fast in
^any places, and so tied it round their ^idle: which done, they made pellets of
^et powder, and taking each man a ^ick rope in his hand, they went forth^ith
into a chamber, where strowing a few ^ose grains of Powder on the floor, they
^t the pellets on fire, and hurled them upon the bed, which gave such terrible
^racks, that the poor sinners awaked, and ^n amasement, with all the have they
^ould, jumped out of bed, and with that ^rew off the Pellets; which falling
upon the ^oor gave fire to the loose powder, and ^here it missed, these Devils
in forma tou^hed with long squibs artificially made of ^owder, which so soon as
it touched their ^odies, they began to roar out in such ^ideous and lamentable
manner, that the ^ery house rang again, perceiving likewise ^y the light of the
flame, the direful shapes, ^eally thinking that it had been the de^il, and
that they already felt the torments of Hellfire. Immediately one of ^he
Crackers took fire which flew about the Chamber from place to place, among the
^aked bodies, who knew not whither to ^un for shelter: at last some of them,
fin^ding the door, ran out into the street, not ^ensible of their being naked;
others so surprised that they fell down in a swound, which the perpetrators
seeing they had obtained their end, went out at a back doo^ and throwing off
their infernal garb, r(...) took upon them a human shape.

Emilia with her Paramour, like another Venus with her Mars, feared that angry
Vu(...) can was come indeed to catch her in her transgression. Her thoughts
thus wandering and she almost bereaved of sense, ra(...) with her bon Companions
along the street, the most sensible of 'um all scar(...) knowing whither; every
one naked to the shirt and smock. Here one complained how his thighs smarted
with the stripes he got; there another complains he feels huge blisters begin
to rise upon his back and shoulders; a third kept a clattering with his teeth
by reason of his coming out of an imagined Hell, into the extreme cold air,
being in the winter season; a fourth n(...) less tormented in his conscience
than of body, fearing a perpetual scandal if they should be taken so, not
knowing wha^ excuse to make to palliate the verity of the matter: nor was it
any time to stand there, for the day approached; nor had any (...) them the
courage to return into the house o(...) Emilia; the Gentlewomen were married,
and they durst not go home in that dress, and the Youngmen either lodgers, or
with their parents, so that they could not find it the best advice to go home;
But wha^ must they do? Every minute adds to time. It will not be long before it
will be day, people will presently be going about their respective businesses,
and the Cock begins to proclaim the morn to the world. Emilia was hereat in
such a consternation, that if she had not been hindered by her company, would
have thrown her self headlong into the Haven. At last one of them remembered
that she had a Niece, or Cousin who lived alone with a maid, and that she had
good hopes of coming in there, without much noise or discovery: And indeed this
liked them all, so that they went all together to the said house, which was
little less than half a mile, and so knocked at the door several times, before
any answer was made: at last the maid comes to the door and demanded who was
there; which when she perceived who it was, opened the door; The Gentlewoman,
who was the only one that had acquaintance there, asked her, if her Mistres was
within; She replied, Yes; desiring farther, that she would please to pay her
visit the next day, withal telling her, that her Mistres was not very well
disposed, and had been above 3. or 4. hours in bed: but all in vain for being
excited with the cruel torments of the cold, and impatience to tarry there any
longer, one of them pushed open the door in order to go in, and seconded by
another, was followed by all the rest; the maid knowing then for a certain who
it was, and that no better would be, went grumbling in, and told her Mistress
that her cousin was there, with some other company, and urged mightily to speak
with her. The Gentlewoman immediately slips on her nightgown, and bad the
maid, to light a candle, and bring it to the door, for they were all this while
in the dark: which she did; and was hardly got into the shop but seeing Ten or
twelve women, and 3 or 4 men all in their shirts and smocks (as was said) she
out of very fear lets the candle drop, and away out of door, half naked;
thinking that it had been many, Ghosts so or that there was some Exorcism in
the case.

Mrs Magdalen (for that was the Gentlewomans name) hearing this noise was
astonished at it; yet although she was indeed by nature a little timorous, she
resolves to go down and see what was the matter. And so taking a candle in her
hand she makes toward the stairs which led down to the shop, and seeing there a
whole Chorus of persons in their surplices, was worse affrighted, than the
maid, and immediately fell down in a swound. The naked company seeing what had
happened, made the work as short as they could, went in themselves to light a
candle, and came back again to do what they could for the Patient, whom they
found in a lamentable Fit, and besides her the Abortive fruits of a
miscarriage, wholly dead. Immediately they went about, seeking in every corner
and cupboard for Vinegar, by the use of which they brought her to her self
again, and made a shift to lay her upon the bed which was yet warm, and covered
her very well. The Gentlewoman who still in a weak condition, as one that is
but newly brought abed, begun to get a little more heart; and requested of them,
that they would be so free as to let her know the ground of the matter, and
what was the cause, of this their being in such a posture and condition, which
they to satisfy her curiosity begin to relate, in manner as we have already
told you, without the least cohibition of any point, either out of fear or
shame; which done they crept to bed again together, taking each of them what
sheets, ruggs and blankets they could get, to keep'um warm: though not in
manner as before: For the women looking upon this as a divine piece of Justice
for their Guilt, resolved not to engage any more with their Paramours, but made
a separation, and so kept themselves at a distance, but could not close their
eyes together all the night; here we shall leave them and return to the rest of
their company.

Those that were left behind, as we said before, were by the horrible sight of
such monsters fallen aswound, upon the floor in Diomedes his house, and by this
time (as awakened from a dream) were come to themselves, they rising up began
to parley among themselves, what this might be; concluding they were in the
suburbs of Hell, and so began to strengthen each other in that conceit, the
more easily to be effected in regard of the apparition which was still very
fresh in their thoughts. Each one began to confess their bad life, and condole
the sad punishment that would follow, and the penalty they must undergo, and
yet not sufficient for an expiation for their wickedness. At last one who
seemed the greatest sag^ among them argued on the contrary, and s^ discussed
the thing in suspense. For (said he* it is evident and agreed by all, that Hell
is* place so hot, that none can endure the heat and here you see we tremble for
cold, much less likely is it that we are dead: nor yet i^ it probable that we
are in heaven, for o(...) bodies and souls are united, have a co(...) junct
power and faculty of motion, so th^^ what has happened has been merely a dream
or some Deceptio visus. They with th^^ toupe courage, and rising up began to
h(...) up and down the house for Emilia, and the rest of the Company, but could
not hear or see either young or old, whereupon they put on their clothes and
went out into the streets to seek them, but not being able to find them, they
concluded that it was some special Judgment indeed, that had befallen them;
that the rest were hurried out of the World, and they only left for an example
to the race of mankind. After a second and a third Consultation they returned
to the place from whence they came (to wit) the house of Diomedes, big with
expectation what the ^ssue of this callamity would be.

The day drew on, when Diomedes before the time expected returned home; having
casually met with the Gentleman, with whom he had to do, by the way, and so in
a trice dispatched his affairs; he knocks at the door, and the Company within
overjoyed, thinking it might be some of their Mates, opened the door; but quite
Contrary, it proved Diomedes; who seeing a Stranger, or two come to the door,
was greatly surpised not knowing what to say, or think, they were one whit
behind him, possessed now with a second horror; He began to ask for his wife,
but none had the courage to answer; but ran away like so many mice upon the
sight of a Cat. Diomedes seeing this, caught one of the women about the middle,
and threatened her so long, till she detected the whole passage, Which he
hearing could hardly believe, being very confident in the honesty of his
Consort, who feigned the greatest loyalty, that chastity could think on;
evermore behaving her self as a modest Matron in his presence.

The clothes he took, and locked them safely up, and the remainder of the
company he secured in a room, where he was confident they were fast enough,
with all imaginable patience expecting the coming of his wife who was said to
be ravished by Pluto, which he did not once relent, as Cynane of old did at the
ravishing of Proserpina; Probably fearing with her to be changed into a
fountain, where his second self might purify her of her fi^thy stains.

Emilia and her company rising the next morning, wist not how they should
deport themselves. The Abortive fruit of Mrs: Magdalen they committed secretly
to the Earth, least it might be the occasion of a rumor, not thinking that the
wind was powerful enough to drive the Scandal through the World, or that their
Neighborhood by an inquisitive Curiosity sh^ould (like Midas in days of yore,
with his Asses ears) discover the truth, though never so artificially
palliated. Whilst they were in a great quandary* not able to invent any mean
how they might go to the house of Diomedes, whence they came, and where their
clothes were: at last they resolved to stay there till it was night again, and
so with Blankets, Rugs and Coverlets to go thither; which they did, and not
without great terror, fearing again to meet with some horrible infernal
Demon, as indeed they met with that which was as good, namely, Diomedes with a
pair of eyes as fierce as those of a lion, glowing with very fury in instead of
an amorous complexion. Emilia thus meeting with another surprizal, had not a
word to say: f^^ where she was not a war of what would befall her, she had not
the occasion to premeditate an Apology, but instead of welkoming him home from
his 4 days Journey, she attempted to run out again; but he seeing that, shut
the door, so that no way was left for her to escape thedireful effects of his
fu^y: and partly out of shame she could no longer endure his presence, but made
toward the parlour where the rest were, he willingly let her in and ^ockt the
door, leaving them to their secret Consults. Diomedes in the mean while repairs
to the husbands of the Women he had in his Parlour, and told'um respectively;
he had a bargain of fair Beasts to sell, which were ready for slaughter, and
stall-fed; adding that as he had got a good bargain by them, that he was
willing to oblige a friend in a pennyworth again, presenting them for Twenty
Florens a head, and pick and Choose, only one he had a mind to himself,
assuring them that the remainder, should be better than so many of the best
kine in Amsterdam. The Gentlemen were unanimously resolved to see the beasts,
he presented to sale, willing to disburt^e^ him of such a bargain, went along
with him home to see them. When the Chapman was about to open the door, he gave
each man a truncheon, and told them they were something unruly, and that such an
implement might stand'um in some stead, and shows them a whole set of Canonics
in their Stoles. See Here, Gentlemen (quoth he These are the Beasts I told you
of, and although they have no HORNS, yet are so practical that they can make
invisible ones. The Merchants who little expected such a stage should be
exhibited at the drawing of a scene, were horribly perplexed twixt Stupor and
rage, some not knowing their wives, being not attired in their usual dress, and
wonderfully disfigured, with weeping, want of sleep, and so many terrible
rescontres they had met with. While they were abashd at the suddenness of the
spectacle, Diomedes broke the silence, told the whole passage through, from the
beginning to the end, and brought them out of the doubt they were in; so that
it was not possible for the poor captives to deny any thing, the case and
matter being so probable and palpably evident. One or two of them knowing
(perhaps) the mild disposition of their husbands fell down upon their bare
knees, earnestly and humbly begging that they would vouch* safe in clemency to
pardon this great and heinous misdemeanour, but all to no purpose, for their
fury was not so easily appeased. Each man in a great fume began to make use of
his cudgel, and laid about till they were weary, their Wives still crying out
Forgiveness! Forgiveness! Others not satisfied with that way, went to the
Schout (or Minister of Justice) who alike committed them all to Prison; which
was more acceptable to them, than to ly at the mercy of their merciless
husbands. The Officer thus taking care for the Offending parties, the men went
home with great contrition for what had past, and never enjoyed their usual
contentment till they had got themselves divorced from their wives, which after
some solicitations they procured. Diomedes being sensible that if he parted
with his wife, he must according to law, part with his whole Estate and Goods,
chused rather to accept of the promise of reformation she tendered him, and her
engagement, to bequeath all she had in the World to him, at her death.

Diomedes thus quit of his servants shortly supplied himself with others, whom
he instructed in his Mystery, but principally to make Beverage, which he made
to pass for Wine: and so docible they were, that they quickly had the knack of
it, so that they begun to have as good a trade on it as, he himself; using the
same way of dealing which he did, when he lived with his Father in Law, to sell
it out by pottles and pints. Of which they made no small profit, ever supplying
the defects with aqua coelestis.

Every day Trading began to decay, and Gaming to Flourish; so that in short
time after he found himself incapable to continue the Trade any longer, or to
satisfy all his Creditors, who daily pestered him. Willing enough he was to
pay, but often, times he was out of Cash, and could not endure to be dun'd;
which his wife observing how hard they were put to it, began to grow very
pensive and melancholi^, perceiving that she had seen her best days already,
and that there was no more hopes of ever coming to her pristine state. The
Proverb is true, Poverty puts a man to his s^ifts; in him it is remarkably
verified, for he began to make use of his wits to study how he might redress
his decaying condition, by some means or other. His Cellars were as empty of
Wine, as his Coffers were of Money, and he thought it was high time for him to
seek remedy for his Credit which lay in it is last pangs, at last he found out a
project he thought might cast the balance. On a morning betimes he went to a
Ship-carpenter, with whom he had some small acquaintance, and desired to view 3
new Ships he had built for sale. The Carpenter glad he had got a customer for
his Ships, went with him, and showed him them all over, and after a few words
struck a bargain with him for all three, for 70 thousand Gilders; and
accordingly Writings were drawn, specifying the sum and manner of pay meant,
which was to be upon 3 May days: The Builder who did not question his
sufficiency, let him have the ships without the lest scruple which he
cheerfully took into possession.

Having got these three ships into Possession, he, by the help of some Brokers
sold two of them, and the third sold out to Partners reserving an eighth part
to himself, so that he was speedily supplied with money, and in a capacity to
bring up his Quota, in order to the fitting out that whereof he was in part
Owner, as in the Spring following she undertook a Voyage to Spain.

The next thing he took care for, was how he might employ this money to the
best advantage; To buy wines and supply his decaying stock, he thought was not
the best course; since he had got such a bad fame of compounding it with Water,
a Temperament the buyers thought, was fittest for themselves to do at their own
discretion, when occasion served; insomuch that he was glad to sell off the
most part of his Wines, for a very mean price, to those who made Vinegar of it.
Amongst 12 Hogsh eads of French wine, he had one of passing good Rhenish: these
being kept till the last, it just happened that a Vintner living at Leyden came
to buy some wines, and casually lighting upon him was content to taste of his
Rhenish: he brought him into his Cellar which was very dark, and gave him a
taste of that one Hogs head of Rhenish, pressing him to drink it off, after he
had sipped a little; which done he drew another from the same pretending to have
drawn it from the next Hogshead, and so a third glass; the Vintner (who had
been all the day at this work) had a conceit that their might be some
distinction in the genuin property of the wine, yet concluded them to be all
equally good. Diomedes, seeing the Vintner between Hawk and Buzzard, pressed
him to drink off his glass, which done, cries, Good Sir, let me give you of
another, the Vintner, seeing a certain kind of Generosity in his Chapman, more
than a Willingness to put off his wines, rescountred his courtesy with a
declining of his kind offer, said, No, no, Sir, I am well satisfied, the wine
is of a good body, and likes me well, and your person more, But now as to the
price -- Diomedes here interrupting him, to push home the matter, began to
commend the wine, protesting he did not intend it should be sold to any that
sold it again, when he bought it at Cologn, etc. But willing to do him a
kindness, he was content to let him have it, hoping afterward to have the
Honor and Fortune to receive some of his Money, for this or the like
merchandise, This done, the Vintner makes agreement with him, sends his wine
home by the Market boat, and (according to their agreement) paid him a third of
the money in hand, and the residue he promised to pay at the expiration of 3
months: which made Diomedes smile in his sleeve, to think how he had g^ll'd
the credulous Vintner.

Not long after the Vintner, having dispatched his affairs abroad, returns
home, and meeting by the way, near the Town, some of his customers, persuades,
them to go home with him and taste ^ome of his wines he had bought; they were
content; and the Vintner himself tasting first, met with four Frensh wine more
like Verjuyce than wine, knew not what to think; recollecting his memory,
woulds need persuade himself he dreamed, supposing of a certain it could not be
the Wine he tasted and bought at Amsterdam; but afterward coming to taste the
rest, and finding one only good, began to smell the cheat, ran in all have to
Amsterdam, almost blind with Passion, and finding out the house of Diomedes,
knocks at the door two or three times before the maid could come at it.
Diomedes hearing so many thunderclaps one after another, feared at lest a
shower would follow, he ordered the maid with a wink (as he was wont to do) to
deny his being within, and so she did; but the Vintner having a strong opinion
it was a little too early for him to be abroad, or thinking perhaps he was not
willing to be disturbed of his sleep, said to the maid, Prithee sweetheart,
tell him I must needs speak with him, my name is K^oonbergen (who was a great
familiar of Diomedes) the silly wench, not knowing how to manage the business
well, turned about and said, I shall Sir, coming again, he asked the maid, What
her master said, Really sir, (quoth she) he says He Is not within; which was
enough to suspect his being within, and after a little urging to no purpose at
all, he found that Diomedes had seen a Wolf through the Chinks; and was for
that time notcomeatable, he posts away to some other places in the City, where
he had business, which being dispatched, he comes timely to the Exchange, where
with great patience he expected the coming of his Chapman, About 12. a clock
(when the Gates are shut, and none suffered to enter till after one, without 6.
d. to the poor) he spied Diomedes, thronging in, amongst a great crowd of
Merchants, made forward to meet him, and lest he should loose him catches him
fast by the middle and throngs up with him. Diomedes finding himself so kindly
embraced, was in a deep study, how to rid him of his companion, and come off
with credit: at last finding the man would not let him go, began to cry out, A
thief, A thief, a Pickpocket; the man still holding by the coat, which Diomedes
had cunningly twisted, and so fastened his hand that if he would, he could not
have got clear; At this noise the Rabble, together with all the Boys, began to
flock about the Vintner, who to his misery was thus entangled, some pelting him
with rotten Oranges, others calling him Rogue, Rascal, Pickpocket, and made
such a noise that it was impossible for the Captive to be heard in his own
defense, seemingly taken in ip^o facto. Diomedes seeing himself now well,
turned him over to the Mobile; some kicking him, others pelting him till he
staggered again, continually crying, Thief, Thief: which at last the Schout (or
Constable) having notice on, was put in mind of his Duty, together with his
Assistants rushed in, and freed the poor caitiff from the rude rout, who
thought then he had been at liberty again, but much mistaken, for the Schout
commanded one of his Waiters, to ty him with the chain, which he did, and
marched very orderly with him to prison, with a retinue of boys; nor would any
Apology or vindication he could make for his innocence help or persuade the
Schout, to consider the matter a little, but was committed to the dungeon, where
he was almost out of his senses with Passion, swearing to be revenged on the
knave Diomedes.

Diomedes thus rid of his Customer was heartily glad, believing this good
fortune to proceed from the influence of his kind Stars, and that the Heavens
had blessed him above all others, with their continual Providence and
Protection, so that he might rest secure under their Patronage, under which he
was never likely to miscarry; through which persuasion he resolved to live in
stately wise, to yield the reins to his affections, and never deny himself any
thing that might add to his pleasure, and the free enjoyment of a voluptuous
and libidinous life, and returning home, began to consider what course or
practice he might next take in hand that might be proficient to his determined
end.

Shortly after it happened, that a certain Merchant came to give Diomedes a
Dun, for the payment of some money; which had been long due upon the delivery
of some wines, having often urged the payment, but was still put off, began now
to show great impatience vowing if he would not immediately tender the money he
would send him a summons. Diomedes finding he could no longer deferr the
payment of this money, and weighing the matter with himself, did foresee that
if this one Creditor should be as good as his word, it would be the laying of a
bridge for the rest to pass over; which might be the ready path to bring him to
ruin: Diomedes prayed him to come the next day at night, avouching his sincere
intentions to pay him the whole sum. The Merchant, willing to make trial once
more of the Fidelity of his promises, goes home and returns at the time
appointed. Diomedes, who was evermore greedy of revenge, had in the mean while
provided two Ru^^ians, to whom he had given instructions, to dance attendance
in a dark wast place near his house, till a certain Merchant (whom he described
to them) should pass by, whom they might assail and take the mo^eys he was to
have received. The Ru^^ians very glad of so fair an opportunity promised not
only to, keep counsel, but forthwith to put themselves in good order, and the
project in Practice, and accordingly they did at the hour appointed. The
merchant, not willing to give Diomedes, the lest opportunity to excuse himself
for any negligence on his part, comes at the time prefixed, receives the Money
and taking his leave of Diomedes with a light heart and a heavy purse (the sum
being about 2300. gilders) he departs homeward, but being past about ten houses
from that of Diomedes, he was assaulted by two persons, who violently grasping
him by the collar, and clapping each man a naked Poniard to his breast, bad him
deliver, swearing by Heaven, that if he made the least resistance, or offered
to cry out, they would push home. The Merchant thus surprised not daring so much as
open his mouth to dispute the matter with them, was fain to deliver, and glad
he had redeemed his life, that lay at stake, at so easy a rate. These villains
having thus got their spoil, betrayed their trust in what they had under a
solemn Oath promised to Diomedes, thinking it better to depart in peace, with
the prey they had then in possession, than to present it to Diomedes, and stand
to his Generosity for a reward of such a perrillous enterprise, so that
notwithstanding his expectation of them (who value no more the Violation of an
oath than the perpretation of such a villainy) he was disapointed. The next day
came the merchant to Diomedes, not only with a design to tell him the
misfortune that befell him (his jealousy prompting him to fix a suspicion on
Diomedes as the original cause thereof) but to make what observation he could
in the face of Diomedes, when he related what had passed; but Diomedes who well
provided with a premeditated manner of behavior, and through paced in such
things, acted Innocent better than Innocent himself could have done, and
faigning himself greatly surprised and grieved to hear the thing rehearsed,
sometimes pitying the Patient of so great a loss, other times railing against
the Villains with many Exclamations. Miserable men (quoth he to the Merchant)
that for the enjoyment of so mean a portion of earthy Mammon, will hazard the
ruin of Body and Soul! who for the poor benefits of the pelf of this world will
endanger, themselfves to dwell in everlasting Burnings! Sad infidels! who
without the least respect to Heaven, and the Future state of the Pious, will
rather for a trifle accompany Devils in perpetual Darkness and Torments; But
alas what shall we say! men will take no warning at the punishment they daily
see with their outward and carnal eyes, how should they then take example at
what is threatened, which they because of unbelief and hardness of heart can not
spiritually behold? With these and the like Palliations, and Hypocritical
ejaculations, he so blinded the Merchant, that he could not in the least
imagine him either conscious or factious in the Robbery: But on the contrary
with great satisfaction, as to the Innocence of Diomedes, he returned home to
acquaint himself in the best wi^e he could with Patience.

Emilia sometimes perceiving the falsdealing of her Husband, was greatly
dejected and sorrowful, weighing the bad issue which usually follows, and
attends such dishonest Practices, would often ferr and instance several
examples hereof to him, comparing his course of life, to diverse of late times,
that meritoriously received a condign punishment for their unjust actions: Yet
all this was but charming of the Adder! Diomedes knew his wife was but a Woman,
a creature as timorous as he himself was ^emerous: he resolves still to persist
in filthy lucre, and to accumulate moneys got per fas, aut nefas, by hook or
crook, all equally just to him; ever delighting himself with an Epicurean life,
and endeavoring to fulfill his sensual appetite, as to what might serve to
recreation in that kind. The more Emilia seemed to reprove and admonish him,
the worse he was, and frequented Taverns, Houses of Game and other consumptive
places more than ever, usually twitting her in the teeth of her former
misbehaviour, as a reward for her kind exhortations; insomuch that she seeing
no hopes of ever redressing his life, or her estate, she took it so to heart
that the very same malady, which siez'd and wasted the good Gentleman, her
Father, took hold of her, as a just Judgment for her, that she who had (by her
disobedience to him) brought him to such an end, should be afflicted and
scourged with the like chastisement. The Marriage, which she in the time of her
Fathers great affliction, would force him to the consent of, and that too with
the greatest Fo he had upon earth; now gnawed more upon her conscience, that
ever it grieved the mind of her deceased Parent. During the time of her
consumption Diomedes the better to delight himself with others, severed himself
wholly from her, both at Bed and Boar. Which unkind doings being now and then
reprehended for, as a great note of his inhumanity, his reply would be That it
was a Venereal distemper she was quelled with, as a Judgment upon her for her
loose life; endeavoring to implant in them some apprehensions of Verity, by
the rehearsal of that well known misbehaviour before related, thinking with
such a palpable instance to add sufficiently to their faith, who
notwithstanding all that, did not prove so credulous, very sensible of his bad
and churlish demeanor toward her. This continually increasing the grief of
Emilia so often as she heard it, at last brought her to her fatal Catastroph';
her lingering sickness finally arrived with her at the Banks of death, which
happy arrival was no small cause of Joy to Lebechea, her unworthy husband. She
was no sooner buried, but he caused all her clothes to be carried out and sold,
thereby thinking to obliterate the very memory of her, lest at any time it
should prove an obstruction to his mirth. He as was before mentioned, without
any Coheir according to the virtue of an irrevocable Instrument of Conveyance,
kept all her Estate in his hands, which rendered him the more capable to enter
upon a second match.

Upon a time Diomedes resolving to make a Journey from Amsterdam to the Hague,
to see if he could meet with any lucky bargain, for which end he changed about
5000. gilders into Gold, for levity sake: pursuant to his intended Journey,
goes into the boat; where he was no sooner sitten down, but he espied a
Merchant coming in all have toward the boat, with two Thief-catchers (so
called from their Office) and being conscious of a prank he himself had played
that Merchant, (which hereafter shall be mentioned) suspected that he was the
man they aimed at, was at first at a stand how to avoid the danger that he was
in, but looking about he sees a great many of the Rabble, made use of the
present means he had, cried out, See Gentlemen, there comes a great Varlet, an
Informer, a fellow that has nothing in the world to live on but what he gets
from the Commissioners of the Excise by trepanning of honest men; A rascal that
would swear his soul to the Devil for a dollar, it is a wonder such vagabonds
are not torn in pieces by well meaning persons, or how dare such notorious
villains appear in the presence of so many honest Gentlemen, as are here, about
their respective businesses, to and again? These words which you may rest
assured he did not smother, or whisper, were immediately taken notice of by the
Rabble, (who are as implicitly incensed at the very name o^ an Informer, as
the Jews are at the commemoration of Haman) kept an eye o^ him and seeing him
make toward Diomedes, interposed themselves and would not suffer him, to lay
hands on him; h^ who knew he had Justice on his side (...) began to push
forward, but finding himself opposed, began to lay about, which the Rabble
feeling the smart of, held it f^^^ a lawful occasion to fall upon him, a^^
they unanimously did, and pummel^ him at such a rate that he thought h^ should
there have expired his last, o^ tearing his Plush cloak, another fast ni^^ by
his Point di Veneza band, a third ma^^ sure his Perrywig and Beaver: n^r we^^
they satisfied with this, for after they hi^ anointed him with kennel muck,
they to^^ him by head and heels, and threw him in^^ the water, leaving him
there to shift for hi^ self, and crawl out as he could, every one that were
factious and had a hand in the matter stealing away one by one, till none was
left, but only a few spectators which were left to comfort him with many bitter
revilings and curses, he all this while not sensible of the reason of this
inhumane usage; nor had the Thief-catchers been behind hand with him who
suspecting he had a wrong sow by the tail, thought it not safe to stay there
much longer, ran away and saved their Lamb-pie till another time. Diomedes who
himfelf had been a Spectat or of this scene in part, speeded him on his
Journey, whom we will post after, and leave the Merchant in the Condition he is
in.

Diomedes that night arrived in the Hague, and was lodged in a Gentleman's
house, whom for this time we will name Leopoldus; he being a person on whom
Fortune ever smiled, and one who had married and met with a good match, which
rendered him as to his private contentment, more happy than the greatest part of
men. His principal Affairs were the Concerns of the East India Company, and
Actions; of which Diomedes was sensible, and consequently hatched a notable
Project, to his own advantage, which was thus: Diomedes coming to this
Gentleman, accosted him on this wise Sir, I have been informed that some few
days since you had the misfortune to lose a bag of Gold, as I think it a duty
incumbent upon me, so I assume the boldness and freedom to let you know, it was
my hap to meet with it, which without either expectation of a reward, or
diminishing of the smallest piece of coin, I humbly tender it to You, to whom
it indisputably belongs. Leopoldus observing a true example of an upright
heart, could not but return him a very courteous reply, said, Sir, I thank you
for your kindness, but certainly I have not lost one farthing I know of.
Diomedes who knew the Gentleman's integrity, that he was not so barkbound for
money as to lay claim to any thing which was not his own by a just Title, began
to showhimself highly concerned; wishing the Party to whom it belonged might
have it restored him again, although it were Fifty-Crowns loss to him himself,
declaring how loath he was to detain any man's right from him, or to keep what
was not truly his own. This ended he brought in new discourse, amongst which he
began to relate how that the day before, he had bought some Leases, to about
the value of 30000 gilders, as willing to dispose of his money that way, not
knowing how to employ it otherwise; with one showing some sealed Instruments of
writing which seemed to be Leases, as also an Acquitrance, whereby was
confessed the receipt of 30000 gl. by the supposed Transporter, or Seller,
desiring Leopoldus he would vouchsase to have the goodness to keep them till he
came that way again, for that he judged it not safe for him to send them home
to the Maid, with whom alone he kept house: nor yet to take them with him to
Brussel, whither he was intended; considering the many perrils and danger of
Robberies he was liable to, on such a Journey; adding that he was in some have,
and could not have the leisure to go and visit a very intimate friend he had in
the Hague, on whom he might otherwise impose that trouble; and that an Uncle of
his lay on his death bed at Brussels, who intended to be queath the most part
of his Estate to him, if he arrived there before his Decease. Leopoldus
although credulous enough to believe what he said for a certain truth, yet he
was very unwilling to admit of things of that nature into his custody, declined
the matter with great earnestness, excusing his refusing to comply with such
things, etc. till Diomedes promised to seal them up all together in a Box. The
Gentleman upon that offered to give him a Writing or Obligation to redeli^^r
such a Box. Diomedes thanked him, but would not accept of an Obligation, saying
it was not necessary to bring that tronble upon him reposing great confidence
and fidelity in Monsr: Leopoldus, not fearing to receive any disadvantage in
the least by him, but deeming them as safe, as if they were in his own Chest
under a hundred locks. The morning being come, and Diomedes making himself
ready, sore against his will took his leave of Seigneur Leopoldo, feigning
great have, departs: but instead of going to Brussels, he went directly for
Rotterdam, when there was a very pleasant Mansion house to be sold, situate
near Haarlem, in which Diomedes had a great liking, and determines to purchase
it, without counting the cost, or weighing the value of the money that so
unnecessary a thing as a Country Summer-dwelling might come to stand him in.

Arriving at Rotterdam he forthwith applies himself to the Sale, where hearing
the Conditions read; he understood that it was to be paid at 3 several
payments, each payment at the expiration of six months, one after another,
which pleased him well, and the better to bring his purpose to effect, he took
with him 2 or 3* Gentlemen, into whose acquaintance he had subtly insinuated
himself, under the notion of one of the most eminent Merchants in Amsterdam,
which they also believed by some circumstantial words he negligently seemed to
let fall: these Gentlemen he entreated to assist him herein, being (as he made
them believe (come thither to no other purpose than to purchase that
Countrey-house, praying further the kindness of them that if they refused to
pass it over to him without ready money, in default of knowledge, they would be
so kind, as to be his Security, which they were free to do.

When the Sale began, Diomedes watched his bacon, and bad at a round rate,
being all the while the leading man; at last got the bargain, and a Good Luck
to boot; promising to perform the first payment within 10 days, and giving good
and sufficient Security for the rest, they were content, Which ended, Diomedes
departed for Midleburg, to complete the time he promised to return in from
Brussels.

It happened that he met with a Jokky by the way, at an Jun, who had 4 neat
Coach-horses to sell, which liked Diomedes extremely well, so that he resolved
to buy them, and asking the price, the Jokkey offered them at twelve hundred
gilders; he thinking that too much, bad ^im 800, at which the Jokky turned
about, and would make him no answer, but Diomedes pursued his bargain so, that
he got them for 1060 gild, which he paid down in ready money he set forward
toward the Hague where he bought a Coach, and hired a Coach and Footman, fully
purposing thence forward to live like a Person of Quality.

In this state he came to the house of Leopoldus, with Coach and Horses,
himself and Retinue all in mourning, complements Leopoldus in courteous manner,
declaring the decease of his Uncle, which Mr. Leopoldus hearing, immediately
rescontred him with a complement of Condolency. After their complements were
ended and Diomedes introduced into the Parlour, he begun to relate how
strangely he happened to hearken out the person, who had lost the money
(mentioned page 50,) and that upon his giving the real tokens of the Sum. and
Species; he restored it him again. Yet all this would not bring him home to his
purpose, which he shortly after put in practice. He humbly prays the return of
his Box of Writings which were brought forth, and he after the passing of many
Complements expressing his gratitude, took his leave, and posted for Amsterdam,
where he set up his Horse in a Hackneystable, till he had hired one of his own,
where he ordered his Coachman to attend. Now nothing remained save his house,
which was not furnished with Movables suitable to the Grandour, he for the
future purposed to live in. Hereupon he applies himself to a Painter, famous
for Work, and Judgment, and one whose name I have seen set to many spurious
pieces, that something resemble his way of working, to make them give a greater
price: of this Painter he bought 14 choice pieces, bargaining for the whole for
3200 gilders, which he promised to send him, the Painter not in the least
mistrusting, or doubting of his honesty was content to part with his pieces
upon those terms, without further care.

Having thus cullied the Painter with those Ornamentals, wherewith he garnished
his house. In the next place he directs his course to a Woolen-Draper where he
bought to the value of 800 gilders in Cloth, Bays and other Mourning stuffs,
making the people believe he had an Uncle lately dead; at Brussels, who had
left him a great Estate, which they believing gave him credit, greedy of his
custom for the future.

And although he had hitherto well effected his purpose, yet ^^s in some fear
that at last all these debts would come home to him, and that some care must be
taken to retrive all again t these considerations were often opposed with an
idle conceit he had of his being born a Child of Fortune, and that the Angel of
Providence was always at his elbow, so that he needed not to take care, or
further thought, than only to enjoy the blessings, that the mild Heavens were
still to pour upon him; The worst was to incurr new Debts to pay off the Old,
since he was well in Credit, as yet hearing none breath a word of Jealousy to
the contrary.

With these hopes he rested content, as do most men of desperate Fortunes
as well on the other hand. Shortly after he returns again to the Hague,
designing to act his part with Leopoldus, to whom addressing, himself, accosted
him on this wise: Good Sir, be pleased to forgive the freedom I come to request
of you, wishing on the contrary, that it had been an opportunity of mine,
wherein I might have been serviceable to you: But be assured, Sir, if I may any
way retaliate so great a kindness, I will be at all times prepared to perform
an office so acceptable. My request is that you would please to sell me about
10 or 12000 gild. in Actions, and I will remit you the Money so soon as I
arrive at home. The reason why I h^^^ it not with me is because that coming to
Rotterdam, I met with a bargain of 300 Tun of Herring, which I finding to be
for my turn, bought, and paid a third of the money down the whole amounting to
17000 gl. odd money, and the rest I am obliged to answer in Actions according
to the Tenure of these Writings. With that he began to show Leepoldus false
schedules and acquittances, he had made for the design; and presented him
Obligations under his hand, and if he was not satisfied therewith, the Writings
wherewith he was empowered to receive the Herring, without which none could
receive them, for that the Merchants had thereby acknowledged themselves
obliged to deliver the said Goods, before the receipt could be made void.
Leopoldus was easily induced to believe what he said, especially remembering the
marks of honesty, and the signal tokens of an upright mind in him, from the
honest tender of the moneys he pretended to have sound, as also his being
enriched upon the decease of his uncle at Brussels, which his returning in such
a Grandour seemed to manifest as a certainty: thus blinded, he assented to his
request, granting him 12000 Gilders in Actions; which he confirmed by the
signing of Obligations, no further security being then demanded, as adjudging
him sufficient for the payment of so inconsiderable a sum. Diomedes (it is to
be observed) signed the Obligation with a counterfeit name writing himself
Desire. This affair done, he took Coach, and that night left the Hague, not
without returning Leopoldus a Million of thanks, for so great a favor: making
the more have, lest Leopoldus should happily after a more narrow scrutiny change
his mind, and consequently revoke what he had done: Now Diomedes had so often
as he had been with this Gentleman always a Jet-black Per^ywig, his Eiebrows
and Mustachios artificially colored, to the end he might not at another time
be known.

Shortly after he went for Rotterdam where (by the help of a Broker) he
converted these Actions into money, and therewith paid his first payment for
his Country house, and passing a complement on the two Gentlemen who had been
his Security for the whole, took his leave of them, and away for Amsterdam.

According to our Calculation he had now about 10000 gilders, with which he
resolved to fit out some Ships, and try his fortune that way; but contrary to
his hopes he was obstructed in this design, for he was upon the undertaking of
this purpose surprised with the Thunderbolt of Misfortune; The Merchant which
he had caused to be misused, under the notion of an informer found him out,
which gave him but small apparency of success, as we shall shortly relate;
first, according to our promise (page 47.) we shall give you a reason of his
being prosecuted by this person, and why he came with 2 Waiters to take him
into Custody.

The Merchant, with whom we have to do, was one who dealt chiefly in Wood, and
for his own use had fi^^ed ou^ Ships for Norway, and sometimes bought of
others, according as he thought the Merchandise for his turn. Diomedes: who
knew this very well, had a mind to show him a trick, for his own ends, applies
himself to one Lammer, who dealing likewise in that way, and had a ship newly
come in, laden with such Wares, Lammer perceiving ^he had a mind to buy some
of him, was willing to show him the Lading, Diomedes appointed him a time when
he should come to him in order to see the Goods, having already understood
where the ship lay: but instead of giving attendance for Lammer at the hour
prefixed, he applys himself to Vander Burgh the Merchant before mentioned,
telling him he had a ship lately come in from Norway, laden with Wood, which he
was desirous to sell, telling him withal that he would affoard him a
reasonable good penny worth of it. Mr. Vander Burgh tickled to see it, thinking
it might be an advantageous bargain to him, was in as much have as Diomedes,
who the better to effect the matter, had already been aboard to make the
Master believe he had bought the whole Cargo. Diomedes borrowed a boat of an
acquaintance of his, and rows aboard, warily shuning the S^ern, lest his
Chapman by that means might come to suspect or descry the Villainy. After he had
shown him all the Wood, and the other making good inspection into the Quantity
and Quality of the same, they entered upon the bargain, which at last was
brought to the point. The Chapman not once thinking but that Diomedes had both
power and property to sell it; though shortly after he found himself in an
error to his sorrow: for when Diomedes soon after struck a bargain with Vander
Burgh for some other VVood, and had received it, deducting the price and
payment of the first. Vander Burgh then thought that having now already bought
the Goods and Engrossed the Conveyance (which also was but a fraudulent
practice of Diomedes) that he had already paid for those Goods, which Diomedes
had after that mannet sold him and not delivered, by deducting it in the price
of those he himself had sold Diomedes, which Diomedes had likewise then
received: but finding he was circumvented, and that Diomedes had no Title to
the Goods, applies himself to the Law, which impowerd him to arrest him, though
(as we have alby ready said) he could not effect the matter, for the trick
Diomedes had played him, in making the Rabble believe he was an Informer.

Vander Burgh was now herein greatly dissatisfied, and had made a vow with
himself to be revenged on Diomedes, and in order to that applies himself to the
City Bailif or, Chief Minister of Justice, to whom he related the Ca^e at
large, and understanding that he had some knowledge of the matter, remains
under hopes to see him punished according to his merits, pursuant to which he
summons him before the Judge, where Diomedes in obedience to the Citation makes
his appearance, was convicted of the crime, and found he had cheated no body
worse than himself: for Sentence being given against him, he was ordered to
redeliver the Wood and fined 2000 gl. beside, which was within 3 days to be
paid to the Officer of Justice, or in default of that, to suffer Imprisonment,
and a severer Sentence to be the second time pronounced against him, in which
Diomedes was fain to rest contented for the time being.

About four days after he takes a resolution to go to the Hague, and in order
thereto betakes himself to the Boat, without either delivering of the Wood, or
paying the fine, taking with him all he could on a sudden convert into Gold,
which was about two thousand Crowns, but he was no ner come to the Boat but was
aware of his friend Van der Burgh whom he had Stigmatized for an Informer, as
was said before, with two Waiters of Justice after him: which leaving we will
return to the pursuit of the matter, and manifest the Truth of the old Adage,
or rather Proverb: Fraus fraud fraudulentos afficit.

Being now returned home, after he had gulled Mr. Leopoldus in the Hague, added
to his Grandour, by Coach, Horses; Servants and Movables, with intent for the
future to live in stately wise; Van der Burgh comes to have notice of his
return, which he had long wished for, went to him and demanded either his
Wares, or full payment: Diomedes finding himself obstructed in the carrying on
of his Purpose, thought it his best way to redeliver the Wood, and intending to
deal no more in Wines, he sold off what remained of his stock, which brought up
a sum of 3000. gilders, two thousand whereof the Minister of Justice laid claim
to, as accrewing him according to the sentence which was issued against him,
and was compelled to pay the Charges and Fees; insomuch that his whole Estate
was not now above 7000 gilders, which he conceiving a few pompous and Jovial
days would consume, began anew to study how he might, furnish his Coffers again.

His Custom was to frequent Coffee-houses, and places of like resort, where
the more sober sort of People do usually meet. Here he found now and then an
opportunity to meet with a Cully, whose humor he could suit, and inveigle with
a seeming Probity. Understanding that one Jerome ^ Merchant, had a great
quantity of Grain, which he was willing to sell, he applies himself to him, and
insinuating himself into his acquaintance, grew so familiar with him that he
invited him to Supper, preparing all things before hand, in order to the better
effecting of the Stratagem.

When Jerome according to his promise was come and set at Table, Diomedes
caused one of his trusty Brethren to withdraw himself into another room, and
tell a heap of money, over and over, all the while the Merchant was there;
which was accordingly done. The Merchant who all this while heard a great
rattling of money, and that incessantly a telling, assumed the freedom to ask
Diomedes if it was not in the next house. Diomedes replies, No, Sir, it is my
Steward, who has received about Eighty Thousand Gilders this morning, for some
Commodities I sold, with other money I have ordered him to tell out, intending
rather than let it ly, to employ it i^ some Merchandise or other: Jerome, who
thinking he had now a fair opportunity offered him to make his market, asked
him if he would buy a bargain of Grain telling him he had about 760 Tun of Rye,
and some Wheat to dispose of, I am wel^ satisfied, replied Diomedes, but I must
first inquire of my Cashkeeper what Cash there will be over, having obliged my
self already to pay 30000 gilders in ready money for a bargain I met with this
after noon, but (added he) if you are content I Will pay you a Fourth ready
money, and the rest at 3 months. Ierom was well satisfied, not questioning the
sufficiency of his new Customer: and so proceeding to the Bargain they ag^eed;
the whole purchase amounting to 69160 gilders, the sale being drawn Diomedes
signs it, having before hand provided Ink for the purpose, which was made of
Saltpeter and other corrosive Ingredients, with this he subscribed his name,
and delivered it to Jerome upon the receipt of the Grain.

So soon as he had got the Grain into his possession he went and sold a certain
quantity, amounting to the sum of 13000 gilders, and not long after met with a
Chapman which bought of him about the value of 9060 Gild. and within a week
after, another that took about 18080 Gild. off his hand, so that his estate was
suddenly advanced from 7000 to 44000 Gild.

Now that he might put off the remainder of his Grain, which he thought would
be so damnified with keeping that it might return to his loss, he procured a
person or two of his own rank to cast a report upon the Exchange, as if the
Most Christian King were a levying of a great Army, and that he intended to
Attacque the Low Countries; and to add a better color and apparency of Truth
to the rumor; he hired an obscure fellow, whom he ordered to give himself out
for one but newly come from the French Court: he had also the Day before
d^^persed a letter or two, dated the latest post day from Saint Germains; which
proved so effectual that the face of affairs was quite transformed, the
Merchants and Inhabitants generally in great fear and consternation, having
always had apprehensions of a War. This sudden news so raised the Price of Corn
that Diomedes wished he had reserved what he had already sold.

Amongst a Considerable number of Trading men that were mis^ed upon this
report, was one, whose too kind nature has sealed, my mouth, and put a stop to
my pen, for sundry obligations, to record his name: yet the Letter, which
Lebechea had caused to be shown him, we shall here insert, as it is thus
paraphas'd from the French:

Sir,
Being incited by the perfect Friendship and the sundry Favor; you have ever
manifested toward me, and that without the least deserts on my behalf, I held
it a duty incumbent on me to give you advice, of the sudden design of his most
Christian Majesty of France, which is with the return of the Spring to make a
sudden Irruption upon the United Provinces; His Resolution being neither to
spare the Land nor its Products, or what else may any way conduce to the
enabling of the Inhabitants in opposition of his Arms: To which end he has
levied a great Army, and as the Infancy of Affairs afford advice, will be drawn
into several Battalions, for the better and more speedy expedition of the
Enterprise. Besides this it a certain truth that a huge Fleet will be put in
equippage, to cruise upon the Hollanders in the North and Mediterranean Seas:
and necessarily I must consess, that so long as I have been honored with the
Dignity of a Counselor of his Majesty, have never seen any thing so desired or
pressed forward, as this very Intent to sub due the Spanish and United
Provinces: a thing, Sir, I only impart to you for your own good, and the good
of those that have any Alliance or Interest with you, hazarding thereupon the
heavy consequences which might befall me for violating the trust reposed in me
from so great a Monarch. Not else but that I am,

Worthy Sir, Your Most obedient and most faithful Servt. Jean le Grand.
Saint Germain etc.

This Gentleman, who, as I told you, was injured by the Contents of this
letter, thinking to take care betime, for the furnishing of his Garner with
corn, met accidentally with Diomedes upon the Exchange, and after a few
circumstantial reasonings tending to the cheapening of the Commodity, he struck
a bargain with him for all the remainder of his Grain, which was agreed upon
for the sum of 38000 Ca^oli Gilders, ready money: for Diomedes was ever
fearful lest his Creditors should fall suddenly upon him, and render him
incapable of receiving any money that was due to him from others. The next day
he delivered the Corn and received the money, with which he made mirth and good
cheer: but it was not long before Jerome his Chapman came to spoil his sport;
for looking by chance upon the Writing he found nothing but paper, and instead
of letters, holes, as if it had been eaten with moths; was in a great amaze,
and weigh^^g the matter well with himself could not but conclude it as a cheat,
whereat enraged he ran to Diomedes his house, and letting his Passion
predominate over his Reason, withoutany further inquiry, charges the matter
home upon him, and roundly began to demand his money, which Diomedes hearing
swore he had paid him all he ought him: Ierom then twice as passion^: as before
could hardly for bear beating him, giving him whole volleys of Rogues and
Cheats, Diomedes as well provided as he paid him in the same Mint, returning
him as many Broadsides of Knaves and Rascals^ as the other did him of Rogues
and Cheats, telling him he was a fraudulent fellow for demanding his money
twice. To be brief this Logic grew so bitter, that Diomedes bad him go out of
his house, if he loved himself or else to take what would follow, which Ierom
observing and finding no good to be done this way, he goes away, threatening to
prosecute him. This startled Diomedes not a little, who after he had screwed his
brain a while, thought he must drive out one ^ail with another: He took
Courage, and to reap the benefit of a harvest of his own making, finding
Obligations to be considerably fallen, repairs to a Broker, of whom he informed
himself of a Person that had some to dispose of, and there bought for the value
of 20000 gilders, which he paid in ready money, and told the Gentleman he had a
mind to 60 or 70 Thousand Gilders more, whereupon the Gentleman (whose name was
Mordecai, a Jew) promised him to come to him, with some others, as accordingly
one evening appointed by Diomedes he did, to transform Money into paper.

In the interim Diomedes had prepared all things in a readiness, and the same
evening invited 7 or 8 Persons to Supper, who were there sooner than the Jew:
last of all comes the Jew. Diomedes made his excuse to his Guests, saying he
had a Gentleman, whom he did not expect that night, that had waited some time
in the Parlour for him, praying them not to look upon his being so called
aside, as any rudeness; the business being of that moment, that for that time
he could not wave it, he having bought some Thousands in Obligations of him,
and that he must come to a Reckoning, and clear Accounts with him. The
Gentlemen, his Guests, expressed their great Satisfaction, that he rather
chused to dispatch an affair of that weight and urgency, than to oblige them in
what might tend to his inconveniency, etc. Diomedes went forth to receive the
Honor of his coming, praying him to be covered, and sit down; which, after a
few Contre-Compliments returned, he did. After they had made a discourse of
some praevious matters, the Jew makes Ingress to the main concern, about which
he came, showing Diomedes the Value of 18 Thousand Gilders in Leases; but
before Diomedes would buy, prayed the Jew he would be so kind as to help him to
make inspection of what money he had void, and whether the Sum would amount to
that or no; which the Jew readily promised to do, understanding Diomedes to
protest he would buy no more than his Cash would answer. Having now spent an
hour in telling, they found that there was no more than 62200 gl. which
consisted of different Coins, and most Gold; which when they had told, Diomedes
put it up into bags, praying the Jew that he would let him have a Lease of
22000 Gild. or rather one of less, that it might not exceed his present
Capacity. The Jew replied, that it was no matter, he would trust him for the
6000 gl. and could well acquiesce in him for such a Sum. Diomedes rather
willing to play at great games than small^; or to get all, than so poor a
purchase, insisted as before; so that the Jew told him he had one at home of
20000 gl. and offering that Diomedes agreed with him for 99 gilders per Cent.
upon which the Jew made as if he would go forth, but Diomedes prayed him that
he would be so kind as to help him to carry the baggs into another Room, where
he used to keep his Cash, not willing to let it ly open to the view of such as
might pass through the Parlour, with one pointing toward his Guests, which sat
in another Chamber so as he could see them, the door standing open, and they
that were within could also see Diomedes and the Jew, and likewise hear any
thing they said, as they did, unless it were something Diomedes spoke not so
loud, the better to palliate the Cheat. The Jew obeyed his desire took the
money in his Arms, and carried it into another Room, Diomedes discoursing him
all the while with material words, so that his Guests could not but take notice
of all that was said and done. This done Diomedes locked the door of the Room,
where the money was brought; the Jew departs, Diomedes thanks him for his
trouble etc. The Jew in a moment returns, delivers Diomedes the Leases with a
promise that he would satisfy him the next day as to the Validity of the same,
that they were free of any Charge and not Fidei Commissa, with which he seemed
content; The writings drawn by a Scrivener whom he had under the number of his
Guests, 2 more subscribed as Witnesses; Mordechai signs to the Writing wherein
was confessed that he had sold and transported 60000 gilders in Leases at 99
gl. per Cent. and paid in full for the same, expecting with one to have his
money paid him, though much mistaken, for Diomedes having the Writings
effectual enough to confirm the Payment and Receipt, had locked up the money.
The Jew, after he had been a while held up with talk, prayed Diomedes to pay
the Money. What do you mean, Sir, (replied Diomedes) have I not paid you to your
mind? I suppose these Gentlemen are sensible that I have paid you, and that you
have taken the Money home with you. The Jew, who at this answer was not a little
dismayed, began first in a moderate way to pray him not to fest, because his
time was short, that he had appointed another meeting that night etc. Diomedes
feigning himself greatly concerned at the Iew's importunity prayed him to
forbear playing the fool, saying he was ashamed to be so rude to his Guests,
that he had already played too much upon their patience; These and the like
reasons move the Jew to suspect a piece of Knavery, whereupon he greatly
incensed, demanded his Writings if he would not pay the value, as 'twas agreed
upon: Diomedes, who was not only forearm'd, but also well accustomed to this
Rhetoric, gave him a vocal Banquet, which the Jew could neither relish nor
digest, being seconded by his Guests, who, by all the circumstances they knew,
or could gather, could not but harbor a bad opinion of the Jew, fell all upon
him together. Diomedes finding the Stratagem have such success, made use of his
opportunity; told the Jew if he would not desist in that impudent way of
reproaching him he would kick him out of doors; the Jew on the contrary
insisting upon his honest repute among men, and his abhorrence and detestation
of such unjust things, as they were pleased to censure him guilty of, prayed
him again to deliver him his Writings, which Diomedes still refused. To be
brief; the one was stout and the other stiff, all Tongue and no Ear. Diomedes
at last pushed him out by the shoulder', and (in a seeming fury) threw to the
door. Which done he applies himself to his Guests; and with a Thousand Lies and
Forgeries so argues the matter, that bearing harmony, and consonant to what
they supposed to hear and see, did so far add to their faith, that they were
ready to attest the reality of the Payment upon Oath, which was forthwith by a
Public Notary (or Scrivener) then present drawn up. After this was over, the
Guests sat down to Supper, and were treated in Lordly fashion, with a sumptuous
Banquet, a Corrolary of Junkets and good Liquor, that done, every one went to
his respective home with great contentment for so great an entertainment: and
Diomedes who had now doubled his Estate could not but smile in his sleeve to
see how well the Machine was managed.

Mordecai who had now met with such a Haman was resolved not to let the matter
rest so, but with all diligence endeavor to right himself, and purposes to
bring the matter to be decided by Authority, incited by his Integrity and
Uprightness, which as another Esther might be able to ensnare this unjust Haman
in his own Net: but as Humane Purposes are fatally disposed, and frequently
fail of a lucky Issue; so by an inopinate Chance he was for that time hindered
in the pursuit of his Intentions, and Diomedes his Troubles procrastinated,
which he was liable to for so notable a cheat, the Issue therefore of this we
will ommit till hereafter, when we purpose to draw a scheme of his Perplexities
all at once.

There is not any Vice so pregnant of destructive Consequences as Covetousness:
That alone is both the root of all evil, and the Cause of Death, the just
punishment of the same: Nay it is conspicuously evident to those who have but
the lest taste of reason, that there are but two paths to choose, which when that
leading to a future Happiness cannot with ease be passed, in contraria current,
they cannot avoid the other, which assuredly without any further promises
better things than the former; and certainly this has been so prevalent with
Diomedes, our present Subject, that Friends and Aliens have had an equal
respect from him, when prompted through a zeal to Proserpina, of, as it is
styled in sacred Writ, Mammon, a Deity to whom the World in this age seems to
be totally devoted.

Diomedes had an uncle by marriage whose name was Epacius, this lived in a
Countrey-house near Hillegom, where he spent his days with all imaginable Quiet
and Tranquillity, not troubled with those encumbrances which others who live in
Towns, and under the Society of Men are subject to; contenting himself with the
propper and genuin products of his own lands. Diomedes envied this good old
Gentleman, desirous to see him take a Journey to Limbo, he being his next heir
apparent: yet finding that this Uncle of his was still fresh, and in all
likelihood might survive him, he thought there was no way to become master of
his Estate, but to circumvent him by fraud, and at last found out a subtle
Invention which he put in practice.

He applies himself to his said Uncle under color of a visit, where he was
cares^ed and received, with all signal tokens of respect and marks of
Friendship, that could possibly be shown a near Relation: Nay in such sort that
Diomedes (had not Satan blown up those infernal sparks which were bred in the
bone) should not have found in his heart to play him the the prank intended;
but where Covetousness acts for Empress, Virtue must a side; so far was it
predominant in him that forgetting all humanity he continues in his resolution,
and after some discourse counterchanged, which smelled of nothing else but
Courtesy and Piety on his side, he fell to bargaining with him, and bought 20
Oxen, paying down 300 gilders, the value whereof he had in Gold about him,
signing an Obligation for the rest, which he promised to pay within a month or
two, and having taken leave of his Uncle, he hired one to drive the Oxen to
Amsterdam.

After 2 or 3 months was expired, the old Gentleman not hearing from Diomedes,
turns him to his Writings, where he found the Nest, but the birds flown; for
Diomedes had temperd the Ink with such gnawing Ingredients as eat through the
paper, as was shown in Page 64, where he served the Corn-merchant after the
same manner. This startled the Old man so, that he suddenly took pen in hand
and writ the following lines.

Cousin,
Since Fate will have it so that I must style you thus, it makes my blood to
boil, and renders me sensible, of an inward grief to think how I am lockd in
bonds of Affinity with one who is a Perpetrator of such hellish Practices, and
damnable Inventions, as I, to my smarting, find you factious in,
notwithstanding your many Hypocritical expressions when I saw you last; Do you
think that God directs the World blindfold? or that your wicked Actions will go
unrewarded? Leave of those unjust Courses (I advise you) and if you desire
either Grace or Prosperity; and make expiation for your Past Trespasses by a
sincere and unfeigned Contrition, rendering to every man his own, and to me that
which you stand indebted; or otherwise rest confident that I will not only have
it by due Course of Law, but also bereave you of your Honor and Reputation.
This consider, and do as you tender your Welfare, I am

Epacius


Diomedes so soon as he had received this Letter, seemed to be greatly
concerned at the matter, and the better to maintain his esteem with supporting
apparencies, against any future suspicion, he Cries Whore first, and summoned
his Uncle to appear in Court, having in the mean time suborned a false Wittness
or two, to give Evidence to a forged paper he had written, wherein Epacius was
found to confess himself indebted to Justin the Father of Diomedes, in the sum
of Six Thousand gilders, payable in case of the decease of Justin to his son
Diomedes whereto the usual hand and mark of Epacius was artificially
counterfeited with a different Ink from the Body of the Obligation, both
tempered with soot, to seem a writing of such standing as the date would
require. Besides this he had also forged a certain Discharge, the Tenor whereof
was thus.

I the under witten do acknowledge and confess to have received from the hands
of Epacius my Uncle, Twenty Oxen, valued according to bargain made between my
said Uncle and my self, the sum of 1530 gl. which I receive in payment and
abatement of the sum of 6000 gilders, due to me from the said Epacius by virtue
of a Writing Obligatory, for Moneys lent and contracted by Merchandise. Which
said sum of 1530 gild. shall be accomptable as part of payment and abatement of
the said sum of 6000 gl. without Fraud or Coven. Signed at Hillegom etc.

Diomedes de Lebechea.

This Acquittance was cunningly sealed up and sent in a letter to a
Countreyman, that lived near Hillegom, whom he had also hired to be assistant
in the matter, he according to the order of Diomedes delivered it to Epacius,
in the presence of the Court. Diomedes so soon as he saw him begin to open it,
prayed the Court to examine his Papers, which they did, and, found the
Discharge, that made so much for Diomedes, that sentence was passed in his
favor, and the Defendant constrained not only to renounce his pretense, but
also condemned to pay the supposed Remainder of the sum that was mentioned in
the Obligation, which (the price of the Oxen deducted) was 4470 gl.

Some few days after it happened that Diomedes went to visit an acquaintance of
his to divert himfelf for a few spare hours. They who were well acquainted with
his Course of life, had a mind to see, if they could circumvent him as he had
done others; in order to which, one Manvelius the most eminent among them
invited him to a sumptuous Feast, inviting several others of his Acquaintance
where, all Dainties were provided that were thought requisite to Entertain the
Guests in splendid manner. When now at the day appointed they were met, there
appeared among the rest one Mons. le Cocque kinsman to Mr. Manvel, newly come
out of France, where his retirement was. One of them after he had passed the
usual Complement to the Reception and Welcoming of a Stranger, as ked him, what
news he brought out of France? I have little news (replies he) which imports any
thing of Joy, otherwise I should impart it to the Company: For that which tends
(though never so little) to the augmenting of mirth would be both more
acceptable and consentaneous to this present Occasion, which were not my
Opinion such, I should not ommit to relate a passage lately happened. The
Company hearing him say so, were yet more eager to know what it might be, and
so pressed him that he to answer their desire began to relate (with as much
elegancy as his Ability in the Language would dispense with) this following
Preamble which sufsufficiently expressed the drift of the Story.

It Is said (quoth he) that a Body when pampered and fed with the most delicious
diet (whilst it lives) Stinks most when it is dead: Even so a man when fed with
the food of choicest Benefits, afterward dies in the common sin of
Ingratitude, the worms of unfaithfulness render him more nauseous than
otherwise, and the more Good has been heaped upon him the worse he stinks. So
much that oftentimes the Benefactor proves his greatest for, and perhaps seeks
to bury him in the Grave of Misery: The following Narrative will then affoard a
remarkable Example of the shameful and infidious deportment and ungrateful
behavior of one who had enjoyed many Favors, The Dissatisfaction of the Party
abused, and the Revenge of of the Fact executed in most horrible manner.

Hillary (a younger brother to Theobald, both sons to one Mons. Huber^ a French
Gentleman of Soissons) after the decease of his Mother had no mind to spend his
days with his eldest brother; for knowing him to be naturally morose and
arrogant could not expect but to be curbed and tyrannized over, resolved with
himself wholly to retire, and betake himself to a married State and accordingly
watches his opportunity to accomplish his prudent and laudable Design.

Not long after it was his Fate to be smitten with a corruscant eye-dazling
Dame, by name Angelica, whom he could never behold without being inwardly
wounded and one in whom Nature might glory as a complete piece of Excellency,
These external Ornaments besides the surpassing rare indowments of spirit and
internal Faculties of the mind, had almost bereaved young Hillary of Reason,
and transformed him into a mute, not able to remedy himself by absence, nor
any manner of Conceit, which he would willingly have imposed upon his Thoughts,
to drive away the Remembrance of what he thought would be his destruction, if
he did not hit the mark which he must aim at: and so far was he charmed that
were he to endure 20 years slavery, with no other Commons than Bread and Water,
for the Enjoyment of a Creature so rare, he would have deemed himself more
happy than the common sort of men. But it was not long before this Idea
vanished, for shortly after he was informed that the Lady had already betrothed
her self by an irrevocable Engagement, and that to his eldest Brother. Upon
these unwelcome tidings he grew very pensive, and so far possessed with
Mela^choly. That the hopes of a Nuptial Bed were transformd into the dolorus
suppositions of a Co^^in: His time he passed away insadness, complaining of his
fatal hap, and the fro^ns of Fortune, which certainly affoarded but slendor
comfort or remedy to his desperate and calamitous estate, much less, means to
an expetible issue of his desire.

Theobald on the other hand, to whom the Heavens seemed to grant good success,
spent his minutes in a perpetual joy, rarely absent from the incomparable
Angelica, who caressed him with all the amorous Delights, that a Lover could
either possibly wish or imagine. His love, as it was surpassing vigorous,
seemed to Angelica in disputably immortal; and that no^e could be so entirely
perfect in his Affections as this Gentleman; who above all his Corrivals and
Competitors, had gained the Ascendant in her heart. Theobald now sensible of
his Happiness, ommitted not to use the freedom she assented to, nor neglected
any liberty that might add to his delight. Oftentimes he extolled her to the
stars, and as often indevoured to exalt himself to the apex of illicit
Pleasure, but she, endowed with the laudable virtue of Modesty, and chaste
Principles, would never yield to what might in the lest tend to the violation
of her honor. Arrived thus to the very extreme end of his wishes, he
understood that his brother Hilary, had made some manifestation of kindness to
her, concluded with himself that it was purley out of envy, or at best an act
of mockery, resented the matter so ill, that he determines a revenge, and to
vent the effects of his fury upon him, as shortly after he did. For,

Upon a day as Hilary went to divert himself with hunting, Theobald,
accompanied with 3 or 4 fellows, speeded himself toward the Chase, with an
intent to dispatch him. When he supposed the feat to be effectually done, he
returns home, but coming to Angelica, she informs him what was reported among
the Neighborhood, as that he had murdered his brother; and entreated him, as
he tendered his safety to abscond, which he did.

Hillary, notwithstanding he was mortally wounded, yet remained in a
possibility of recovery, and it just happening that 2 Peasants came riding that
way, espiedhim wallowing in blood, and perceiving him still alive took, him up
into a cart and brought him to a Cottage, where by the help of an expert
Chiturgeon, he was cured of his wounds, and restored to his former health, when
he recovered his senses, and began to remember how barbarously his brother had
attempted to murder him by so inhumane a way, he thought it not safe for him
to stay there, till his brother might come to hear of his recovery; and so
perhaps assail him a second time at unawares, and so give opportunity to the
loss of both their lives; he took his journey toward Vienna, where he resided
some time at the Imperial court, none of his acquaintanc knowing that he was
alive, save a bosomfriend he had, who disbursed the money for his cure, making
the Surgeons and the Peasants in that village believe he was an Italian, to
prevent further inquiry into the matter.

Angelica was all this time in great consternation about this facinorous act,
which her lover had perpetrated in such a degenerate and ignoble manner, and
yet could not sound the Occasion or ground of the matter. But what grieved her
more, was his perpetual Absence, which could not be remedied without forfeiture
of his head. At last she resolves to apply her self to some Eminent Minister
of State to beg a Pardon for him, as suddenly she bethought her of a fair
Opportunity, having a near Relation on the Mothers side, who was a special
Favorite of the King, and a person of rare Conduct and great Gravity.

So soon as she hadintimated the Case he went to give attendance at the door of
the Audience Chamber, and was after a few minutes waiting admitted into
presence, preferred an Exhibition of the Case of Theobald, with a Supplication
for Pardon, to which his Majesty was pleased to give his Royal assent Returning
thus to Madam Angelica, with a pardon in his hand, she dispatched letters to
Theobald, who understanding himself a free Remmissionary, came boldly home, and
applied himself to his Lady, to return her thanks for the grand respect and
Affections she had manifested toward him: renewing his suit, and confirming
his Fidelity and Constancy to her; which between them he ratified by deep
protestations of his sincere meaning, binding himself with a grievous Curse
never to recede from what he had already by Oath obliged his Conscience to. She
on the other hand was not remiss to retaliate his Inclinations; and not only
after the same manner vowed a stability of Promise and Purpose, but allowed and
accepted of his Oaths and Protestations as satisfaction enough to expunge all
jealousy ou^ of her mind, declaring moreover that she could very well
acquiesce in what he had already promised without any thing more to be said by
way of Addition. Thus resting secure of each others Fidelity, they began to
grow a little more familiar, than you will say (perhaps) was seemly: so for that I
would not willingly use the freedom to commemorate it at this time, lest I
should be taxed with immodesty for my pains.

When they had thus fruitfully spent their time for some few days together,
and Theobald already cloyed in Pleasure, laughs to think how he had attained
the scope of his Desires; he takes a resolution never to come into her Company
again, and forgetting her great favors, and the signal marks of Love she had
ever shown him, he began to contemn her. Her Love he rewards with hatred, her
service with Contempt, her Fidelity with Falsehood, her Zeal to preserve his
life, with cruel Revilings and Tauntings for what he was himself equally guilty
of.

Now when Angelica had with great Patience expected the coming of her Gallant,
but neither seeing, not hearing of him, she was wholly altered, fearing that
she had deceived her self in being too credulous. She sends her Page forthwith
to his house, who desiring to speak with him, Theobald sent him word that he
had nothing to do with him, nor any he was any ways concerned with, and that he
would not have any Match-makers or Wench-brokers to tread his threshold. The
Page returns with this answer, which so surpised the Lady that she was almost
distraught, blaming her self for being too apt to believe the many
Protestations of her Lover, as well as him for his Treachery: yet ever would
comfort her self with these thoughts, That he might probably do it to try her,
although found her self shortly after in a grievous error, when news was
brought her that Hilary was still alive, and returned home from the Court
Imperial, that Theobald upon his arrival was set forward upon a journey for
Italy, having taken all his Patrimony with him. These unwelcome news brought
her into despair of ever redressing her mischance, and withal into a distemper
which kept her company so long as she lived.

Theobald arrives first at Milain, where he purposed to spend a little time; but
as Fate would have it, grows weary of the place, alters his Resolution and sets
forward for Genua. Comeing then to Genua found there an opportunity to
transport himself for Venice, and in order to his Voyage imbarques himself
aboard a small Pinnace bound for the Hadriatic Sea. So soon as they had reached
the height of Gallipoli, were assailed by two Corsairs belonging to Argiers,
which without much contest took them, carried up the Pinnace to Argiers, and
brought Theobald, with the rest of the Captive Slaves to the market, where they
were exposed to sale. Our Gentleman, being well limbed and of a robust body was
not long there before he was sold to a Moor, who forthwith clapped a massy
ponderous chain to his legs, and let him ly in a kennel, like a dog at his
chamber door. I doubt not but by that time he was sensible of his misery, not
only to be brought to the Condition of a Slave, from a State so Noble and
happy, but at the same time to be deprived of all he could call his own in the
World, and so rendered incapable of his own Redemption and to acquire a
livelihood for the future.

While he thus had hardly time enough, to bewail the sad and deplorable effects
of his temerous and insubid Actions, consulted now and then with his hard and
uneasy pillow, how he might make his escape; but all to little or no purpose;
for he had no less than three locks to break, besides his chain. He then
resolved to write to the Lady: Angelica at Soissons, to try, if possibly he
might prevail with her to procure his Redemption, and to pardon his
unworthiness, with promise of submission to her wills: Angelica receives a
letter of this tenor, and was well satisfied with the matter, hoping now by
this Occasion to cover her scandalous miscarriage and to save the Oath which on
her side so well as his was of such gravity, as a tender Conscience could not
dispense with the breach of; But considering the Ransom was too high for her
alone, she declares the matter to Hilary, entreating him to contribute the
half, and promised to deposit the other half her-self, moving him to show a
fraternal love, and notwithstanding he owed him his life, yet that he would not
deal with him according to his merits, but rather let it be known to the World
how willing he was to remitt, offenses by passing by one of that moment, and
recompencing it with good. By these and the like arguments she instanced,
Hillary was drawn to compassion with his brother, and liberally paid down half
the Ransom. Angelica having brought it to this pass, perpetually furthered the
matter till she got her Vassal home. When he was arrived they begun afresh to
evidence their inclinations, he promising to marry her before her nine months
were about. The time was appointed, all things in preparation to this jovial
day are taken care for. At the time appointed the friends on both sides repair
to the wedding, and Angelica, tricked up in gorgeous attire, waits for the
joyful coming of her Bridegroom; but he instead of coming to receive his
Bride, and perform the Nuptial ceremonies according to his Oath and Duty; broke
up a Money-chest of his brothers and ran away with a notorious strumpet,
leaving Angelica to comfort her self with what he had left her in pawn.

Not long after the Lady fell in labor, and was delivered of a brave son
having the very features of his Father. The child she sent away clandestinely
into the Country, yet not with such privacy, but that the matter was noised
presently abroad, as usually happens in such cases, she kept her bed for
several weeks together, summoning up her wits along, how she might order her
affairs with her treacherous lover, who had thus unkindly dealt with her. By
that time she had recovered her strength, Theobald comes home, and applies
himself to his brother, who denied him reception, and threatened if he did not
immediately depart to turn him over into the hands of Justice; he meeting with
this disappointment, was urged, to return to Angelica, thinking to sooth her up
and perform the marriage already ratified; but she considering his ingratitude
and unfaithful deportment, on the one hand, and her miscarriage with him which
rendered her liable to perpetual infamy on the other, rejects him with a
positive refusal; how-ever being compassionate over him through reason of his
poverty gave him the value of 2000 gilders, or upwards, thinking so to be rid
of him, Theobald takes the gift without the least manifestation of his
gratitude, which when he had consumed on his lusts, returns again to her, still
pressing and insisting upon her promise, and at last grew so importunate that
he threatened to expose her to public shame, unless she would, agreeable to her
promise, marry with him: but she perceiving the villainy of his purposes, to
retaliate her late benefits in such manner, harbored such a hatred against
him, that those very atoms and sparks of love which till now, lay buried in the
ashes were totally extinguished, and took the freedom to turn him off; and told
him she hoped that her just Plea would be vindicated and her cause revenged,
either, by the Great Judge in Heaven, or the Temporal Justice on Earth.

Theobald, whose Impiety was such that he neither valued this disdainful result
of his new suit, nor dreaded the menacing Oaths she swore, departed, and
related not only to her near Relations, but to whom soever he met with, that
Angelica was a notorious Strumpet, that she had proffered her body both to him
and his Brother Hilary, as a voluntary Prostitute, and the like. Thus was the
Lady Angelica exposed for a public taunt to the World, hissed and hemmed after
of the Rabble; which when she perceived, and the Cause thereof, she summons him
up before the Criminal Bench, to make proof of what he had reported: but
Theobald not able to make due proof thereof, suborns 2 or 3 Russians; who made
oath of such detestable actions against her that the Bench without much
examination so abbhorred the Cause, that their Modesty would not vouchsaft it a
hearing, but bade her depart, and for the future be of better deportment or
else expect the punishment due for such misbehaviour.

Angelica finding her self thus abused in her Cause, and her self become a
public Reproach, resolves to revenge her of this Wrong, and to reward her
quondam Lover for his unjust doings; in order to which she sends her Page to
Theobald, with Instructions to invite him to Supper with her, and reconcile
their Difference, with a Glass of Wine. It was a matter of doubt whether
Theobald was more amazed or overjoyed at this unexpected Invitation; but
holding it for the wisest Course to take her in the hamour, promised he would
give attendance, and accordingly at the hour appointed where she (as far as her
inward fury would dispense with) courteously received him, with all imaginable
tokens of joy, and Carresses. So soon as the Table was set with Dishes, she sat
down next Theobald (hardly able all the time, to contain her rage, or deferr
the execution of her passion one moment longer.) It seemed by some
circumstances that she intended to make him drunk, but being too impatient, to
dispatch him, by so redious a way, she took the opportunity (when he
endeavored to kiss her) to stab him with a Knife that lay by her plate on the
Table, upon which he fell down to the Ground, not able to recover himself so
far as to make the lest resistance, thus finding that he was made incapable of
defending himself, he begged mercy, and prayed her that she would not use such
cruelty in revenging her self of his unworthy car^iage; to which she answered
that no torment could be thought too cruel for so base a wretch as he was, and
that she would not grant him so great a favor to purchase a new
coffeehouse: with that she slashed off his nose, and mangled his face in
lamentable manner, picked out both his eyes, and then stabbed him 3 or 4 times
in the belly, where still alive he lay wallowing in blood: and, so well as his
decaying vitals would give him leave, prayed her to dispatch him outright, and
rid him of that miserable pain, but she who was ready to do any thing more than
what he desired, replied that a speedy death were too great a mercy, and to
prevent his being importunate that way, with the help of her Knife tore his
tongue, out, crying, This is that devilish Instrument which has so many times
been the occasion of my woe, which has brought this villain and my self to this
miserable State, May this be the reward of every false and treacherous Varle^;
and with that, threw it away, and began to rip up his breast for his heart: but
her servants who p^obably were ordered for that time, to kee^ out of the
Chamber, hearing this noise, and such unwonted expressions, rushed in, and
seeing this do^eful spectacle were in a great amazement, and did what they
could to stop the Course o^ her fury, but all too late; for although they could
well see that he was then alive, yet is was not long before he was a Corpse. The
Servants took the Knife from her, and used all the persuasions they could to
reduce her to the knowledge of her self, and to be sensible of such an inhumane
and insubid feat; and at last prevailed so far with her that she began to be
deeply sorry for what was done, and to consider, that she was not likely to
escape the hands of Justice for the same, which seriously weighing with her
self, she grew desperate and attempted to stab her self, but was hindered by her
servants, who advised her to make her escape, to which she seemingly assented,
and in order thereto bid them sadle a couple of Geldings. Whilst the men were
gone to fetch out the horses, she slipped out at a backdoor and threw her self
headlong into a Well, that was in the middle of the yard, and so revenged
Herself of Herself.

The horses now being brought forth, and all things in a readiness, one of the
servants steps in to tell her, but not finding her in the Dining Room, went
through all the Rooms in the house, and at last into the Court to seek her,
where at last he found her in the Well, with the feet just above water, upon
which the Neighbors were called together, and after a through inquiry into this
dismal feat, and the cause, unanimously concluded Theobald the Occasion of his
own and her untimely end

So soon as this story was ended, gave each man his Opinion about the same,
which that we may not detain you with any previous discourse we shall ommit.
Manvelius in the mean time gave his Guests great Contentment with a laudable
entertainment, where plenty of every thing that might add delight to the Eye,
or Pallat, was as it were poured out of a Cornucopia, Nor were the Guests
tardie to acknowledge the same, expressing their great satisfaction by variety
of Complemental Elogies on this splendid Treat.

Diomedes (who all this time seems to have lain dormient) was not remiss to
afford what mirth he could to the Company, in telling of several pretty
stories, of which he was well furnished.

Among the Guests was a certain Gentlewoman called Christina; whose name, how
well it agreed with her temper, you may judge by the sequel. This Gentlewoman
suited the humor of Diomedes as well as she could, till at last Diomedes was
so far taken with her that he coveted what was not consistent with Virtue; and
at last they understood one another so well that she went into a Chamber alone,
whither he followed, and was for some time held up with a few Ceremonies, not
much pertinent to the matter he came about, till she made a shift to pillage
him of a Gold watch of a very high value, which he not once perceived. This
done they parted without any further mischief, and full satisfaction to
Diomedes, who contrary to his purpose missed his Venereal Corrolary where with,
he thought to complete his Epicurean Banquet. After the Guests had given the
usual Complement to Manvelius they departed each to his habitation; Diomedes,
who all this while knew not of his loss, goes to bed, and in the morning when
he awoke, began to look for his watch to see what a clock it was, but found it
not.

Yet was he not so much concerned at the loss, as that he knew not who should
be the Thief, and was in default of proof constrained to hold his tongue and
put up the matter in quiet.

A few days after came Manvelius to give him a visit, accompanied with Monsr.
le Cocq the Frenchman, and a third person, who in the project was to represent
a strange Merchant. Manvel upon his first saluting him, began to beg excuse for
his boldness, and so gradually proceeded on to the purpose. Sir said he, I am
heartily sorry that I am necessitated to give you a trouble which I little
dreamed on, this Gentleman having made a journey expressly to receive a sum I
am owing him, and has happened to come just as I am out of Cash, having
yesterday paid off 3 considerable Sums, and the day before cleared Accounts
with some of my Correspondents, so that being out of moneys, I beseech you be
so kind, as to supply me with a Thousand Ducatoons, for three Months, wherein
you will highly oblige me to do the like or greater favor, when your Occasions
and my Opportunity concur. Diomedes jointly considering Manvelius his
Reputation and Civility, could not deny him, counts down the money. Manvelius
hereupon shows him a Blank bond which he had made, wherein Diomedes was to
confess himself to have a Diamond-Ring of Manvels for a Pledge, which he
desired him to sign. To this Diomedes assents, on Condition Manvel was to sign
another for the money. Now after a short previous Colloquy, Manvel desires
Diomedes to sign, which he did, having in the mean time clandestinely taken
away that Obliga^ion, wherein the Pawn was spec^fi^d, and laid down another in
the lieu of it, whose Contents was, That Diomedes confessed himself Debtor to
Manvel in the Sum of 25000 gl. which Diomedes, not sensible of the fraud,
without any difficulty signs. This done, Manvel and his Company took their
leave of Diomedes, well satisfied that the matter took so well.

This Mischance was also seconded by another. For a certain Boor living near
Amsterdam, who had in former time been deceived by Diomedes, took upon him to
be revenged on him for it, which he thus put in practice.

He had in his house a servant-maid to whom he imparted his aggrievance, and
withal told her his purpose of retaliation. To this maid he gave Instructions,
and delivered her 2 pair of Pendants, the one pair fine, the other false, but
so like each other in fashion that an ordinary Judgment could not distinguish
them. With these she posts away to Diomedes, where coming to speak with him,
she profferd them to sale, telling him that she was of good parentage,
notwithstanding her then being in the state of a Servant, in which state she
had diligently served for several years together, and so saved a small sum of
money, which she then intended to dispose of to an advantageous end, only
wanted about an hundred gilders more, which she prayed him that he would do her
the favor to lend her upon the Pendants.

Diomedes who had a reasonable Judgment in Jewels could not value them less
than 6 times the money, readily gave her the Sum she asked upon them, on
Condition she should pay 15 st. per month Interest, and signed a Writing
whereby he confessed to have received such Jewels from her, which upon payment
of the moneys lent he was obliged to make restitution of.

Whilst he was busy in writing the said Note, the Wench clandestinely drew out
the false Pendants, and Conveyed the true into her Handkercheif, which she lay
on the table, as a necessary instrument for a Hocus pocus trick in time of need.

For that time they took their leaves of each other, and the maid returns to
her master, and told him what had passed, which pleased him extremely well.

Some time after the Peasant came to Diomedes at Amsterdam, and presented him a
bargain of Oxen, promising to affoard him a good pennyworth, and a long day of
Payment. This pleased Diomedes extremely well, having found so rare an occasion
to chouse the Clown, so that he deemed it more than a venial sin, to neglect
such a golden opportunity: he therefore returns the Peasant answer, that he
would take a walk that way into the Country and, withone see his Oxen.

In the mean while Diomedes calls to mind, how he had been cheated by a Servant
wench (not knowing that it was a Contrivance of the Peasant) set up his
windpipes and told the Story; sharply reprehending the vices and ungodly
Practices of this Iron-age; and gloss'd the whole matter, with so much Candor
and Integrity, that the Peasant, if his Conscience had not been asleep, must
needs have repented his designed Revenge. Never were two better met, the one
acting Idiot, and the other Puritan; the Peasant under a color of Simplicity,
and downrightness, a^^ented to every reason of Diomedes, without any deeper
Sentence, than, Good-lack-a-day; What will this World come to a^ last? well is
't po^^ible? What a sinful Age, is this we live in? and the like. After this
manner they spent the tediousness of the way, which indeed, was too long for
them both.

As Soon as they were arrived at the house of the Boor, and Diomedes set down,
in comes the maid, whom Diomedes so soon as he saw knew to be the same that had
put a trick upon him. He was no longer able to withhold his fury, but
immediately taxes her with the cheat, and gave her a whole Tear of Mabs and
Jades. But the wench, who had no small measure of Impudence, first made as if
she were amazed, and afterward, began to act her part, and with one told him
that he was himself a cheat, and that he should not put her off so, in telling
her that the Pendants were courterfeit, which she had brought him; for she
could bring manifest proof to the contrary. Upon that she ran out in all have,
and called an Officer, who arrested him there in the Room. Diomedes thus
surprised, addresses himself to the Boor, and makes his complaint, what hand
measure he had. But the Boor instead of comforting him, threatened to fall upon
his Bones. You r asca^, quoth he, think you that I will justify your villainy,
or that this hypocritical Expressions have wrought so far upon me, as to have
such a mean conceit of this good Gentlewoman, who is as well famed for her
Virtue, as thou a^t infamous for thy Villainy. These Jewels to my knowledge are
not false, but it is thy naughtiness would persuade me to it, for they have
been twice sold for more than 3000 gl. and if thou will not return them; We Will
convert thy bones into Dice.

Diomedes hearing that unwelcome Echo, had not patience to rest^ain his fury
longer, gives the Boor such a Dandyflute on the Jaws, that he reeled again; but
the Peasant, who was no novice at this game, lent him a blow with his fist,
that made his nodle ring; and finally together they close, where at the first
jirk, the Peasant had our Merchant under his rustic Carcass, where he so
peppered him off, that Diomedes began to beg his pardon; which when he saw that
the Boor would not hear at that ear, began to cry out, Murder; but the Peasant
to throw all difficulty from off his own shoulder; put his hand in Diomedes his
pocket, and drew out his Knife, which had his name on the haft, and threw it
upon the floor. This done, he cries out for help; the neighbors who seeing
this bloody Scene, and the Peasant crying out Murder, Murder, ran all
together upon Diomedes and used him in most barbarous fashion: others in the
mean while ran to fetch the Schout (or Constable) who carried him to a new
lodging, though sore against his will; where he was fain to stay a day or two
before he could get a Hearing. When he was brought before the Bench, in order
to have his Case tried, there appeared 8 or 9 of the Neighborhood on behalf
the Boor, who swore point blank against Diomedes, as, That he fell upon the
Boor without any reason. That he drew his Knife with intent to stab him, and,
That he went about to circumvent the maid, etc. When all these things were
heard, and the Oaths tendered and taken; the Court ordered Diomedes to pay the
Charges, and the value of the Jewels and to remain in prison till either the
Moneys were paid, or security was given. This startled Diomedes so, that he
began to revile the Court for such an unjust Sentence: but when they threatened
to whip him, pro Contemptu Curiae, he was fain to lay his hand to his mouth and
give them better Language. This done the Court broke up, and Diomedes was
remanded to Prison, where he remained some days, till by Council he moved for
an Appeal, which they could not refuse. But when he thought himself a free man
again, the Officer of Justice, made a new demand upon him, for drawing of his
Knife, and so committed him to Custody again, for these new Pretenses. Diomedes
thus brought again to another sorrow, was out of hopes of making his Escape,
for the Schout would not take any other security than ready money, or the value
in hand. However he began to look about if he could see a hole to make his
escape, and at last espied one; through which he forced his swinging Carcass;
though that being too high from the ground on the out side, he durst not jump
off; but seeing a little thatched house on the north side of the prison he
resolves that way, and off he comes, but the Roof being a little too weak he
fell quite thro^gh, and so upon a Bed, on which lay a young Country wench, and
her Paramour, without knowledge of her Father or Mother. These sinners were not
a little amazed, but thinking that some Judgment was come upon them for their
wicked doings, it being dark, one ran one way, and the other, the other way,
but whither, I protest I never yet could learn: however I think it good to
follow our Merchant, whom methinks I see running for Amsterdam, with his tail
between his legs.

By that time Diomedes was got home, and hardly got a good nights rest, came
Manvelius to salute his Knaveship; praying him with one to pay the 20000 gild.
The twenty thousand gilders (quoth Diomedes) prithee what dos't mean man?
explain thy self: Manvelius hereat counterfeited as much amazement, as he, and
urged him to pay it without many words, or controversy; and not to pretend
ignorance, or make the thing strange. To be brief they grew so hot that
Diomedes held up his fist to give him a Sarabrand; whereupon, Manvel, who was
no great affecter of such sport-^an out immediately to the Citymessenger (or
Bailif) to summon him up to the Townhouse, where after the matter was debated,
Diomedes, lost the trial: upon which he appeals to a higher Court, where at
that time he had another Trial, which was but of small moment, and that he won,
but this which was of greater importance, was given against him; and he
condemned to pay the money, which he did without showing himself much concerned
for the matter: though resolved to be revenged by some stratagem or other;
which also succeeded well. For,

Having now designed his Machine, he bribed 4 or 5 Persons to be assistant to
him in this affair; who glad of the opportunity promised to behave themselves
according to his Direction. One of them was to be Don Philippo, forsooth,
dressed and attired in a gentile habit, to suit an Ea^^or Baron. Two other of
his Camrades he put in Live^ie, like Pages, who were to follow Don Philippo.
After instructions given, Don Philippo ma^ches up and down; and passed several
times by the door of Mr. Manv^^, whom at length he found standing before his
house. Don Philippo, steps up gingerly to him, salutes him, with all imaginable
courtesy, and told him, he thought himself the happiest man alive, to meet with
so good a friend, asking him about his health and how affairs stood; Manvel,
who was not one of the stiffest, received him with such courtesy as he thought
might suit a person of his Calibre, and really thought with himself that he had
seen him some where before, but durst not make so bold as to ask him at first,
Who he was? Don Philippo pursues his complement, and finally breaks off with
the recommendation of Monsr. Le Cocque, whom he said he had seen (for Diomedes
had made him acquainted with all necessary circumstances about him) he being
but lately set forward for France. Manvel hearing that prays him to step in,
which Don Philippo excused, thinking it time enough to accept it at the second
entreaty; but Manvel thought perhaps the Gentleman might probably be in have,
and therefore would not be too importunate, insomuch that Sr. Philip, for that
time missing of his expectation, took his leave of him, and went into an Inn,
in the next street, where he took up his Lodging for that night. The next
morning having consulted with his Confoederate Diomedes, he sent him this
following Letter.

Monsr. Manvel, SALUT.
The Inclination which I have to toward your person, for many considerable
causes and reasons, moves me to let you understand of a rich Opportunity I have
in serving you in a bargain of such Commodities as I am sensible you deal in,
which may tend to your advantage, if you will please to come over, and honor
me with your presence. I make no doubt but you will think your Journey worth
the while, and consequently make an advantageous bargain, which is the only
desire and hope of.

SIR, Your faithful Servant Anth. van Breuckel, Broker.
Rotterdam, etc.

Manvel, upon the reading of this Letter, determines to set forward to
Rotterdam, and make use of such an opportunity, especially because the same
Broker from whom this Letter was supposed to come, had formerly sent him advice
about some particular affairs which fell out very luckily: and according to
this Resolution sets forward that night.

In the mean time Sir Philip, the Mock-Baron, sends to know whether Manvel, was
gone or not; and being informed he was, goes with his Pages pro tempore, to
Manvels' wife, to act the Part intended. Diomedes had in the mean time assured
him that she was a brisk, open hearted Dame, and therefore gave him
encouragement to use the more freedom with her. When he had got access and
found her in every thing congruous with the Character Diomedes had given him,
he began first to entertain her with soft and fair discourse, and so gradually
to take a larger liberty, till he had got the scope he aimed at, and won her
consent to go to bed with him. This the Pages marking they acted their parts
with the Maids below, who spared not for wine all the time, till the Maids were
both so drunk that, they were not sensible what they did, and at last fell both
asleep, the one under the Kitchen Table, and the other in the Cellar before the
tap, with a great Stone-bottle in her arms. When the Pages saw that the ^oast
was clear, the Mistress above with their Master, the Maids-fa^^ asleep, and the
Doors at the Order of Mrs. Manvel, securely bolted, began to hunt up and down
the house for Keys: which after a little seeking they found, and went to a
Money-chest where the^ met with 16000 Ducats. Having got the Money, they ran
out leaving the door open and knocked at some of the Neighbors doors, praying
them to have the goodness to come to the passing of Mrs. Manvel, who lay
desperately sick. This done they betook them to their heels. The Neighbors who
held it their duty to visit Mrs. Manvel in such a time, especially, as some of
them knew that her husband was gone from home, went in, and coming into the
chamber where she was wont to ly, stood a little at the door, whispering
together, and at last opened the door very softly, to go in. Don Philip hearing
the door open, drew back the Curtain and sees 3 or 4 women marching softly
toward the Bedside; upon which to avoid further trouble he jumps out of bed in
his Wast-coat and Drawers, and with his Upper-garment upon his arms made all
the ha^^ he could toget, out before any more of that kind of people came:
leaving his Breeches behind him, in which was a Copy of that Letter that he had
sent Mr. Manvel, dated from Rotterdam.

Diomedes who tickled mightily to see the issue of the Project, was not far
from them, but looking out, saw a heap of Seamens wives at Manvels' door, ran
forthwith to see what was the matter and after a little inquiry learned how the
matter was. Well (quoth he) such People ought to be punished without mercy who
violate their Husbands beds. It were a sin in the highest nature to conceal it;
and those who would keep such things from the knowledge of Justice deserve as
much themselves. But little needed he to urge the matter much, for that were but
to teach his Grandame to eat eggs. Within an hour or two comes an Officer, whom
Mrs. Manvel was fain to fee with a pledge of Jewels.

Within 2 days after arrived Manvel from Rotterdam, and hearing what had
happened was very ill at ease, wishing that h^ had not taken that ^ourney,
being now ashamed to show his head abroad, and restless with his wife at home.
However^ he resolves to ease himself of the latter, and in order thereto goes
about to get a Divorce, which was granted him: Upon which he returns his wife
her Dowry reserving but a very mean Portion for himself.

Diomedes, although in some regard sufficiently revenged, yet was not satisfied
with this but soon after put another thing in practice.

He had acquaintance with one Luke a Wine-couper, who had been privy to the
most part of his Roguery when he sold wine himself: to him he imparted his
design, and promised to hold him harmless and run the Risque himself, if he
would but undertake the Act. Luke was herewith content; and according to the
Instructions of Diomedes went to Manvel, proffering him a bargain of Rhenish
wine; which he told him he would affoard him cheaper than the common Price,
because he had occasion for ready money. Manvel then seeing the man in a
strait; thought to make a prize of him, went with him to his Cellar, where he
tasted of several Hogsheads and before he came away struck a bargain with him
for three thousand Gilders, to be delivered and paid that night. Manvel then
goes to make room for the Wine in his Cellar, and Luke in the mean time removes
those Hogsheads which Manvel had bought, out of their place, and put others in
their room, which were filled with sour wine, and in every tun was a pipe made
of Lattin, cunningly fastened in the inside. These were filled with Gunpowder,
and match fastened to the Ends thereof, being of a considerable length from the
powder, that it could not burn so as to give fire for some considerable time.
By that time the Wine-couper had laid his Machin, Manvel comes in with the
money, which was paid and received according to the purport of the Bargain.
When he had got the Wine home, and set in order in the Cellar, he went to
Supper, where he had scarcely sitten a quarter of an hour, but he heard a
fearful cracking, and the house fell a shaking. Upon this he was not a little
altered; yet thinking, because it was hot weather, that it might be thunder, he
sent one of his men to see if his Warehouse windows were to; for that side next
the street was stowed with Flax. But by that time his Servant was got to the
innerdoor, the greatest pipe took fire which made all fly about; the hoops were
broken to shivers, and the floor of the Parlour where they sat at Table, broke
through, being directly over the Cellar where the Tuns were; and at once broke
all his Porceleyn, and a costly Looking-glass.

Diomedes longing to hear of the issue and effect of the machin, goes to a
public house hard by, where he had not been above half an hour before he heard
it crack and thunder, and suddenly saw the whole street in an alarm, none
knowing what was the matter. Diomedes together with those that were in the
house ran whither they judged the report came from, and found the Warehouse
door of Manvel open, with a multitude of people at a distance not da^ing to
come anigh it, much less so courageous as to enter in, till such times as they
saw Manvel with two of his men come trembling down stairs, with a candle in the
one hand and a Crucifix, or an Agnus Dei in the other. But before Manvelius was
come to the middle of the stairs he fell down through the steps (the staircase
being all shattered loose with the force of the Powder) where he was up almost
to the middle, in leckage of the wine, crying out, help! help! I drown, I sink,
I drown, I sink, upon which one of his men which though^ to pull him out came
also tumbling down upon him, the candle falling out of his hand. Manvelius
hereat surprised wist not what to think, but supposing it had been the Devil
began to lay about, which the man took so well out that he paid him again in
the same coin, in short, they banged it about with such courage that had not
the other man come hastily with another candle lighted, they had both smothered
in Wine. Diomedes, who to his hearts contentment, was all this while a
spectator of the scene, had almost lost his breath with laughing, and to give
Manvel a hint, cried out, If a man were indeed so zealous to fight the Devil,
he would scorn his help in cheating of honest men. Manvelius not able to creep
through the way he came, (the dimension of his Gut-case being with the
thickest) was fain to go out at the street door, partly because of his being
tipsie with tumbling in Old Rhenish, hardly able to steer his Course, and
partly because of the Rabble that crowded about the door. He was no sooner come
out, but the people being inquisitive how it came, and what was the matter:
when he to satisfy their curiosity told all he knew of the thing. Diomedes
among the rest hearing all, it so tickled his fancy, that he could hardly
contain himself of laughter, which he endeavored to bridle so well as he
could, to prevent suspicion.

Manvelius upon this gets an Ague which kept him in his bed: finding out in the
mean time the trick which was put upon him by the bursten pipes, match and
smell of powder; and for the same summons the wine merchant to appear before
the Magistrate, who could not deny the fact, but referrs himself to Diomedes,
who being likewise sent for, denied to know any thing of the matter, but wholly
pretending ignorance, the Wine-merchant received Sentence of Banishment and a
Fine, by which means he was utterly ruined.

Diomedes had a Cousin married to one Ambrose with whom he held a long
correspondence, and had a great kindness for. About these happened an odd
passage, which I hold not impertinent to insert here, being both comical and
ridiculous. This Ambrose her husband was one, who had but little value or esteem
for the world, unless for it is Movsture, being deeply in Love with l'eau de
vie, or Brandy. Mrs. Anthonette, that was the Gentlewom^ns name, was reasonably
fair, and might pass for a beauty, but never could get the ascendant of her
husband, who was more inclined to Bacchus than Venus. This beastly life of his
made her almost weary of Life. Never came he in without a Guide, and whether she
Carded or Spun at home, he was sure to Reel abroad: and when he was come home
must be lifted into bed. Anthonette would often admonish him to leave off these
tiresome and dishonorable Courses, where by he did not only loose his
reputation amongst men, and make her a Mockingstock to her Neighbors, but ran
headlong into ruin, and would at last reduce himself and her into such a
condition, as would render their Lives uncomfortable. But this rather provoked
his Wrath than Amendment: insomuch that he told her that if she did not desist
and let him alone he would in place of spending a penny spend a pound, and for
the future take a greater liberty than he had hitherto don. Mrs. Anthonette
seeing that he was already without the bounds of reason, imparted her grievance
to Diomedes praying him, if he knew any Council for her, or a mean to draw him
from this loose course of Life. Diomedes was (as appears by our foregoing
discourse) subtle enough in invention, and resolute in putting a thing into
practice, promised to do his best and assist her when he met with an
opportunity, which would be best, when he came home drunk again.

It was not needful that he should wait long for that Occasion, for it was
almost a miracle to find him sober at night. She therefore prays Diomedes, to
do it so soon as he could: and accordingly he promised that night he would.
Anthonette stood at her door in the Evening waiting for her husband, whom at
length she saw at a distance; surveying the breadth of the streets, with a
train of boys after him, who convoyed him to his door: where being come he
complements his wife after his old mood, with his hat to the ground, and a
hundred base los manos, till at last stumbling upon a great stone, he lay as
flat as a Flounder. Anthonette seeing him ly so, prayed her Neighbors to help
him in a doors, where they tug'd and wrestled, till they got him into the
Parlour. This done she sends her maid to Diomedes, who without delay came and
found friend Ambrose in the condition we left him in. Diomedes gave order to
unharness him which was accordingly done. When he was stripped, he wrapped him up
in a Winding Sheet, and lay him handsomely in an old sugar Chest and carried him
down into the Cellar, where they stopped all the windows close that he could see
no light; and tied an English Water-dog to his feet. That done they went up.
Anthonette put her self into deep mourning, which she had upon the Death of her
Father. Diomedes took a Goats hide which he fastened about his body, that was
so neatly contrived, that one would have taken him for a Devil, or at best a
Monster. Two persons more were hired, to complete the Stage, whereof one of
them was put into another che^t, like a Coffin, at a small distance from
Ambrose: the other was like Diomedes sh^ouded in a Goats-skin. When they were
in their Acting ga^b, they went down into the Cellar, and lay some loose grains
of powder about the Chest in which the merry Ambrose lay, and ever now and then
tilted up the Coffin at both ends, letting it fall down again with a great
force: the other that was to represent a Corpse, all the time upon a heap of
wood in the Corner. Anthonette caused her maid to dress her self in an ougly
Robe, made of old rags of diverse colors, with a black long snouted visage. And
artificial breasts made of two bags of sand, which hung down to her middle. When
all this was done they began to dance round about the Chest, roared and yelled
so long till he awoke, which when they perceived, the two mock-devils ran and
embraced him, rubbing their snaky wiggs against his cheeks, which put him into
such a Sweat that all he had about him was as wet as if it had lay in water,
fain would he look up but durst not move or stir, for Diomedes looked at him so
grim, as the Devil over Lincoln, and he with his eyes fixed upon Diomedes durst
not look another way, for fear the Devil should take him for a living soul.
While they stood gazing at one another, the other Devil in forma came, and
threw half a dozen live-eels into the Coffin which began to creep up and down
over his whole body and face; yet durst he not cry out or stir, for Diomedes
had him so fast in his eye that he held him strictly in aw. When this was done,
they put fire to the loose grains of Powder, which flew all into a flame round
about him. This caused some alteration and made him cry out, Ick bid u doch,
Here Duyvel, so ghy de Man (...) diemen so veel lof van sprec^t, seght mijn
daar ick ben, en hoe dat ick hier ^ome te gera^en. Derschoont my doch dat ick
die vrppostighept gebruycke om U. E. aen te spreken, want ick ben even vroome
Hollander, en betale daar ick schuldigh ben; selfs mijn Waardinne in it Schilt
van Vranckrijck, die de meeste had te pretendeeren, heb ick tot den uytersten
duyt betaalt. That is, Good Mr. Devil, if you be the Gentleman I have heard so
much talk of, do me the favor to tell me where I am, or how I came hither, and
please to pardon the liberty I take to ask you, for I am an honest Hollander,
and pay my debts. My very Landlady at the French Arms, I have paid to a
farthing which was the greatest sum I owed. In this dreadful Pickle he lay
panting, but could not screw an answer from his Devilship. At last he prayed
they would let him go away. You fool (said the other that lay in the Corner) do
you think that we shall ever come out of Hell? no, no. Remember how often you
have called out, Den Duyvel haalt my, The Devil fetch me, and now you see what
a sad condition you are in, and how he has once got you in his clutches. You
have wholly dedicated your precious time to drinking, and shall ere long, see
the reward of such impious courses as you have made choice of, and have leisure
to wish you might live the time again, when all will be to no purpose. I am in
the same condition you are in, and would (were it in my power) give ten
thousand Worlds to live my time again: but to little purpose is my wish; my
opportunity I have lost, which can never be recalled, and the golden minutes I
was so prodigal of, are a greater Hell to me, than Hell it self as thou poor
caitif, ere long, shall be made sensible of, on thy behalf. Ambrose hearing
that really believed that he was dead and already before the Postern of Hell.
After he had lay in this condition an hour or more; the two Devils took him up,
the one by the head, and the other by the heels, made him fast with ropes, and
so dragged him to a Post, where they bound him so, that he could neither move
hand nor foot: which done they took each a whip, that was made for the purpose,
and one of them with a hoarse voice bad him confess his Offenses. He seeing
them in good earnest, began to mutter it out by degrees. The first was his
Drunkenness, as that he now and then took a cup of the Creature, more then did
him good, That he had abused the good counsel of his wife, who had many times
forewarned him of Perils continually attending both body and soul. That
drinking sometimes with a Goodfellow, or two, when they went aside, he would
clandestinly drink off a glass, wripe his mouth, and fill it again. That he had
several times and in several places lay with such and such Gentlewomen. This
Anthonette overhearing had hardly the Patience to hold her tongue, being now
ascertained of what she was theretofere never jealous of. When they had wrought
with him so long as they could, and that he could confess no more; They let him
done gently, and brought a bottle of Brandy, which they tempered with Opium,
and Diacodium; adding a little spirit of Hartshorn and Assa foetida; the first
to make him sleep, and the latter, by way of circumstance to suit the Place,
and Condition of the Patient. This Potion they forced him to drink, which at
first he was unwilling to do, yet when they threatened to commit him to the
Flames he quaff'd it off, hoping by his obedience, now, to be excused another
time. This having done he was again drunk, and by the vigor and virtue of the
sleeping Ingredients, fell into a deep slumber. Which being effected they
brought him up into his own bed, and drew off their Infernal Robes, and put on
Terrestrial Garbs. Anthonette remained still in her mourning Weed, and one of
her Assistants put on a moodish suit, suitable to a Gentleman of Quality, who
was to represent a Bridegroom and the other who was to be his Friend. Diomedes
was also in slight mourning, being cousin to Anthonette as was said before,
and Appolonia served at Table. When they were all set, they began to dance and
make a great noise, which at length, though hardly, awakened Ambrose, who was
in a thousand troubles when he thought upon what had happened, sometimes would
endeavor to persuade himself that it was only a dream or whimsy, and would
vanish in time; yet again that it must assuredly be real, by the Wounds and
boils he had about his body; and seeing the face of things quite altered, it
confirmed his belief the more. At last seeing Glasses go round briskly, and his
Anthonette, drinking to every one respectively began to cry out, Oh Good
friends have a care what you do, and listen a little to what has happened to me.
Hardly had he opened his mouth, but all rose from the Table, and began to
shriek out, as if they had been indeed amazed, one running this way, and
another that way, and finally every one out of the Chamber Anthonette only
excepted, who fell down upon the floor, as if she had sounded away. This
Ambrose marking durst not rise up to help her, fearing to make her worse but
began to call out to the maid, Appolonia, Appolonia, no maid makes answer,
Anthonette lies still, and Ambrose lay still in his bed, musing on what was
past, being all in a sweat; till at last by the virtue of the Potion he fell
into a slumber again, and consequently into a deep sleep. This Anthonette
observing, she ran out softly and thanked the respective persons for their
service and caused the maid to uncover the Table in the dark, without making
the lest noise, and so pulling off her Mourning Weed, went to bed, to her
husband, sleeping by him a good part of the next day.

When Ambrose awaked, saw it was day, and found his wife by his side, was in a
hundred quandaries, not knowing what to say, or think. At last he began to push
his wife till she awaked, and asked her, how she came there; and, If she was
not afraid to have a Ghost to her bedfellow. Anthonette hearing him speak with
such an absolute zeal, could hardly contein her self of laughter. Prithee my
Dear, (quoth she) what do mean? Do you go about to make me laugh, or to put
me in a fright. I beseech you explain your self, and I shall perhaps answer
your expectation and design, Upon this he asked her, If he was not lately dead
and she about to marry with another? This coming so seriously from him made her
laugh whether she would or no: yet made as if she looked upon this as mere
dotage, and the effects of wine. Ambrose still held on in this discourse, and
did all he could to asseverate the passages which he imagined to have truly
happened, from whence Anthonette concluded, that the Stratagem had had a good
success. Pursuing his discourse after some few ejaculations, he began to
express sincere intentions of repentance, and to become a new man, saying, Oh,
that the Heavens would but grant this one thing, That I might always persevere
and remain in this good purpose of Life, I should never so far forget my self
as to do those things, which I am now sensible tend to eternal destruction.
But, alas! what remedy? or, what helps my bare and simple wish, my time is
past, and I am now bound to go on a long journey, for which to my grief I am
unprepared. More he indeavored to speak but could not for weeping. Which, with
these expressions pleased her to the heart, hoping for the future, to enjoy a
peaceable life, with our new Convert: and seeing him in such a perplexity began
to drive the thing out of his head, and assured him that he was still alive,
and that he had perhaps been in a Trance, which might probably have been for a
happy warning, and to make him sensible of his condition and of the state he
was in, by suffering himself to be so drawn aside with ill company, and letting
loose the reins of his lust and libidinous propensity, which every man is
inclined to by nature, and the like. But say what she could, he could hardly
believe but that the thing was real, and that he had verily been tormented, for
it was already high light day, and he in his perfect senses, yet had still the
wounds about him; and to be short he became for the time a pure Convertit, and
fully resolved with himself, to be more circumspect in his actions, and never
again to bath in the Sea of Bacchus, lest he should chance to drown in the
Abyss of Pluto: and so effectual was this mean hat^ although his own wife (who
before had work enough to restrain him) had offered him Wine, he would not so
much as once taste it; nay, so abominable was it to him that he could neither
endure to see or smell it: his Tossing off whole Bowls, was now turned to a
nauseous Vomiting, and the charming Delights of good liquor changed into a
detestable and loathsome Abhorrency.

Five full years continued this passage in great privacy, before Ambrose
discovered the Trick, for it was done with the knowledge of too many persons to
be always concealed, or held under the Rose: at what time (by I know not what
pick-thank) he was informed how his wife with the help of some others, had
deluded him; which nevertheless his fury was in some manner too strong for him
to bridle, yet being sensible of what he had confessed at the whipping post, he
held fast the Rains of his wrath, lest he should be twitted of his belluin
actions: and had by that time so learned to lord over his passions, that he
rather thought it his duty to content himself with the effects of that machin,
how unkindly soever he might take it from their hands who had been the cause of
this his odd Conversion.

This Amsterdamnable Gusman having once in his life done evil that good came of
it, met once suddenly again with another opportunity to do himself good, which
was on this wise:

Not long after this Masquerade he applies himself to an eminent Merchant of
Amsterdam, whose chief Traffic was in the Straits and at Greenland, whither he
sent every year several Ships: of this same Merchant he bought, to the value of
3600. gilders in Train and Whale-bone, besides 800. gilders in Rice, which he
promised to pay upon delivery, for which purpose he repairs to the House of Mr.
vander Ha -- the said Merchant, with a bag of money, where the Goods were
delivered. Diomedes tendered him the money, amounting to 4400. gilders, for
which the Merchant signs an acquittance. Now Diomedes in the mean time had a
Camrade of his by him all the time, whom he had instructed in what he was to
do. Seeing now his opportunity, he calls the Merchant aside, as if he had an
earnest to impart to him, where he held him up with an invented story, while
the other clandestinly takes up the bags and acquittance, and steals away.

When Diomedes saw all effected he walks demutely back again with the Merchant
into the Counting house, where the Merchant coming sees the Money and Paper
gone, began to rage and stamp like mad, not knowing what to do in the case, but
at last calling to mind, such another prank Diomedes had played, of which some
had given him an inkling, immediately without more ado charges the matter home
upon him, and taxed him for the Thief. Diomedes highly incensed at the affront
began to give him scurvy language, which was again retaliated; in short to high
words they came, and finally Diomedes gave him a challenge, which Mr. vander Ha
-- refused not to answer, so to it they went, where Diomedes, being an experter
sword-man, gave him a prick under the left pap, which he judging to be mortal,
took him to his heels, and away for Paris, to avoid the danger that was
incumbent on him.

Mr. vander Ha -- in the mean while lies wallowing in his blood, is found by
some who knew him and brought home, three Surgeons are immediately sent for,
who having made inspection into the wound, concluded the good Gentleman past
recovery; however use their utmost diligence to cure him, and at last by their
joint care and skill, brought him so far up, that he was judged past all danger.

Diomedes who knew no better but that his Antagonist was dead, kept himself
very privately at Paris, till all his money was spent for by reason of his
sudden departure, he could not take more with him than a little gold he had in
his pocket. Seeing now that all his money was gone, he resolves to list himself
among a company of Padders, having already got into acquaintance with a Captain
of the Gang, who upon his intimation gave him free admission, with this
proviso, That he should first show his proof by way of Trial, or examen, which
he essayed and with good success, as you shall presently understand.

Now by reason of the unhappy circumstances he had involved himself into, he
went under the name of Monsr. de Villeneuf, which name we purpose to make use
of to denote his Worship in the sequel.

Monsr. de Villeneuf went into a noted Ordinary, where several of the young
Nobility did customarily meet once a week, where being come, and looking like a
Person of no indifferent quality, sat himself down among those Gentlemen, and
being in the crowd, when they first began to take their places, none took
occasion to question how he came there; for besides their civility for the
better convenience of the House, strangers are admitted at the Request of the
Landlord, every one thought he might probably be an acquaintance of some one in
the company, and therefore unwilling to put any affront upon him, not knowing
whose displeasure that they might incur by so doing. To come more to the
matter, Monsr. de Villeneuf, observes, when (as the manner of that Ordinary is)
the Guests gave money into a silver Charger for the use of the Poor, which went
round the Table; that a Gentleman who sat at his right hand had a velvet Purse
well charged with Pistols: This Purse made his Teeth to water, and like a
Lodestone had such an attractive virtue that it turned his eye what wa^ soever
it turned its self.

When the Meal was over the Gentleman rose from Table, and took his leave of
the company. Monsr. de Villeneuf seeing him go, posts away after him, to see if
he could bring his purpose about, and accordingly closes up with him, saying;
Sir, I perceive by your discourse at Table, that you have a desire to buy two
Coach-horses, There is an acquaintance of mine, who has a brace of
Flanders-Mares, which if you have a mind to see I will give him notice of it,
that he may wait upon you, at what time and place you are pleased to appoint.
Monsr. de Molineaux (for that was the Gentleman's name) hearing him say so, made
answer? Sir, it is true, I have 4, or 5 days inquired but cannot hear of any
according to my mind, and if you can bring me to sight of those two Mares, you
will infinitely oblige me, yet believe me, Sir, I should be loath to put you to
so great a trouble; but wherein I may serve you, vouchsafe but to command and
your injunction shall be obeyed. Villeneuf replies that it was no more than his
duty to serve him, the more because his supposed acquaintance had desired him
to recommend his bargain: and so prayed him to go along with him to a Cabaret
hard by, promising to send for his friend thither. To this Molineaux assents;
where being come Villeneuf writes to his Comrades, under notion of writing
about what he had intimated to Molineaux. After he had done he stepped aside to
give it a Boy who was to carry it, according to his directions. The sense of
the Letter was thus:

I have met with a Cully, do you therefore come as Officers and arrest him as a
Malefactor, it is a fat bird and for our turn, further directions I need not
give, Sat sapientibus dictum puto, but what other instructions shall be
necessary, I judge it time enough when you make your appearance. The World is
turned over the moon.

The note was larger but abstruse: however so perspicuous to them as they
understood his meaning, and accordingly came; one representing an Officer of
Justice, the rest his Dogs, or Followers. So soon as they came in, they siezed
the person of Molineaux, in presence of Villeneuf who made as if he had been
mightily astonished at the matter, and showed himself greatly concerned for
him, desiring them not to be so uncivil as to drag a Gentleman out of the house
at that rate. Monsr. Molineaux prays them to tell him what was the matter, and
upon what account they arrested him, with all desiring them to advise the
matter better together, and bethink themselves, whether he was the person, or
no, that they came to look for. The Officer with a dreadful look tells him,
that he, and none else, was the Person they looked for, Come, come, added he,
you would pretend ignorance, would you? are not you acquainted with such and
such men [naming some of an infamous gang, and himself for one] and are you
ignorant of such and such a cheat? Monsr. Molineaux swore and protested he
never was acquainted with that gang of Rogues, neither did he know any thing of
those cheats. However notwithstanding all those asseverations, the Officer
commanded the men to ty him fast, as they would have done, only Villeneuf prays
them that he might have the liberty to speak a word with him apart, to which
the Officer gave his consent. Villeneuf therefore calls him aside and
discourses him after this manner; Sir, I cannot enough condole your present
trouble into which you are fallen, but if I can be Bail for you, I will, rather
than that you should be carried through the streets, which may tend to your
dishonor, well knowing (although my acquaintance with you has not been long)
that you are a Person of such worth, as that you cannot but be universally
known, only I desire to have some security for my self, which if I should
demand upon such an account I hope you will not take ill out, since you have
that by you, which will do it. Monsr. Molineaux thanks him for his great
civility, withal telling him that he was content, and prayed him to accept of
the Purse of Gold if that would satisfy him. Well (replies Villeneuf,) I hope
that the matter will not prove so difficult after they find it a mistake, and I
question not on the other hand (since the Officer knows me) but that he will
accept of my Bail; and with that steps toward him, and offered his Bail. At
first he seems to scruple, saying, that he knew not whether he might do it or
not with safety; But, added he, for the honor of you Monsr. Villeneuf, I am
content to hazard the matter, being you seem to have knowledge of him.
Villeneuf having promised upon his parole to make him forthcoming, the
mock-Constable took his leave of him and went out, leaving them two together.

When they were gone Villeneuf began to ask him, what was the matter? to whom
the Gentleman replies, that he knew no more what it was than of his Deaths-day,
but that he was sure it was a mistake. If I might be sure of that, (quoth he) I
would go my self and discourse the Officer about it, for albeit I am satisfied
as to your being wronged, yet people you know are always apter to sustain and
harbor a bad opinion of any man, than a good, and the whitest walls we see are
the soonest stained. To be brief, he desired him to stay a little and he would
go and speak with him, and if he did not return within an hour, that he should
go to such a Cabaret in St. Honory street, and there inquire for him, which
Monsr. Molineaux promised to do. Villeneuf in the mean time, goes to his
Comrades and tells them that at such a time, he was to bring him a sum of money
for his security, naming when and where, which was the same time and place he
thought they would find the Gentleman, praying them to meet him at that time
there. This done Villain-enough trips off and went for Rouan, where he
imbarques himself for Middleburg, having got 800. and od Pistols to bear his
charges thither.

Monsr. Molineaux whom he had left behind beginning too late to distrust the
Cheat, resolves with himself to go out and see if he could hear of Villeneuf,
but the Landlord, seeing him offer to go forth, takes him by the shoulder and
bad him pay before he went, which he was fain to do. Coming to the House where
Villeneuf had appointed him, he inquired for him: but not hearing of him, and
he now waited a good while for him, began to distrust the matter, and at last
makes his mind known to the Landlady of the House; who imparted the matter to
her Husband, her Husband to other Friends then in the House, who all concluded
it to be a Cheat. Whilst they were busy in talking, comes the Fellow who had
played the Officer, and five or six of the gang with him, and asked for
Villeneuf. The Landlady knew that was the name of the Bail, and prayed them to
go up to him above stairs, which they did, but entering the Room they found that
they had got a wrong Sow by the tail, and would have run out again, but the Man
of the House shut to the street door, and would not suffer them; till having
sent for an Officer, they were apprehended, and committed to Prison, where they
remained till they received their Trial in the criminal Chamber. The
Ringleader himself had both his ears cut off, and burned in the shoulder with
a Flower de Luce. The rest only scourged a little, except two which had been
before convicted of enormous crimes in Picardy, were sent to Marseilles to tug
at the Oars.

Diomedes now arrived at Middleburg durst not go for Amsterdam before he had
heard how squares went there, and whether Mr. vander Ha -- was recovered: He
therefore sent to a trusty Friend of his to inquire for him: who sent him word
that the wound, though at first judged mortal, was well cured, and that there
was no danger of recidivation; Upon this his Rogueship returns for Amsterdam,
without fear of such courses as his Creditors which he had so balk'd would
take, so soon as they had notice of his arrival, which indeed would have fallen
out sour enough if it had not just happened to be in the Vacation time; However
when the Vacation was done they began to ba^^ him like a Bear at the stake,
till he was fain to make his escape, as shall be hereafter said.

After he had been a day or two in Amste^dam, he went to visit an old friend he
had at Haarlem, and with one to give him a Dun. But hardly was he got out of
the Gates, before he was espied by a Mercer, who had about three years before
sold him to the value of 800. gild. in Silks and Tissue, which money he could
never get. This Gentleman seeing Diomedes posted after him as fast as he could,
taking two friends along with him who were well mounted, and just then upon a
journey for Flanders, for which reason the Mercer was to convoy them a part of
the way. So soon as Diomedes with the passage Boat arrives at Haarlem, the
Mercer follows him to see where he would go in, and there arrested him. He now
under arrest, knew not any evasion, but was fain to pay down the money which
was almost the last of his Gold, which he brought with him from Paris. This
done he was set free again, and the Mercer glad to get his money went with his
company to Leyden, where he took his leave of them.

Diomedes in the mean while, goes to his Debtor, whom he found not at home, and
was fain for that time to be content. But bethinking himself of a sum he had
owing him at Amersfoort, he betakes himself thither.

Coming into a certain Village near the City he takes up his lodging there, for
he having once played a foul Trick at Amersfoort, durst not venture himself in
the Town, but sent a note to the Person who ought him the money, praying to
speak with him. The man received his Letter, sent him answer that he would
come, as the day following he did, being come Diomedes prays him that he would
please to pay the money: But the man who was not in a capacity to pay it,
prayed him, to have patience 14 days and he would pay him the most part of the
sum. Diomedes seemed very unwilling, but knowing that he durst not sue him,
because of the bad circumstances he was under, which, if he had made the lest
stir or appearance would have turned to mischief; and on the other hand, was
sensible how cases stood at home, resolves to content himself with his promise,
and spend that time in the Village. He called briskly for wine and was attended
after the best manner, till his money was up. When the 14 days were expired, he
sends to his Debtor at Amersfoort who prayed him to stay a week longer for his
money, and he would faithfully pay him all, giving him some likely and probable
reasons, whence he might gather that there was some apparency of reality in the
man. Diomedes, though sore against his will, was fain to take all in good part,
for the aforesaid reasons, and when the time came about, he sends again but
word was brought him that his Debtor was marched of and had taken all his
movables with him, which so vexed Diomedes, that he was ready to hang himself,
that he should be so chouc'd with the man, and besides his tedious journey; to
run himself into debt at his Lodging. Every time Diomedes rose from Table, his
Landlady looked for her money; who seeing nothing come but a few airy Castles,
at last assumed the boldness to ask him when he thought to pay her, Diomedes
told her that the next day he would receive some money for a bargain of Wine he
had sold to a Vintner, and upon the receipt of that money he would pay her. She
distrusting, the rather because he sent and received several Letters, to and
from Amersfoort, contented her self with that answer. The next day, the
Landlady perceiving him to deal in Wine, prayed him to show her the way to
purify Claret; Diomedes gives her some instructions in writing, which he
protested cost himself a great deal of money in France. He told her besides
that he had a way of making one Pipe or Vessel yield two sorts of Wine; as by
example, If it be a Hogshead of white Wine that it would run both white and
claret from the same Vessel, at two several Cocks, as distinct and different
both in taste and color, as if it were two sorts of Wine. The Landlady prays
him to teach her that art, saying that she was a poor woman, and burdened with
a charge of children, and by her late Husbands negligence brought into so much
debt, as she was never able to pay. Diomedes, at first seemed to scruple,
saying, it was a mystery that only another besides himself in all the 17.
Provinces knew: However, said he, I shall tell you on condition that you will
swear upon your honesty never to reveal it. This she promised to do, and told
him that she would reckon him the Center of her happiness ever after Well,
quoth Diomedes, Then at night we will try it, at what time you shall send your
Maid of an errand, and we in the mean while will get all things in a readiness.
The evening being come, The Landlady sends out the Maid on a sleevless errand,
which she thought would cost her an hour or two at lest; Diomedes provides
himself with an auger to pierce the Cask, and a paper or two of Powders, which
must be the Ingredients, and so calling his Landlady into the Cellar falls a
boring: when he had bored one hole, he prayed the Woman to set her thumb to it
till he had bored another, which when he had done, cries out, Good lack a day,
what have I forgot? the main Ingredient I have left some where in my Chamber,
which is the first that I must use, and so prayed the Landlady to stop the
other hole so long with her other thumb which she did. Diomedes seeing her so
hard engaged at stopping, marches softly up stairs into his Chamber, takes his
Port-mantle, and ruminating the House finds a Bag of money which was left to
the care of the Landlady by a Butcher who was come to buy Cattle at the
Beast-market, and so trips off. The Landlady being thus employed waited a while
with patience till she grew weary, begins to cry out, Where are you, Sir, if
you stay much longer, the Maid will come. But no answer was made, she then
calls out again, a second and a third time, still receiving no answer;
whereupon she began to smell a Cheat, and fain would she go to see for him but
could not leave the Cask: and in this posture she was fain to stay till her
Maid comes home, who wondered to see her Mistress fast to the Cask, asked her,
what was the matter? Prithee Nan says the old Woman, set your thumbs to these
two holes, till I go above; The Maid relieves the Mistress, and the Mistress
runs in all have up stairs, to see for her Guest, but entering his room, finds
him not, and going into another, sees her Linen and other Goods all on a heap
together, cries out with a lamentable voice, Thieves, Thieves, I am undon, I am
robbed, I am undon, all I have in the world is stole. The Maid hearing her say
so, forgets her self and in all have runs up also, to see, if her new Petticoat
and Linen were not stole likewise. The Woman runs up and down the House like
one distracted, the more when she mist the Butchers money, and the Maid, out in
all have to call in the Neighbors, who understanding the business got an able
fellow or two to run after Diomedes, who by that time was far enough out of
their reach.

About three days after Diomedes arrives it Utrecht, it being then Horse-Fair,
takes up his Lodging at an eminent Inn, not far from the Cathedral Church, and
met accidentally with a young Gentleman who was a Canonic, or Dom Here of that
Place, and come thither to receive his annual Prebend. When they sat together
at supper Diomedes insi^uated himself into his acquaintance, and at last came
to sound his concerns. The next day the Gentleman prays Diomedes to accompany
him to the Fair, and (since two heads are always better then one) desired his
help and judgment about a Horse. Diomedes to show that he was a man of
breeding, could not be so uncivil as to deny him and so accordingly they went
together. After they had viewed the Fair well, the Dom-Heer, spies one to which
he took a singular liking, being both of a neat shape before and behind, and
likewise an excellent ambler. The Horse he bought paying to the value of 45.
pound sterling. for him, and ordered him to be brought to the Inn, where he lay,
and returns with Diomedes home, where by that time he came, the Horse was
brought, and set up in the stable. The next day the Gentleman asks Diomedes if
he would break his fast with him, to which he easily assented; and when they
had done, called for a reckoning, the Dom-Heer sadles his Gelding and makes
himself ready for a journey. Diomedes seeing him lay on a heavy Port-mantle
behind him, thought it more than a venial offense to loose such a considerable
booty, told him he would bear him company part of the way, if he would please
to have the patience so long till he had hired a Horse, willing rather to ride,
having such a civil Gentleman for his Fellow-traveller, than to sit in the
Passage-boat such fair weather among a company of old wives. The Canonic was
glad to have his fellowship, I told him he would stay for him, Diomedes
immediately goes to a Hackney stable; where he, with the recommendation of the
Landlord, hires an old Jade that could hardly trail her legs after her. This
done they both mount, and so soon as they were got out of the Town, the
Dom-Heer new phangled of his purchase, rides out to try his Gelding, which
done, he prays Diomedes to dismount, and try him, which he also did, and let
the Dom-Heer ride so long on his old Hackney. Diomedes now mounted on the
Gelding rides a good way forward, and honestly returns again, and so a second
time a little further, returning likewise. The Gentleman taking more delight to
see another ride his Horse than himself, prays him to ride off again, which he
did, and that so far that he never saw him since.

Diomedes after he had left his Companion and provided himself, of a good horse
and money enough was resolved to take a turn up toward Aix la Chapel and
Cologn, and accordingly went through Brabant, where he played some notable
Pranks, one whereof was thus.

Coming into Lovain, he took up his lodging at the, King of Spain (one of the
best Inns in the Town) where being allighted they brought his Gelding into the
stable. There happening to be at that time a Colonel who had long served under
the famous Mont^cu^ul^: This Colonel viewing well the horse of Diomedes, and
taking a singular fancy for him; asked him if he was willing to sell him.
Diomedes seemed to be unwilling, saying, that the Rijngraaf by recommendation
of a Gentleman had a great mind to see him, and herefore was not willing to
part with him, unless upon very good Conditions, seeing he was sure to have his
Price for him. These words made the Colonel the more eager to buy him, praying
Diomedes to set a Price and see if they could agree. Diomedes asks, 350
Pata^oons. The Colonel told him that was a price he thought much too high, and
willed him therefore to be more reasonable. He prays the Colonel if he had a
mind to try him, he should not think that too dear, wherefore he prays the
Ostler to ride him out, which he did. Now said Diomedes, do you think the Price
too high, believe me I am sorry that I propounded not a higher: I make no
question but I shall make more money of him when I come at the Campaign, Sir
(replies the Colonel) I am satisfied as to the Horse, but as touching the
Price, I think much to give so great a Sum and therefore if you are not willing
to give him for less I presume it will be no bargain with us. Well Sir (said
Diomedes) There^ no great harm done, you have your Money, and I have my Horse;
and with that bids the Ostler set him up, and rub him well, etc. which he did,
Diomedes returns with the Colonel to their Inn, where after supper they agreed
for the Horse, the Colonel pays him 300 Rix-dollars in Gold for him, and was
well satisfied with his purchase. The next morning, so soon as the Gates were
open, Diomedes goes out to the Stable without once reckoning with his hoste^s
and demands his Horse of the Ostler which he had sold and already received
Money for. The Ostler neither knowing nor mistrusting any thing to the
contrary, but that it was his own Horse, delivers him without any scruple.
Lebechea being now furnished with Money as well as with a Horse, thought it his
best way to return toward Holland, and accordingly taking Machlin by the way,
posts for An^wer^, where coming to the Goos Inn upon the Market, he meets with
the Marquis of P -- to whom he sold his Horse for the same price, and imbarqued
himself aboard the Schuyt for Dort, and so forward to Amsterdam, leaving the
Marquis and Colonel who were near kinsmen to divide the Horse or dispute their
Right.

Being now returned for Amsterdam he remained some time there unknown to his
Creditors who lo^ged greedily to hear of his Arrival, and for many days
together ^anging by night through the Town with his Cloak mussled about his ears,
he was at last discerned by a neighbor of his, whom he had formerly served a
dirty trick. This Person being a Broker and thence very popular, and a man of
universal acquaintance, went and signified his arrival to every one he knew to
be any way interrested in him, upon which notice they came every day clustring
delivering him Reckonings; as also in the street, for so soon as he thought
that most, or all of his Creditors had heard of his arrival he chused rather to
hazard his Person abroad than to loose his accustomed Recreations and
Divertisements. Every day that the kind Heavens bestowed upon the World, was
our Merchant pesterd with Duns. Now comes the Mercer, Draper, Tailor,
Embroyderer, Habe^dasher, then comes the Mason, Carpenter, Smith, Painter,
Carver, and Glazier, another, or perhaps the same day comes the Butcher,
Poulterer, Fishmonger and Baker with Bills as Woodcocks. Nay the vast expenses
which he had vainly thrown away in repairing his Country house, after his own
particular fancy, did far surmount the money he purchased it for, and than it
was really worth. Besides this came every day those persons which he had
cheated, Leopoldus from the Hague, the Vintner of Leyden, the Ry-merchant, the
Ship-Carpenter of Amsterdam, Mordechai the Jew, and the Wood-monger, these
coming-constantly to give attendance and wait upon his Knaveship, fell now and
then into discourse together, and so summed up his Roguery, and some of those
so concerned at his unjust dealings that they reviled him in the open street
which caused a great concourse of people and sometimes the Mobile before his
doors: others who were quite worn out of patience, resolved to take a speedy
course, least dallying too long they might come to late, since he had so many
of those Serviteurs every morning at his door.

It happened that some of his Creditors meeting together upon the Exchange,
where they came to speak with him, agreed upon a time when they should come all
together to give him a visit, amongst which was the Painter of whom he had
bought 3200 gl. in Pictures, 3 Tailors, a Mercer, an Upholsterer, an
Embroyderer, and others that wanted their Rent for Cellerage; these coming one
day desired to speak with him; but he, as his custom was, let them know he was
not within, insomuch that they were fain to be content without effecting any
thing at that time: however seeing that they could never find him at home they
swore they would come every day till they received satisfaction, as accordingly
they did, thronging so before the door and in the passage of his house that he
could not go out, and at last forced the Fox out of his hole, where they
delivered each man his account, and prayed him to peruse'em.

On a certain morning came in so many of his Creditors that the entry of his
house was full, which he understanding called in some of the Principle of them
into a Room apart where he opened a Chest of Drawers and showed them several
Baggs of Money and asked what for coin they would be pai'd in; they made
answer, so as he pleased. Well, said he, Gentlemen be content for this time to
go away, and come tomorrow and I shall in the mean time take it into
consideration. With this answer they were fain to depart; but coming the next
day found him still in the same Story: For he ever let them see the Land of
Promise, but would never suffer them to enter into it. These being mostly
Persons of mechanical Professions could not endure any longer to be balked, but
resolved to proceed against him at law, and see if that would be more effectual
than Threats and Flatteries.

Soon after comes Leopoldus from the Hague who had sold him 12000. gl. in
Actions, and the Ship-Carpenter who had pretense of 4666 gl. upon him, the
Corn-Merchant Jerome to whom he was owing 69160 gl, and Mordecai the Jew, who
came in for 82000 gl. more; these all unanimously went and made their Address
to the Upper-Judge, who hearing these various complaints, could not but add
credit to their Demonstrations, they being Persons of that worth, and Gentlemen
of honest Fame; insomuch that these Enormities made Diomedes so black, that the
Officer of Justice could not but take notice of him as a great Criminal as well
for Cheating, Forging of Writings, etc. as for Fighting and Bloodshed, with
many such like abuses: Insomuch that he watched his opportunity to apprehend
him and commit him to custody having already an old claim against him for a
delinquency already mentioned. Diomedes beginning to smell a Ratt, thought good
to pack up his Auls and be gone, taking with him 10000 gild. in Gold and about
36000 gild. in Jewels, which he had to that end bought to supply himself in
time of need: besides 18000 gild. in Money and Jewels which he hid some where
about Haarlem, thinking that if he should prove unfortunate, that might be his
Friend in Extremity. This done lie posts away through Rotterdam and so on for
Middleburg, where he took up his lodging in an Inn, thinking there to rest a
little after a wearisom Journey.

He had with him only one Person to wait upon him, who spoke very good English,
judging him as serviceable upon his intended Journey, which was for England.
His whole purpose he imparts to Harry (for that was his man's name) and what his
resolution was: Harry in the mean time (having acquaintance with Leopold's
Page) writes to him and detects the whole concern; the Page thought it his duty
to intimate the matter to his master, shows him the Letter. Leopold upon this
notice went with all possible speed for Middleburg, where Diomedes lay
windbound, and charges the Praetor or Baliff of the Town with him, who went
instantly with the Dienaers and siezed him, being so drunk that he was not able
to stand; insomuch that they were fain to arrest a Fellow with a wheel-barrow
to carry him along, which after they had first made him fast, they did, being
guarded by hundreds of the Rabble, and an infinite Train of Boys, who were very
inquisitive what the matter was that such a Gallant should be so meanly coached.

Diomedes all this while was not sensible whither they brought him, being so
drunk that he had not the use of his senses. Thus hurried away, he was put into
a Dungeon where having got a little Sleep he awaked; and not knowing any thing
of the matter could not devise where he was got, for all was dark. In this
amazement he began to grope here and there, where still he could feel nothing
but the bare Walls, and looking about him could not see any thing, which made
him doubt whether he were blind, or that it came by the vigorous effects of the
Wine. At last he began to cry out* but the more he cried the worse perplexed he
was, for no answer was made. Thus remaining in a quandary a thousand doubts and
Imaginations possessed his mind, till at length he falls asleep again and so
remained till it was day, at what time he discovered by the light of a little
hole that he was for that time enjoined to take Chamber-air. But all this time
he could hardly persuade him self that the thing was real, but would fain
impose upon his thoughts that he only dreamed, and that it was a mere Fantasy
occasioned from the Threats, of those he had gulled at Amsterdam. This
continued for some time till at last he saw clearly there was no deception in
the case, but that he was surely fast. His negligence he relented now more than
his Actions, which were the occasion of this his misery, and the loss of his
money vexed him more than that of his Reputation: but seeing that Repentance
was now an hour too late, and all his complaints to no purpose, he begins to
hunt out for a place to make his escape by. After much*^eeking he espied a hole
which was very high, and thwarted with massy grates, so that it was impossible
for him to come out that way: he therefore began to examine his Pockets to see
if he had money enough to bribe the Jailer or Turn-key, and so that way to give
them the slip, but he found they had taken away almost all the money he had
about him, only the Jewels they had left him which were stitchd up in his
Drawers. These he offered the Jaylors man that brought him meat; but he
considering that his place was of more consideration than the Jewels (according
to all the judgment he had) and the Penalty greater than both, he durst not
hearken to him lest he should be tempted, insomuch that Diomedes grew desperate
of ever coming out that way, and was fain to comfort himself on the best wise
he could and with hopes of Mercy.

After a few days he came to Trial, and found that his Creditors were all
acquainted with his Condition, and had made instance to have him brought to
Amsterdam, amongst whom the Head-Officer of that City principally appeared,
that there he might receive his condign punishment according to the enormous
feats he had committed there, and therefore most fitting there to be a public
Example. Diomedes seeing no sufficient evidence, in Court, denies all, and was
thereupon remanded back to prison till further and clearer proof could be made,
by Witnesses of Affidavits from Amsterdam. Being now secured the second time,
his greatest fear was that those of Amsterdam would prevail in their Demands,
and get him thither, where he being palpably guilty of so many enormities would
hardly come off with his life, or that perhaps coming to have a second hearing,
cases would appear so dirty that he might for better security be clapped into
shakles, and have a pair of Iron garters bestowed upon him; resolved therefore
to loose no time or opportunity, nor spare for pains to get out of his cage:
and in order thereto sounds the Privy, which he found to his purpose, and in
the dead time of the night, began to dive where he was almost smothered in
Filth, and having traveled so far till he met with the common shore could not
see which way to go, nor meet with any soul to show him the way. Many
Cross-pipes and conveyances he found, but either he could not find an Entry, or
else the mussin too narrow to receive his body: however, the hardest Invention
is acquirable, and nothing so difficult, but may be accomplished by Time,
Patience and Industry. He hearing a great noise, which he perceived might be
about 20 steps behind him, and making toward the place it was warm water which
he presumed some had thrown down the house of Office, to purge it, and finding
the pipe of a sufficient wideness, endeavored to force himself through. After
a long pinching and squeesing of his body, in he goes, and found it ever wider
and wider till he got up so high that he could teach the seat, where groping to
find the hole, feeled a pair of warm Buttocks, which happened to be a
Gentlewoman, who was newly set. The Gentlewoman feeling, some body finger her
Flesh behind, and not dreaming of our subterranean Passenger, shrieks out and
ran away in all have, hardly daring to look behind her.

Our Pioneer seeing the Lady in such a fright, cried out; Madam, please to
excuse me that in stead of handling your Breaosts I have through a mistake
seized upon your Buttocks: Neither think that I come to do you any harm, for I
am an honest man, and under hopes of Privacy and Concealment am come to seek
protection under your Roof, which I hope after a full hearing of my deplorable
state your Ladyship will vouchsase to grant me.

The Gentlewoman who at first was astonished, was content to dispense with so
much time as to give him a hearing, he relating almost the whole passage, ^ow
he was an eminent Merchant in Amsterdam and was upon his Journey for England,
but by some malicious and ill-affected persons seized and accused of what he
was never guilty, and therefore being clapped up in Prison, was fain to do what
none would leave undone, that is tender of his Life, and therefore hoped that
the Lady would neither think it strange nor take it ill out, but rather pity
his sad Condition, etc. These and many other Arguments persuaded the Lady to
compassion, and to give credit to what he said, the more by reason of his rich
habit and embroidered coat, which was circumstance enough for a Credulous woman
to believe all he said was real, and not barely verbal. In sum the Gentlewoman
lent him a shift and other clothing to cover himself, leaving him by himself
in the yard, and showed him the Pump where he made himself clean, she in the
mean time looking through the window and seeing his well proportioned body, began
to be enamoured with his Person, and had hardly the Patience to wait his
coming, to examine him a little further. After he had made clean his body, he
also washed his clothes in the best wi^e he could, and hung them up to dry:
which done he steps into the Parlour to give the Lady thanks for the great
civility she had shown him which he did with so much grace and Eloquence that
the Lady resolved that night not to go to bed, but to discourse him about
affairs, etc. After he had warmed him a little she took him, and (according to
the manner of the Country) showed him all the house round, where she let him
see much costly Furniture, besides her Plate Jewels and Clothes: having done
above stairs, she brought him below to see her Shop, which standing in the best
place of the City was furnished with all sorts of rich Laces, Points, and fine
Linen, besides another shop next to it* divided from the former only by a
small Partition* this was furnished with all sorts of Silks, flow'red, striped
and plain, besides many rich Indian Gowns, ready made, whereof she took one,
and desired him to put on, lest he should get cold. Madam, replies he, Your
courtesy is not to be paraleld, whereof, this is a notable instance, your
Ladyships gracious Favors already heaped upon me denote the real worth of the
Interior habit of your Mind, as well as your Angelio^l Countenance and form to
evidence the completeness and perfection of your external Person. But, Madam,
it is not likely, or may it in any wise be deemed possible, that I should take
cold, so long as I am within the Circle of your sun-like beauty, where I could
be heartily content to live and die. Mrs. Olympia, (for that was the
Gentlewomans name) was not much behind him, for a Complement, but the greatest
part of their Communication, as we have in some part forgot, and as it is
otherwise not material, and consequently not necessary to our present purpose I
shall wave. But only by way of abridgment, it may suffice to tell you that
before many hours were spent they made an insubid vow, plighted their Tro^h
together in the presence of Heaven, and swore a perpetual fidelity and
constancy of mind. This rash promise they ratified by many kis^es and mutual
embraces of each other, she thinking her self at worst to have a personable
man, whether all other appendencies were as he had represented them, or no; and
he on the other hand in hope of bet^ering his Estate, by imbarquing himself on
a firm-built bottom and substantial shopkeeper as appeared by what he had
already seen. Diomedes seeing her so fast linked to him, as well by that
irrevocable and inviolable engagement which they had reciprocally
counterchanged, as also by the great inclination he could observe she had
toward his Person, thought it best by degrees to detect the naked truth to
her, rather than conceal it any longer.

He began first to relate a mixed story of Truth and Lies, as my Grandmother
used to give me a medicine against worms, which of its self, was bitter, she
was wont to sweeten the Cup about the edges with honey, or temper it with sugar
to make it more palatable. First he tells her how that of his kind nature he
had been surety for some of his Relations, and upon their Failing he was fain
to pay their Debts; and at such and such times he had losses by sea, and bad
Debtors, insomuch that he had been frequently in Extremities, which had
compelled him to do some things which his good Conscience would not dispense
with, and in sum he had paid 15. times his real Estate upon such unfortunate
Occasions, and was at that instant Debtor in 260000 gild. and had on the
contrary Credit 220000 gild. which he did not doubt but one Adventure or two
would make good, and assopiate the differences which lay between him and
injured Persons.

This can did Confession did not in the lest startle the constant Olympia, who
had rather disburse a greater sum, than to break squares with him, who had
already insinuated himself so ^ar into her Breast that for better or worse she
was resolved to imbarque her self with him into what Ease or Trouble the Fates
should involve him in, and promised him to make good his Accounts, in case he
would deliver the remnant of his Capital into her hand. To this Diomedes freely
assents, and so the Troth was mutually sealed and confirmed on both sides with
many Expressions and Protestations of stabilily.

The day approaching, our Terrae filius, having regard to his security
consulted with his new Mistress, what course was to be taken for the point of
Safety: and in sum it was thought advisable to be jogging before break of day
to a place, which she had appointed him, and to commit his affairs into the
hand of some trusty Solicitor, or other, who might make the streets passable
for his Worship.

The next morning being come, the Jailer opens the Prison door misses Diomedes,
which startled him so that he was ready to kill himself, or the first person
that came nigh him; yet bethinking that it was a vanity to lay violent hands
upon himself, he imparted the matter to his wife, who presses upon him to
acquaint the Officers of Justice with the whole Affair, and at last persuaded
him to do it, upon which a scrutiny was made, and Messengers sent abroad with a
Pouvoir to apprehend him, if within the Jurisdiction of the Province of
Zeeland; But when he could not be heard of, the Committee for criminal affairs
had a debate among themselves the Result whereof was, That the Jailer himself
should be shut up and secured, in his place, suspecting that he had been bribed
or corrupted by money, or fair Promises, since it could not be made appear that
he had broke any way out, the Walls, Doors, Windows, Roof and Floor being all
^irm, without any breach: and on this wise continued the innocent Jailour, till
a Person nominated by Diomedes, appeared and offered full payment to all his
Creditors, who rested satisfied; only the Schout of Amsterdam, who made a large
Demand, upon the criminal score; however was in process of time satisfied with
a handsome sum of money, and gave Diomedes liberty to appear abroad, and
negotiate his affairs wheresoever his concerns then lay.

After they had been a while married Diomedes began to press hard upon her to
get her to remove for Amsterdam, which she for her own part was very inclinable
to, but as Old women are no more willing to leave the Place they have lived in
all their life time, than they are willing to leave the World; so her mother
Livia was as far from consenting to leave Middleburg, as she was free to their
wedding. But however she was forced to yield to their humor, and assent to
their marriage though sore against her Will, since the greatest part of
Olympia's Estate came to her by a former husband, who bequeathed her 80000
gild. by Testament, dying but 10 days after the Marriage and about 6 months
before she married with our Merchant. Thus breaking up at Middleburg she
removes shop, Goods, and all to Amsterdam. Her mother also followed, and hired
a house not far from her son in Law, thinking to comfort her self the remainder
of her Life with the Company of her only Daughter.

That which is bred in the bone will never out of the Flesh, a Tree that grows
crooked when young cannot be bent when it grows old and sturdy. Diomedes who
was so addicted to bas^ and indirect dealings and an irregular course of Trade
from the very Craddle could not forget his old Customs and inclinations, no
more than Aesops Cat, which was by Venus transformed into a beautiful Lady,
but being married and on her Nuptial Bed with her Bridegroom about a
delightsome Exercise, accidentally spies a Mouse run over the Floor, immediately
jumps out of the Bed, and after the mouse; at which Venus was so enraged that
she transformed her into her former shape again, The sequel of my story may
supply the place of a Moral. Diomedes not content with such a fair Condition,
and a well settled state having at once cleared himself almost of all claims
against him, got a good Estate and Married with a fair and virtuous
Gentlewoman: but finding him in a new way of Trade begins to try practices that
way, and makes false measures, a true and a false yard, the true to show upon
examination, and the false for daily use in the shop. This way dured not very
long, for his new Customers soon found one his base doings and consequently
went else where to market, which he perceiving took the matter into
consideration, and resolved to try some other way before it was too late, and
in order thereto, insinuates himself into the ^avour of the Factors of the East
and West India Companies, and that so fa^ that he had their Custom for goods,
and the opportunity to deliver a considerable quantity of Linen, and withal
received a round sum of money from both the Companies.

Not long after came those two Gentlemen that had been security at Rotterdam
for his Country house, desiring either that he would pay the remainder, or
quit them of their Engagement. Olympia who knew nothing to the contrary but
that all was paid, and now hearing those un welcome Tidings was mainly altered,
having already paid so much money for him, upon so many occasions. Diomedes,
not willing to suffer any affront or shame for so small a sum, promised to
follow them in a day or two, and so to pay them in full, with which they being
satisfied for that time, took their leaves of him. Within 3 days Diomedes sets
forward on his Journey, and in the Passage-boat between Amsterdam and Haarlem
meets with a young Gentlewoman with whom he made Acquaintance, and after a
little discourse began to be very free with her, and inquisitive about her
dwelling and Condition, and whether she was Maid, Wife, or Widow, to which she
answered that she was unmarried and never had a husband, and that her Residence
was at Haarlem, although shortly after she casually dropped out that her husband
had lay 3 years sick of a Quartan Ague: From which Contradiction Diomedes
observed that she was a Gamester, and consequently offered his service, which
without many Ceremonies she accepted. When they were come to Haarlem, she
brough^ him into a noted Inn in that Town, whence he concluded that she had no
fast dwelling there. This being before noon Diomedes bespeaks a dinner where he
treated his Miss very splendidly, having before hand concluded to pass for man
and wife. After dinner they took a walk into the Woods, where they spent the
Afternoon, and in the Evening return to Haarlem. After supper he asked the
Landlord if their Bed was ready; answer was made, Yes, first asking them if
they were man and wife, or that they must have two several Chambers, they both
answered that they needed but one. The fore part of the night they spent in
amorous delights, but toward the morning Diomedes falls fast asleep, which she
observing, rose up very softly, and cuts off the Plate buttons of his coat,
goes softly down stairs, and prays the Landlord to show her an Apothecary,
pretending her husband was very sick and had not slept all the night: Madam,
said the Landlord, If you have any occasion at the' Pothecaries I shall send my
Maid, The Gentlewoman made answer that she only wanted a lit^e Diacodium or
Opium to provoke sleep: and withal told the Landlord that her husband was
sometimes troubled with a Frenzy or a lightness in the head, and was used at
such times to talk idly, and she was afraid that he would have one of his
Fitts if he should not get a little rest.

The Landlord sends the Maid with these directions who quickly returns. The
Gentlewoman upon that goes softly up stairs, as if she would give it him in,
and finding him still fast asleep, did not tarry any longer above than to take
away suspicion of the matter. Coming down stairs prays the Landlord that if
they had any business above stairs in any other Room, to make as little noise as
they could, and with one desires him to deliver her the money her husband had
give^ him to lock up, for that she must go and pay it that morning according to
promise. The Landlord not in the least suspecting any thing, freely gave it
her. She now having got so rich a Booty marches off, and was never heard of
since.

About II a clock Diomedes awakes and missing his Darling was afraid of what
he afterward to his sorrow found true. So soon as the Landlord hears him
awake, he goes up and opens the door very softly, and sees Diomedes in a raging
fit, looking upon his Coat, which was bereaved of Buttons. The Landlord asks
him, how he did? and how he had rested that night? Never the better for you,
you Rascal. (replies he) What is the meaning of this? See here: and with that
shows him the Coat. The Landlady hearing him stamp and make a noise, ran up
stairs, asks her husband, what was the matter? Why Poor man! said he, he has
been a pulling off the Buttons from his Coat you may see what a sad thing it is
for a man to be deprived of his senses. You D^g, replies Diomedes, Do You take me
for a Mad man? O pray Sir, says the host, have Patience, and take a little
rest, I hope it will shortly go over. What a pox do you mean? says Diomedes, what
do you take me for drunk or mad Now, now, quoth the Landlord, It Is the Physic,
Sir, that works in your head' twill quickly go over. Work me no Working says
he, you rogue, who has stole my Buttons? and with that reaches for his sword,
which the Landlord seeing ran out of the Room as fast as he could drive, slaps
to the door after him, and down stairs after his wife but she not so quick as
her husband, down she tumbles and he upon her, and with the fall put her Arm
out of joint. The Landlord thus perplexed was almost besides himself, and the
Woman not a whit better. After he had gathered his senses together again, he
bethought himself to send for a Bone-setter for his wife, in the first place,
fearing her arm was really broke, and in the next place to send for 2 or 3
stouthearted men to enter the Room where Diomedes lay all the while a thundering
and pelting the stools about the Chamber. When the Champions were come together
the Landlord up and told them all the story; How that a Gentleman and his Lady
was come there the night before, and that the Gentlewoman her self was gone out
to pay some moneys in the Town, and had left him there, being possessed with a
Frenzy which he was troubled with at certain times of Moon, etc. and that he
had therefore sent to desire their help and advice. After the Consult was ended
they went up with joint courage to visit this Bedlamite, where opening the Door
found him not, for he had jumped out at a Window; which they seeing open,
gathered thence that he was gone out at a back-street, so that they made no
great search for him, but coming down stairs, they meet Diomedes coming in with
the Substitute Schout, [or Constable] who immediately taxed the Landlord with
very grievous Crimes, which being debated pro and contra they began to
understand each other better than they did before. Diomedes impatient of this
tedious dispute, demands the money he have him to lay up; Why, replies the
Landlord* Your Wife has taken it with her and is gone to pay it. Hey day! cries
Diomedes, what, ever worse and worse, The Woman I never see with my eyes
before, (...) is none of my wife. That is no fault of mine, quoth the Landlord,
you did not only tell me she was your Wife, but lay with her, and upon that
score I must justify my self, she has the Money. This enraged Diomedes worse
than before: but the Officer hea^ing of their lying together, would have seized
his person suspecting that he was a married man (which Justice takes more
notice of than otherwise) and Diomedes fearing that if he dallied there long,
that he might be secured till he should evidence the Contrary, which he could
not do, and so bring himself into public shame, besides a round some of money
at best, to satisfy Justice, which would but be Loss upon Loss; he therefore to
prove the worst steals softly out, under color as if he would go se^k for his
Darling. And betakes himself in all have for Amsterdam, thinking one time or
another to revenge this injury.

Olympia seeing her blessed Jewel come in such a fashion home, without ever a
button on his coat, or his sword, which he was fain to pawn by the way to bear
his expenses, was not a little altered: but he to palliate the truth of the
matter (as his old custom was) told her that missing the Boat between Haarlem
and Leyden, he was fain to go a foo^, where coming at the Downs he was
assailed by 3 or 4 Russians all masked, who immediately clapped a pistol to his
breast and bad him deliver, which he to save his life was fain to do, nor yet
were they contented so, but must disarm him, and cut the buttons off his Coat.
Olympia was not easily induced to believe this his story, but after a little
chiding with him was forced to put all up in good part.

Diomedes was not willing to leave the matter, so but urges her anew, to give
him 6000 gild. more, which she would in no wi^e consent to, till by his
continual Importunateness he had almost harassed her out of her life, that she
was fain to give it him, upon promise of being a better husband.

Having got the money he departs for Rotterdam, and there arriving he paid the
sum. and returns back again for Amsterdam, where he was as welcome as
Quarter-day to a Tenant that has no money to pay his Landlord: For so soon as
he arrived he found Olympia very pensiv and melancholic, that she would not
give him a word; which he observing thought some way or other, to remedy the
matter, by making of one good bargain or other.

But amids all these hopes he received Letters from Spain that the Ship which
he had sent out upon a hopeful voyage was cast away on the height of Cabo
Verdo, which news reduced him to despair, insomuch that he continually ran from
one Tavern to another, and misspent his time, that with an incessant consumption
of money made his wife in a worse humor than before.

It happened not long after that he met with an expert Gamester at Backgammon
who allured him to play a Game with him to pass away the time. Diomedes who in
his days had now and then shaken his arm, was easily moved to it; so to it they
went; where from Shillings they proceeded to Ducatoons, and from Ducatoons to
Ducats, Diomedes in the mean time holding the board eaven with his Antagonist,
which was done by subtility to make Diomedes the more easily induced to venture
upon greater sums. At last it came up to 25 gild. (or 50 sh.) a throw, so that
Diomedes came off at night with 1300 gild. loss. And being willing to go home,
his Party takes him by the shoulder and would not let him stir out of the
place till he had given him a Bond under his hand, whereby he acknowled himself
to be indebted so much money to his Party, and thereby firmly binding himself
to pay it upon demand. Diomedes was at first very loath to set his hand to
paper, but seeing no remedy he was forced to it.

The next morning betimes came the Gentleman and demanded his Money of
Diomedes, before his wife was stirring; upon which Diomedes went privately and
stole away the Keys, Olympia not once perceiving, for she was fast asleep, not
having slept the whole night by reason of her husbands staying late out; for
whom she was in continual fear, knowing him to be of a rash and resolute temper
when he had drunk a little more than ordinary. Having now got the Keys he took
out a bag of moneys very clandestinely, pays his Creditor and lays the Keys
where he took them.

Whem Olympia had occasion for some moneys went up into her Chest and found a
great hole in the Cash, falls aboard her husband and called him a thousand
Rogues, which he by all the means he could endeavored to extenuate, but all to
no purpose for he had not the art to tame a Shrew. All the ways he could
possibly think upon he made use of to pacify, and flattered her with promises
of Amendment, and I know not what. Still Olympia rails and curses the day that
ever she saw him, wishing she had been in her Coffin when she sat upon the
house of Office, or that Death had seized upon her Heart, when he seized upon
her Breach, etc. Thus she continued for many days together in this fume, and
would not go to bed with him, no, nor eat in his presence. Long dured this feud
between them although he for his part did all he could to compose the Difference,
which in process of time he accomplished.

The money being now brought to the utmost he began to solicit for more, which
he would raise by exposing some Linen to public sale, which converted into
money, he told her he had a conceit in his head to put them well in stock
again; Olympia was not so rash of belief as he had hopes she would be, before
he made the over tu^e and moved the matter; well knowing it was by no laudable,
but some dishonorable practice.

Day by day he wrought upon her, till he made her weary almost of life, and,
was at last forced to give her Consent: which having obtained, he went to the
Public Saleman [or Out-crier] and delivers him the Goods.

As soon as he had got the moneys, he went to a Merchant who dealt in Linnens
by Wholesale, and told him, that whereas he had bought several Pieces of him,
and not paid for the same, he was come to pay off the Account, according to his
Duty, Sir, replies the Merchant, I know nothing of the matter, pray what is
your name? I shall see in my Journal. My name, said he, is D. de Lebec^ea, you
will find it about 16 or 18 months agon, for to the best of my remembrance it
must be then about. The Merchant turns over his Books but finds no such name
and told him he believed it must be a mistake. Diomedes assures him that it was
no mistake, for he could be positive as to the Goods received, and the sum, but
not to the time, for he had only noted it negligently in his pocket book
without any certain date. Still the merchant declines it, and declared how
unwilling he was to receive moneys which he doubted whether it belonged to him
or no, and that it might probably be some other person, and that the mistake
mightly there. Diomedes assures him on the contrary, saying that certainly he
was the man. Many Arguments were used on both sides, and at last it was brought
to this conclusion, that they should cast a lot, and so end the Difference that
way; which they did, and it fell upon Diomedes to pay the money, upon which he
told him 160 gild. Which he said was the sum, this being don, the Old Merchant
invites Diomedes to a glass of Wine. When they were grown a little merry, they
struck a bargain for 6090 gild. in Linen, whereof he was to tender 1000 gild.
in ready money, and the remainder in 3 months, with which the old Gentleman
was well satisfied, not in the least distrusting any guile in his new Customer,
for that he had already shown himself a well meaning just man. Diomedes having
got the Linen, brought it home and furnished his shop in better manner than it
ever had been before.

Olympia seeing all these Goods brought home was more possessed with fear than
joy suspecting it was brought about by some unjust mean or other, and would at
last prove a bitter bargain. Often times she endeavored to understand from him
whence it came and upon what conditions he had bought it, which nevertheless he
would not let her know. However she never desisted to admonish him of leaving
off his unjust courses, withal telling him what would be the end of it: but
all to little purpose, for he was deaf on that ear: and as Guil and sinister
dealings seldom ever make a man really happy, so it rendered him very
unfortunate, as will appear in these following Relations.

It happened not long after that Diomedes met with a person that every way
suited his drift and humor who was likewise a Blade of Fortune. This Gentleman
desirous to show Diomedes a trick went into North-Holland, where he hired a
Lighter, to go for Amsterdam, and arriving there he applies himself to Diomedes
desiring to buy some Linen, and pretended he came expressly upon that account
from Hoorn, and in case he would use him kindly in what he had occasion for, he
would be a constant Customer to him. Diomedes thereupon promises he would deal
fairly with him, and affoard him as good or better Penny-worths than any
Linnen-Draper in the City, upon which he showed him several sorts of Linen and
rich Silks. In sum he made a bargain with him for several pieces, which he
prayed him that he would help him to Ship, which Diomedes did, Herman (for that
was the Customers name) having given him a Glass of Wine, or two, at last
prevails with him to go down with him to Hoorn where he would pay him the
Money, and crave his Assistance in disposing and ordering of the Shop. Diomedes
not willing to disoblige such a hopeful Cust^mer, went with him, not
distrusting his honesty in the least.

So soon as they were arrived at Hoorn, Diomedes steps with him out of the
Lighter supposing he would bring him to his house and with one pay him his
Money. After they had gone through several streets Harman brings him into an
empty house which he had taken for a year only to that end and purpose. The
house was without any furniture than only a stool or two, an old Table and a
few planks. Entering the house they were welcomed by a Person who was privy to
the matter, whom Diomedes supposed to be his Brother. Diomedes is desired to
sit down and a Glass of Wine is brought fo^th, which after they had drunk twice
or thrice round to the success of the business, the new customer and his
supposed brother dropped out one after another and leaving Diomedes to keep
himself company, mad, all the have they could to get the Lighter which having
got, they set sail, and with a stiff gale presently got out of sight.

Diomedes all this time waits for his Customers, but having sitten above half
an hour, and finding they did not come he began to mistrust some Knavery, and
on a sudden runs up stairs and into every Room in the house, where he saw no
body. After he had ruminated the whole house through, he went in all have to
the Haven where the Lighter came on, which by reason of the many cross streets
and by-lanes they led him through, he had much ado to find: but coming at the very
Place he found the Lighter was gone; upon which in all have he returns back
again to the house and enquires of the Neighbors whose it was, and what his
name was that had taken it, the first they told him, but for the last they
could not inform him, for that it was a stranger. At this Diomedes was
startled, and in all have runs to the Landlord, and asks him, Where the Person
lived that had taken his house. The Landlord replied that he knew him not, for
he had never seen him before, whence Diomedes gathered that he was deceived.

He gave order to apprehend such a Person, if he should be seen or appear there
any more, and that notice should be sent him, and upon that returns for
Amsterdam.

As Soon as he was arrived at home and told his Wife the horrible Cheat that was
put upon him she flew into a hot Passion, and complemented him on this wi^e.
Thou Monster of mankind, lying and abominable Varlet, whose drift and sole
delight is pure Villainy, Cheating and Lies. Unreasonable Man! Abominable Rascal
and Plague of Women! How sad and fatal was the hour wherein I first saw thee,
and the day unlucky which joined us so near together. Had the unkind stars
which influenced me to this, hurried me a thousand miles into the Earth, or by
Lightning consumed me to Ashes, then had I been at rest and free from those
horrid and plaguey Vexations which thou do every day afresh inflict upon me by
thy wilful, rash and cursed Actions. Inhuman wretch thou art, how can Heaven
suffer thy accursed self to breath and live thus Vengeance free. All I have
reserved to support me in approaching age (if not prevented with grief) thou
throwest away upon thy lusts, and yet criest thou, Have patience, be Content?
These and many other raving expressions she sent out, which Diomedes (although
sensible that she had reason enough) could not brook: but opposed her, and told
her that it was not a Sham as she took it to be, but if she would either go, or
write to Hoorn, she would be satisfied about it. But all he could persuade or
do, would not move her so much as to take any notice of his words: insomuch
that he was fain to be patient against his will to hear those Thunderclaps;
which continued so long that he resolved to take some enterprise or other in
hand to put himself yet once more into stock.

He sends an old Woman of his acquaintance to a Salesman to buy up a Quakers
Suit, with a plain hat, having (...) small silk Line about it; etc. provides
himself also with a little Collar-band, with Gloves, Shoes, Stockings and all
things else suitable. In this Garb he dresses himself, when Olympia coming into
the Chamber and sees him in such a habit was ready to cry out, Thieves!

At night he went down to the Passage-boat for Rotterdam, where he met with
good company, all looking upon him as a Quaker, or an Anabaptist, and according
to his demeanor simple and upright, he knowing so well how to manage the matter
that he was universally taken for what he counterfeited. He was very observant
in his reasoning to use no barbarous nor superfluous words, but on the contrary
reproved those that did. In the next place he plays the Satyrist against modish
Habits, being not only Pride but Idolatry, whereby every one endeavors to
outvy another, and that only for honourssake bringing in many instances of Holy
Writ for the same; as particularly that of Herod, who gloried so much in the
Pomp and statelines of his Throne in the Eloquence of his Harangue, that he
refused not Divine honor, etc.

After he had done with the Vanity of Ornaments and the Mode-sick Rout, he
began to reprehend the Covetous Generation, laying out the sad and lamentable
effects of Avarice, and the many temptations that they were under who were
addicted to tha^ sin, as Deceit, Hatred, Strife, Envy, Theft, War and Murder,
from this he proceeds to Humility and Contentment the two contrary Virtues
which he painted in their own Colors; and in sum pursued the matter so fairly,
thate very one looked upon him as very strict in his way and Profession,
especially a company of old Wives, who flocked about him as Wasps about a
honey-pot. Thus rambling from Virtues to Vice, and from Vice to Virtues, he
purchased to himself a good esteem of all the Company: and now understanding
that they were not far from Rotterdam he proceeded to the praise and dispraise
of several Callings and Functions according as they were laudable or
discommendable in themselves, and at last began to treat about Merchandise,
which he preferred above all other Vocations which the Sons of Men use,
provided it be carried on and managed with upright and square dealing: and by
some by-words signified as much as that it was his proper calling.

A Merchant then in the Boat that sat directly over against him, asked him, In
what Commodity he chiefly dealt in, he made answer, In Linen and in Grain. The
Gentleman upon that recommended him to a Friend of his at Rotterdam, who had a
good quantity of Grain which by reason it was, as times stood then, very
doubtful which way the market would turn, whether rise or fall he might
probably meet with a good Bargain. This proposal suited well with Diomedes, and
being arrived at Rotterdam went with him to the other Merchants house, who had
about 80 Last (or 160 Tun) in his Garners, which he set at 170 gild the Last,
amounting to about 136000 gild. in all, which Diomedes objected against, saying
it was too high, and prayed him to set a lower price with one word, retaining
to himself a competent Gain. The Merchant swore he could ^ot let it go for
less. Sus! Sus! (quoth Diomedes) swear not, I will believe you the rather by
Yea and Nay, than by an Oath: but, added he, since you have declared by Oath
that you cannot do it for less, I will rather take it, than that you should
violate your Asseverations. In short Diomedes bought the Bargain and went to
his Lodging where having stayed 2 or 3 hours he returns back again to the
Merchants house, with I know not what excuse, prays him that he would be so
kind as to let his Cashier go along with him to Sardam, to receive the Money
pretending to live there. The Merchant gives his consent and making himself
ready by that time the Grain was shipped, and the Vessel ready to set ^ail, he
received a letter from a Camrade of Diomedes, who was made privy to the matter,
and therefore came a day before Diomedes to Rotterdam. The Contents thereof was
after this manner.

SIR,
UNderstanding you have met with a good Customer for your Grain, being a Person
with whose Father I have formerly dealt; I presume to request the favor of you
that you would please to take the pains and come to the Seahorse, that I may
show him some I have, which to do you will oblige him, who is,

SIR, Your Obedient Servt. Albert van Aken.


There Merchant having received this Letter shows it to Diomedes who seemed as
if he were glad at the news and therefore prayed Arond (for that was the
Merchants name) to go with him a little. Arond, replies that he knew not the
Person: How, quoth Diomedes, do you not know him, and he knows you so well?
Come, I shall find him very well. Upon this Arond goes with him, both following
the Messenger that brought the Letter, where instead of going to the Garner, he
led them out of the Town to a Tavern, notedly infamous; for that the Man
himself was a notorious Rogue, the Wife a Whore, and the Daughter one that had
been several times publicly whipped upon the Scaffold. The Master of the house
was before hand bribed to be assistant under some golden promises, and
immediately called out, A Rogue, A Rogue, and with that bolts the Door fast.
Immediately upon this sudden outcry, Diomedes rushes in, who had all this time
held himself so sincere and Pious, taking a rope, ties him hand and foot, and
put a Gag between his teeth, which done they drew the door to, and left him
upon the floor neither able to cry out nor move. Diomedes in the mean while
whispers the Messenger in the Ear, that he should acquaint the Shipmaster how
that they intended to go through Land to Sardam, and that he should not neglect
to fall down with the Tide, having a very fair wind and good weather, The man
runs away and dispatches his errand; Diomedes also follows him accompanied with
the Maid or Daughter, who had order from her Father to go down with Diomedes
(for they had promised that the host should have a share in the Purchase)
Diomedes seeing himself accompanied with the Wench had no great liking to it;
and thereupon pretends to have forgot something in the Town, desires the Maid
go on softly and he would overtake her, going in the mean time through another
street and was brought aboard the Vessel which had just set sail, and told the
Master that he had altered his resolution and left his Affairs to Monsr. Arond
to direct in his absence, and that Arond would come over Land. Thus having a
brisk Gale they fell down with the Tide and came in a short time to Sardam,
where he took out the Grain into Lighters, and so away for Freezland where he
reshipt it again for Amsterdam, and there by the help of a Broker met with a
speedy market; and received 11293 guld. for the whole purchase, the Goods being
very much damnified by Leckage, etc. and the Price mightily fallen.

Olympia seeing Diomedes bring home so much money was in a great perplexity,
for she doubted that he had not got it by fair means the more because that when
he went from home he had disguised himself, however thinking that he had
employed her Money which she had given him at several times in some secret
Merchandise, she took courage, receives the Money into her Custody, and after
disposes of a great part of it in Linen, Silks etc. wherewith she furnishes
her Shop.

Shortly after this enterprise Olympia fell very sick and died, leaving
Diomedes sole heir of all she had in the World. Livia the Mother observing that
Diomedes, since the death of his wife took no more notice of her,
notwithstanding the great Friendship he seemed to manifest toward her, during
the life of her Daughter, which now she found to be no more than a parasitical
trick to cully his wife, and to trust the more to his benignity, if she
bequeathed all to him upon her death. She resolves therefore upon a project to
make her have more respect from him than with plain dealing she was likely to
acquire, well knowing his ingratitude was like that of an Asses foal, when it
has sucked so long till it be full, turns about and kicks the Dam.

Every day she caressed Diomedes till she saw him well inclined to continue
friendship and for a mean sum makes an agreement with him for her boarding in
his house, which being mutually agreed upon on both sides she brought in a
great Iron money chest filled with stones and other ponderous materials, which
he supposed to be Money, and knowing her to be old and decrepit, that she was
not likely to live long, and that by making much of her he might be once Master
of that Treasure.

So soon as she perceived that Diomedes was blinded with hopes of Inheritance,
she made a motion, as if she would leave him and go elsewhere to be boarded,
unless Diomedes would renew the Covenant, which should be thus, That he during
the time of her life should give her free Lodging, Diet and other necessaries
so long as she lived, and after the expiration of her Life to inherit her
Estate and Moneys. Diomedes, not willing to let her go now in her old days,
thinking that the Term of her Life according to the course of Nature could not
be, very long; consents to what she proposed, and accordingly a Will was drawn,
the Tenure whereof was, That Diomedes should solely inherit all her goods
whether moveable, or unmovable, Gold, Silver, in Coin or Plate, Jewels,
Movables and Utensils, and in short all that upon her Deathbed she could
properly vendicate or claim as her own. To which was annexed the before
mentioned Conditions as that she should during the Term of her Life have all
necessaries provided her requisite to the sustenance of human bodies, or upon
default of that, or full performance, that then the said Will should be void
and of no effect. This Contract being signed Diomedes on his part neglected not
to caress her with what he could possibly imagine would please her, yet l(...)
not his old course of Life, to wit, Drinking, Whoring, Gaming and Cheating;
which now he could do with more freedom than when the good Olympia was alive.

By some acquaintance or other, he had understood that there was a Convent of
French Dames, who had prostituted themselves for Money, where being once
introduced by his said acquaintance, he took the occasion afterward to go all
alone, and having pitched upon 2 which he took most fancy for, he got them into
a Room apart, where he treated them with whatsoever they had a mind to.

Within an hour after comes in one Monsr. Melletier a German by birth, and
sometime under a Public Character at the Court of Sweden, from a potent Prince
of the Empire, till by a negligent management of his Masters affairs he was
called home, disgraced and detruded out of service. This Gentleman having two
Ladies with him, desired of Diomedes, that he might sit in his Company, to
which Diomedes very easily assented. Being thus admitted, they were very merry
till night, which when come they concluded to go to bed, 3 and 3 in a Room as
they came in together. When Diomedes was got above he presented his service to
his Mistresses to undress them, but they absolutely refused to do it, saying
they could do the turn themselves very well.

When they were all unharnassed and in bed together Diomedes presently found
him self in a mistake, for instead of having entertained two Ladies, all the
day at Table, he found he had treated a couple of beardless Young Men, upon
which he was so surprised that he jumped out of Bed, but one of them held him
fast and prayed him not to be dismayed since there was no great harm done save
that he had misied of his expectation, which he might suppose to be only a
dream. In short they fell into Dialogues with him, and expressed themselves so
plain, that he presently understood of what gang they were, and at last
concluded together to cozen or rob an eminent Mercer, and to consult a mean by
the next morning how to circumvent the Party pitched upon, and upon that
resolution they left off discourse, leaving each other to their repose.
M^lletier who was in another chamber had a different chance from Diomedes, for
both those with whom he bedded were females, who showed him pastime enough till
at last falling asleep, two or three lusty fellows came up stairs and
immediately clapped a great ball into his mouth, tied him hand and foot very fast
and put him in a great Basket, which they made fast with a Padlock, being naked
and so hard packed up and bound that he could not move or stir, and his mouth
so close, that he could not cry out, or hardly draw his breath, but hearing
that he breathed too strong through the nostrils they unlocked the Basket and
stitched 'em up, which being done and the Basket made fast again, they took his
Clothes, Money, Watch, Rapier, etc. and went their way.

The next morning Lebechea awakens and calls to the two Mock-Ladies telling
them a project he had in his head which he thought might be well effected,
which was; That they thould first lay out some moneys in Silks at the Mercers
shop, and afterward bring in a chest in which should be a man, who by an
artificial lock could open it on the inside, and yet that it should be firm
without, and all under a pretense of some Goods. This liked them very well they
therefore resolved to do with him as the Tyrant Phalaris did with Perillus, put
him in and make him the proof of his own stratagem. Diomedes was very unwilling
and loath to take it upon him but was at last persuaded to ride the Trojan
Horse, and accordingly was laid upon Cushions for softnes sake, that his long
lying there might not prove uneasy.

Vander Dussen and Berne, (for so were the names of the masked parties; went
directly to the Mercers, where they looked out several Pieces of Silk, and
pretended that they lived at Haarlem. In short they bought to the value of
about 730 Gild. in Silks, which they immediately tendered; and packt up the
Goods in a chest, just such another as they had put Diomedes in, and against
the evening got a Porter to carry it away to their Lodging on a Wheel-barrow,
where coming they took out the Goods and sent Diomedes away in the Chest with
another Porter, who knew nothing of the former. Vander Dussen goes before and
prays the Mercer that he would please to have the Goodness for to set up the
Chest in his house, till the next morning, they having come too late to the
Boat. The Mercer suspecting no ill, gave them house-room for the said Chest,
not willing to deny them so poor a Courtesy, for the money they had already
bestowed in his shop, and in hopes of future Custom. The Mercer bids his
servant to help the Porter in with the Chest and set it behind the Door, which
was done, and Vander Dussen takes his leave of the Mercer and went to his
companion Berne, who came with him about 10 a clock at night, at what time
Diomedes had promised to come out of the Chest and unbolt the doors, as he did
precisely at that hour, they coming also to assist him took all the richest
Goods out of the Shop and carried themaway to 2. Boats they had hired; which
done they drew to the Door softly and packt up the Goods in one of the Boats
which was so full that they could hardly sit all three, and because Vander
Dussen and Berne were not well skilled at rowing, they let Diomedes row the
Boat, which was laden, and themselves sat in that which was empty. By that
time they had got to the Newbridge the Sluices and Waterbarrs were open, so that
they got easily out to the stream, this being just by break of Day, and few or
none appearing upon the Y, but growing more clear they espied a Boat at a
pretty distance which seemed to make toward them, which Diomedes would
persuade them was the Schout, and therefore prayed them to change Oars with him
seeing his were not so good as theirs, and his Boat very deep laden. They
reached him theirs but in stead of delivering his, he thrust them into the
Goods, and rowed away, leaving them to the favor of the wind and Tide, to
drive which way they would; in sum Diomedes got quickly out of sight, and so
away for North-Holland where he got a Lighter and out them aboard bringing them
up to Amsterdam again, where he soon got a private Customer that took them off
his hands: and as for Vander Dussen and Berne he was sure they would not detect
him being equally liable to punishment with him, and under the same
circumstances.

On the same day that this work was first put in practice was Meletier, that
was packt up in a Basket against his will, sent to Utrecht with the Ordinary
Market-boat; superscribed, To be delivered to Madam Catharina d^ Bois living at
Utrecht, etc.

This Lady was one whom had some tixe before made complaint of Hous-breaking,
and therefore is supposed to have this Present sent her, which opening, and
seeing a naked Man, was mainly surprised, and began to shriek out, upon which a
Gentleman and near kins man to her ran into the room where the Basket was
opened, and seeing the quaint spectacle knew not what to think of the matter,
the more by reason the Man gave no answer; but seeing he had a ball in his
mouth, did all he could to get it out, untied his hands an feet, and ripped up
the stitches of his nostrils, as a Tailor does the folds of a Petticoat. Which
done they took him out of the Basket and set him before the fire, throwing a
loose Gown about his shoulders for it was then very cold weather. I^ the
meanwhile they lay laughing together not knowing how or from whence this
wonderful Present came, till at last he recovering a little strength and his
speech, began to relate all the whole matter, without any palliation of the
Truth, which made them laugh heartily. After he had warmed himsell well, Madam
du Bois bad her Maid fetch down a suit of Clothes which she bestowed upon him,
as also some moneys, with-which he returned for Amsterdam, to see if he could
hear any thing of them who had served him so kindly, but all in vain. And so
much by the way.

A few weeks after this it happened that Livia, Mother in Law to Diomedes,
began to grow sick, which was to him the occasion of some joy, hoping in short
to live in greater Gr^ndour than before, for he never in the le^t suspected but
that she had abundance of Gold and Jewels. Every day the old Gentle woman grew
worse and worse and her vitals spent to the very last: often would she have had
a Doctor to come, but he ever with one excuse or another shifflled it off;
allowing here no hearty Di^t but such as when she had her perfect health she
could not eat, insomuch that she ended her days in misery, no sooner was she
departed but Diomedes strips her and lays her out; sent also to some of his
Creditors, who had threatened to be too hasty with him, letting them know that
within 3 or 4 days he would pay them their Money in full, and desires them but
to have the Patience, till the Corpse was buried. He provided also his house of
more servants, and considered with himself where he might have a Coach and
Horses, as also a Yacht: in short the calculation he made of his Patrimony was
very large, and never to be consumed. Impossible it was for him to wait for his
Mothers interrment before he must be peeping into the Chest, but could not find
the Keys; for those she well secured in her life time, lest at any time her
stratagem should prove ineffectual and fail her: however in turning up the
Bed-straw they found them between two planks, but so rusty that they were
hardly sufficient for the use they were made for.

Lebechea having now got the Keys he made a shift to get the chest open, which
he found stowed with stones and Cannon-bullets (for her deceased Husband was
the Gunner of a Castle in Flanders) and about 23 Ducatoons in Money with a
Paper, the Tenor whereof was thus,

Son and Heir.
THink not with thy self that I have any more Tresure left, than what thou
see here before thy eyes, with which thou may satisfy thy self; since thou
have been so prodigal of what came by me, or mine. A fitter Inheritance I could
not leave thee than these Stones; reward enough for all the Good I could ever
enjoy from thy stony heart. Nor is it to be thought unreasonable, That thou,
whose Hope only made thee show what another would do in Duty, and reciprocal
Love, should be fr^strate of thy hopes: but as every Dog gnaws the Bone for the
sake of the Flesh that once grew on it, so I give thee Leave and Time enough,
to vent thy Malice and gnaw these Stones, as the Relicts of what thou have
vainly consumed, which might have given me the same Comforts in my old Age,
which sore against thy will I have enjoyed.

Farewell.

But how our heir startled at this Last Will and Testament I leave to the
Reader to judge; sure I am his passion Lorded it so far, that he ran down in
all have ^o the Corpse, threw it out of the Coffin, began to punch it up and
down the Floor, and trampled the insensible carcass under his feet, wishing now
more that she were alive again, than when alive that she were dead, that she
might but for one hour feel the effects of his Rage. He cursed her with more
Anathems, than the Mass-priest with Bell, Book and Candle light, After he had
so misused the Body he made his Maid dragg it out into the street, where
hundreds came clustring about it, being an unusual Spectacle, and few knowing
what was the meaning of it, till at last the Magistrates came to have notice of
it, who immediately sent a messenger for him to appear at the Stadt-house,
where making his appearance, they demanded the reason of his Inhumanity; he on
the contrary began to relate what a trick she had served him, and how she had
been for so many years together maintained by him upon promise of making him
heir to a considerable Estate. etc. The Magistrates not willing to hear any
more of his Reasons commanded him forthwith to take her in, and interr the
Corpse after a decent manner, besides, to go the usual time in mourning, upon
peril of the effects of their Displeasure. They also gave him a hint of some
abuses he had put upon the East-and West India Companies, which they threatened
to take into examination if he did not rest pacified with their merciful
Injunction. Diomedes du^st not make many words, but was fain to smother his
Anger and depart in obedience to their Commands. So soon as he came at home he
took in the Corpse and after two days he buries it decently enough but with no
great show, himself following the Bier.

When the Funeral was past, he cashiered his new-taken-on servants, and razed
all the Castles he had built in the Air. But above all it troubled him most,
that he should be so forward as to promise his Creditors such speedy Payment,
and that with such freedom; he was sensible that it would be badly taken out if
they found themselves so mocked, and so con^equently all fall upon him at once.
He resolves therefore to pack up his Auls and get out of the way, since his
last cast was played, and the only hope he had of raising his State and Fortune
proved no better than a mere Bubble, and to stay there much longer was the
nearest way to Prison.

Pursuant to this design he transports all his Effects into the hands of one
Van Galen, a person whom he knew to be really true and honest, and therefore
reposed in him the more confidence. To another he committed his affairs by way
of Procuration, and recommended to him the sole care of his business with
Instructions to Compound with his Creditors, tho after a shameful rate.

After he was gone the Creditors came in expectation of receiving full payment,
but could neither meet with Man nor Money, save only Odiard, to whom he had
given Procuration, who gave them but little hopes of getting their Money upon
any likely conditions, especially when besides many other apologies on behalf
Diomedes, he told them outright that the name of his inheriting a good Estate
upon the Decease of his Mother in Law, was but a mere sham of the Old Woman,
declaring the whole story at large. When they heard of that, some of them were
so impatient that they threatened speedy execution: but Odiard let them know,
that they would get nothing by foul means, and with one showed them that he had
no Effects, and therefore willed them to agree and compound with him whilst it
was proffered them.

Some of the Creditors were content to make a composition, but others were as
unwilling: however at last they became of one mind, and desired the Party
empowered to nominate a Place, which he did, appointing them a Tavern, thinking
that so when they had got a glass of wine, they would be more flexible and
easier to treat withal, than otherwise.

When they were all come together being 83 persons in all Odiard out of the
name of Diomedes bad them 5 per cent. At which most of them flew out in a
Passion and swore they would rather spend that money to be revenged on him than
to receive it for full Payment; so that Odiard had a hard task to pacify them,
and make them have patience to listen to what he would propose more. At last he
came to 8, and 10 per cent with which the greater part being pretty warm with
wine were content, but the rest not, thinking to press yet more out of him,
which they seeing that they could not do, assented with the rest, and so came
to an agreement, Van Galen being security for the money, upon which they
parted, and Diomedes was sent for home, who was constrained immediately to sell
his House, his Summer-Dwelling, Shop and Movables, and all little enough to
make eaven with his Creditors at Ten in the Hundred. However he pay of the sum
for which he had compounded and hires a house anew, thinking with the remainder
of his Moneys to set up a Shop, which was not above 4000 gild. but just in the
nick of time comes those that had been security for his Countrey-house to urge
the third and last payment insomuch that he was fain to part with that Money
wherewith he thought to advance his Fortune and rear his State. Having now
nothing left but only a parcel of stolen silks which he had reserved unsold
as was mentioned page 192. which he durst not expose to open Sale because the
Robbery was talked of all over the Town. he resolves upon a new Practice to put
himself in stock again, which was after this manner.

Having 8 costly Diamond Rings which belonged to his wife Olympia, he procures
8 more, every way like those both in bigness weight and fashion, only these he
caused to be made, were of Brass, and false stones, these he put in two several
Boxes, the true and false each in a Box apart. He also put himself into an
unwonted habit, coloring his Eie-brows and beard artificially and put on a
long black Perrywig.

Thus attired like a Jew he directs his Course for Utrecht, taking the said
Boxes (...)ng with him. When he was arrived he went forthwith to a Jeweller,
where he proffered the Rings to sale. The Jeweller having thoroughly viewed
them he prays Diomedes to set a Price which he thinking too high bad him set a
Lower and so on till, they made a bargain which was for 4600 gild. When they
were come to an agreement the Jeweller paid him the Money which he told himself
before, and prays Diomedes ^o tell the heaps after him, which he did, letting
in the mean while some pieces fall that the Jeweller out of Courtesy took up,
and Diomedes having the Box of false Rings in his handkerchief clandestinly by
virtue of Hocus Pocus took up the true and lay the false in the place, which
the Jeweller could not so much as once mark.

Having received the Money, he returns immediately for Amsterdam, taking a
Wagon by the way, for fear the Jeweller should open the box before he locked
it up; where arriving he immediately put on his usual habit, thinking to sell
those Jewels at Amsterdam although he came to miscarry in his design, for
intending to go to a Jewellers house he met with one Muller, a German, and a
famous Rook at Tables, who in his time had played many a Game with Diomedes.
These two meeting together upon the Dam-rak faluted each other, and began to
enter into Dialogues about the old concern, that finally they both resolved to
have a touch at Back-gammon together and going into a noted Tavern in the
Calver-street, to it they fell, where for 5 or 6 Games at a Ducat each, Diomedes
won, but Muller seeing Diomedes very eager would not play for less that 25
gild. which the other, by the encouragement he had already, did not once
decline, which at last brought our Diomedes so low that he was fain to depose
his Jewels, that he in a trice lost, and was fain to leave his Coat for the
Shot; which the next morning he redeemed.

Our Gentleman now quite destitute of money studies what practice he should
follow to get more, and attempting many ways that miscarried, he at last meets
with one that was effectual, which was thus.

Walking along the streets he saw a billet newly pasted up upon a Corner-house,
which many Gentlemen were a reading, it being for the Public Sale of a Garden
about half an hours walking without Amsterdam, and belonged to one Mr. de Bo --
an eminent Merchant, the summer before dwelling at Amsterdam, but then removed
to Haarlem, partly for that he dreaded a War and consequently all the perils
that Trading persons are in jeopardy of in such cases (he being sufficiently
able to live on his yearly Revenues) and partly by reason that his Lady was for
3 years or more very subject to diseases, and advised to leave the Town, and
receive the benefits of a more salubrious Air. This Diomedes seeing, he applies
himself to the Gentleman disguised with a black Perrywig, Artificial Must a
chios and Eye brows; besides a Cloak with the cape richly embroydered,
pretending to be a French Baron, and desired to treat with him about his
Garden. After many words used on both sides it was resolved that they should go
and view it, which they did. But Diomedes told the Gentleman he was not willing
to venture upon the purchase of it, till his Wife arrived who he said was upon
the way, and he hoped would be in Town within 2 days, and desired him not to
sell it till he had given him first notice of it (directing the Gentleman to
the house of one of his Accomplices, where he should enquire of him by the name
of Monsr. de Rocheville) the Gentleman was content to do so, and after a few
complements took their leaves of each other for that time, the Gentleman going
to the City Dool and Diomedes through the Town to see if he could meet with a
Cully.

The next morning about 8 a Clock he sees a Gentleman with his Lady reading the
Billet, and closing himself up with them, could hear by their discourse that
the Place and Conditions liked them very well. They asked a boy where such a
street was (being the place where the Owner lived, as it was specified in the
Bill) Diomedes (anticipating the boys answer) asks them if they had a mind to
see the Garden; Yes, very gladly, replies the Gentlewoman, if we could find the
owners house. Madam, said Diomedes, I shall show you my Garden: The Key is at
my Brothers house, here hard by. The Gentleman and his Lady follow Diomedes to
the owners house, where coming he enters in before them, and asks the Maid for
her Master, who made answer that he was not a stirring, Prithee Sweetheart
(quoth he) desire your Master to lend me the Key of his Garden, and tell him I
shall return it toward night, and come and discourse him about the Bargain, so
soon as my wife has seen it. This he said whispering, so that the Gentleman and
his Consort could not hear. The Maid goes up to her Master and tells him that
the Gentleman who was there the other day was come with his Lady to see the
Garden, and desired to have the Key. Mr. de Bo -- bids her give it him, and
with one beg his excuse that he could not wait upon them thither, he being at
that time not very well disposed, and desired a little rest.

With that Diomedes goes out, taking the Gentleman and his Lady with him, and
brought them to the Garden, which they having thoroughly viewed, and examined
all the Con-and In-conveniences about the Premises, fell to bargaining.

Diomedes considering that it was not safe for him to fell it as the usual
manner was, to be paid in 2 or 3 Terms, but rather to see if he could make it
to be paid in ready money, and accordingly makes his Conditions, That if they
would pay in ready money he would allow them 5 per cent. If in 3 months, 2 and
a half per cent etc. The Gentleman calls his wife aside, and debates the matter
with her, who counseled him rather to pay the Money down immediately, since
that was a considerable profit. In sum they agreed for 3440 gild. for the
Garden Orchard, House, Ponds and all other Appurtenances, and the next day
Writings were drawn, and the Money tendered: with which Diomedes trudges away,
promising he would go and fetch them the Key, which according to his word he
had carried home before promising to wait upon the Owner the next day in the
Afternoon. Long waited the Buyer for his Chapman with the Key, who came not:
ever now and then he peeped out to see if he could see him, but all in vain for
no Chapman comes. About 2 in the afternoon when they had dined, the Gentlewoman
councils her husband to take a walk and see if they could find the house, which
by the help of the printed bill they did. When they were come at the house,
they pulled the Bell and demande^ if they had not the Key of the Garden* The
Owner over-hearing, steps out to the Door, and prays them to come in, telling
them that he would wait upon them thithe^ himself. So soon as he was dressed he
come^ down stairs, and away they went together. By the way the Owner asks the
Gentlewoman if her husband did not go with them, Yes Sir, quoth she, this is my
husband. Nay, said he, but I mean the Gentleman that was with you yesterday,
with the Cloak embroydered on the Cape and a black Perrywig. Why, replies the
Lady, I know not that you have seen me in company with any such Gentleman since
I came to Town, unless it be your Brother, of whom we bought the Garden. My
Brother! replies the Owner I have neither Brother nor Sister in the whole
World, as for the Garden it belongs solely to me. Upon these words the
Gentleman and his Wife were so surprised that they had not the power to move
one step forward, but standing still they looked one another in the face as
pale as Death. suspecting indeed that there might be some Roguery in the case,
the rather when they bethought themselves that Diomedes did not appear, since
he had received the Money. At last the Gentlewoman who could not any longer
contein her self burst forth into these words. Certainly he told us that the
Garden ^as his, and that you were his Brother, we therefore really believing
(as we still believe) ^e had power to make conveyance of it, have purchased it
for the sum of 3440 gild ready money, which we have deposited already and
received the Writing*s Madam, replies the Owner, I will assure you he has no
claim to it for I never saw him before, neither can I tell you who he is, any
more than that he came to me about 2 or 3 days ago* and desired me to show him
the Garden, he promising me to treat about the Bargain, so soon as his Lady
came to town, etc. Hereupon they began to stare one another in the Face, and so
astonished that they knew not whether they dreamed or were awake. In sum after
a long dispute and in the heat of Fury they fell to loud, but not angry words,
and observing the People to begin to cluster they returned to the Gentleman's
Lodgings, where they heard one another at large and brought the Evidence with
the Notary that signed the Instrument, although it did not signify much since it
was conspicuously evident that the Garden belonged to Mr. de Bo -- and that
none else had any Title to it, as also that he had no such Brother in the
World. Their extreme shift was to send all over the Town to inquire for the
Party, that had sold the Premises, but none such could be found or heard of,
for he had quite altered his, habit, and put on a flaxen wig; and the Gentleman
fain to be content with the Cheat he had put upon him, and comfort himself with
the wit he had bought at so dear a rate.

Diomedes having got such a noble purchase he resolves to set up shop again,
and try what he could do that way once more; and in order thereto buys a good
quantity of Silks, paying some part in ready moneys, and the rest he took upon
Trust, amongst which Goods he also stowed those which he had Stole (mentioned
page 190) he hired also a maid to keep the shop, to dispatch errands, and the
like.

It happened that 2 famous Pick-pockets came out of North-Holland to practice
in Amsterdam, both Women, These two being above the degree of your ordinary
Filchers, made up a project between them which was thus. They went to a
Surgeon of known fame for his great ability and skill, whom they accosted
after this manner, Sir, we have been happily informed of your great experience
in the Mysteries of Surgery, after which we have been in some mesure
restless, till we have been so fortunate as to speak with you about a Sister of
ours, which is at certain times of the Moon troubled with a Lunacy, and by
reason it was advised by some of great Judgments to let her blood, we
therefore come to give you the ^^ouble of your helpful hand and advice in the
matter, her head is sometimes so perplexed with worldly affairs, she being
indeed by nature, much addicted to avarice; and when she suffers under those
sad passions talks of nothing else than Money and Goods. The Surgeon told
them he was well assured that he could do it if it were practicable by human
skill and told them that if they pleased to bring her, he would give them his
advice. The one of them makes answer, that all the cunning must be in bringing
her thither, and when brought for them to get out of her sight, for so long as
they were present she was ten times worse than otherwise: To which the Surgeon
replies he had a very convenient backdoor by which if they thought good they
might slip out, having first led her into the Parlour. This advice was very
acceptable, and they accordingly went out to market, where the first shop they
found most likely for their turn was that of Diomedes, where they bought to the
value of 460 gild. in flowered Silks which done they prayed Diomedes to send
his Maid along with them to receive the Money to which he assented, so away
they go together, till coming at the Surgeons, they went directly into the
Parlor, the Maid following, one of the Women carrying the Silks: but when the
Maid would have gone quite through, the Surgeon pushed to the Door and would
not let her go any further; the Women in the mean time running out at the
Backdoor, and the Surgeon with the help of his Man took the Maid and made her
fast to the stool with a Towel, making also her hands and feet fast, upon which
she roars out, crying, What do you mean, Sir? pray what do you intend to do? The
Surgeon takes no notice of her words, but goes on with his work, takes her
Arm and binds it fast with a clout, she all the time crying out, I come not
here to be let blood, I come for my Money, and Money I will have before I go
out, What do you intend to murder me? You rogue! You villain let me go, and
give me my money, or else my goods again. Still the Surgeon proceeds on with
his work, taking his lance lets her blood in spite of all she could say or do,
till at last he perceived her swound away, and then stopped the Vein, binds it
carefully up, and takes spirit of Hartshorn and other foetid Quintessences
which he held under her nose, sprinkling a little Vinegar upon her face, till
she recovered. So soon as she came a little to her self again, she began with
fair means to enquire after the Women that had brought her thither, as also
what was become of the Silks. The Surgeon hearing her name the Goods so
specially, began then to mistrust something of reality might be in the case, and
after hearing the thing more amply, and finding that she had her perfect
understanding, began to repent his rashness, begging a hundred times pardon of
the Maid. and telling her how that he was deceived, etc. Upon which he untied
the Bands and set her at liberty. The Maid goes out sadly dismayed and ran all
about to enquire after the Women, but to no purpose, so that she was ^ain to
return home without either money or Goods. Her master seeing her so pale, which
was occasioned partly by the loss of her blood, and partly at the loss of the
Goods, he asked her, what she ailed; and what had befallen her? She made
answer, that she was cheated by the two Women, and told him all the whole
passage that had happened to her since she went out. He understanding the
matter at large for a while raged and stormed at the Women who had played him
that dirty trick.

After he had kept Shop about a month or two, and spent the Stock as well as
the Profit, so that the shelves began to grow thin, he went about to see if he
could meet with a Wholesale Cully of whom he might receive Goods upon Credit;
but to his sorrow could not meet with one but what would have money upon
Delivery.

In the mean time it happened that the two Gentlemen who had been security for
him at Rotterdam for his Country house, came to urge the last Payment, which
was only 20^0 gild he having paid at one time 1000 gild. and at another time
6000. These seeing that Diomedes had made agreement with others and that they
were paid agreeable to the Composition, they resolved to ensnare him since they
could find no other way to get their Money: and in order thereto made one privy
to the Concern, whom they sent now and then to Diomedes with Buttons, Silk,
Ribbons and other pedling trifles which he gave him upon Credit. After he had
been there several times with Diomedes, he told him that a certain Merchant in
Rotterdam had desired of him to enquire if he could hear of a good Customer for
him, who could help him off with some silks, who if he be an honest man, he
desired no money before he shut his books; and with all told Diomede^ if he
could serve him with his Recommendation be would be glad to do him any Courtesy
that lay in his power. Diomedes was well pleased with this Offer, resolved to
make use of it, and thanks the man for his Civility who took his leave of him,
promising within a day or two to send him a letter about the business they now
discoursed upon, as shortly after he did, the tenure whereof was thus.

SIR,
ACcording to my promise I have spoke to Monsr. de la Rue, who is willing to
dispose of his Goods upon the Terms I told your of; so that it is only needful
that you should come your self and see what is necessary, or for your turn, as
I doubt not but you will find all according to your mind. In expectation of
your presence I shall remain,

SIR, Your obedient and most faithful servant, Henry Mormerent.


So soon as he had read this Letter he resolves forthwith to set forward on his
Journey, designing also to go on to Antwerp; to see if he could meet with
another Enterprise for his turn there. Arriving at Roterdam he went directly to
the house where Mormerent told him that he lived, where comin he received him
with all imaginable Court^sy, that he should not distrust any thing Presently
Mormerent takes him along wit^ him to a house where de la Rue must be supposed
to live, but coming there answer wa^ made that he was not within, upon which
Mormerent whispers the servant in the Ear^ who ran immeditaly to Mr. Cornhert
and hi^ Brother in Law, who were the Gentlemen that had been security for
Diomedes, to le^ them know that he was there. Diomedes supposing that he was
gone to call his Maste^ waits there very diligently till Corn^ert an^ his
Brother came with the Schout, who apprehended out poor Merchant and carried him
to a place where they kept him i^ custody.

Cornhert having his Party secure, demand^ his Money, and threatens him unless
h^ would pay him immediately, that he would send him away to Prison, where at
last h^ should be constrained to pay it, besides the Expenses, Charges and
other inconvenien^ces. To this Diomedes replies, that he had n^ money nor
Credit at Rotterdam, and pray^ them to quit him and he would pay them upon his
arrival at home. But the security would give no ear to any such Proposal bu^
told him that if he would he might easily help that defect another way by
sending the Keys (...) Amsterdam, and give order to some (...)sty Person to
send the money, for upon no ^her Condition he should come out of their ^atches.
A long time he argued the case ^ith them, and protested that he meant sin^rely
and that it was more than 3 times the ^^ue of the Debt that they injured him
etc. (...)t all he could say or infer was but lost (...)bour, so that after he
had stayed there 48 (...)ours he was fain to send the Keys to his said.

During the time of his being under arrest (...) was noised through the Town how
that one (...) Lebechea of Amsterdam was arrested, ^ho was one of the most
notorious Cheats (...) the 17 Provinces; with an Addition of many enormous and
fraudulent practices he ^ad been guilty of, but chiefly in Mer^handise, having
dealt in most things, and ^specially in Wines, Grain, Woods, Lin^^en, Silks,
etc. all which coming to the (...)r of Mr. Arond, whose loss was so great that
he could not be forgetful of it, Diome^^es having cheated him of 13600 gild.
as was mentioned in page 183 he therefore be(...)es himself speedily to the
Golden Lion where the other was held in custody, to view (...) it were not the
same person; where co^ing he discovered in him the very features ^f him that
had deceived him, the same ^ody and proportion, but in the habit quite
different as also in voice, for before he counterfeited a Pharifaical voice,
the better to delude his Merchant. At first Arond was in a doubt what to do,
whether that he should tax him with it or no, but when he considered what a
report went abroad of him, as that he had played many absurd cheats, and that
in Grain too, he took courage and expressed himself after this manner. Are not
you the very Gentleman who about 3 years ago bought so much Grain to send for
North-Holland? naming some particulars more. Diomedes stares him full in the
face and with a dejected countenance had already confessed it, but considering
the consequence of the matter if he should own it; stoutly denies that ever he
bought any such bargain at Rotterdam, insomuch that Arond began to fear that he
had been too temerous, and wished he had not moved the matter, w^ll knowing,
that if he had not sufficient proof thereof, the business might have an
unwelcom Issue.

The next morning Diomedes receives the 2000 gild. wherewith he paid Cornert,
thinking thereupon to be at liberty but much mistaken, for he had no sooner
paid it but in comes Mormerent bringing him a bill of 160 gild* or there
abouts, for Buttons, Ribbons and other such inconsiderable wares he had sold
him. When Diomedes saw that, he was almost out of his senses, swearing that he
neither would nor could pay it, and began ^o rail against his Creditor, to
which Mormerent replies, Sir, I pray you do not take it so ill out that I come
to demand my own. I (...) sorry ('it is true) to find you in this condition, and
cannot devise in all the World how your Party should so come to meet you here:
However I must needs tell you that I expect my Money before you depart hence,
and therefore to that and I continue the Arrest.

With that Diomedes flew into a great Pas^on and told him that he scorned to
stand disputing with such a Pick-thak or Trepan, and that he might do his
worst. To be brief they fell to high words and Mormerent charges the Officer
with him, which Diomedes ^eeing was fain to content himself, and send down the
Keys again to the Maids, for another sum, both to pay off Morme^ent, and defray
his Charges, which upon such accounts are generally considerable.

Opportunity often times makes a Thief is the language of a true Proverb. The
Maids were upon his first sending the Key under a most heavy Temptation, but
now much more when seeing his delay they could no more moderate their
Affections to so pleasant a Bait, and to be plain they sent him what money he
ordered, converted part of ^e rest to their own use, and so long as ^e was
absent, treated their Minions, with all that they could desire or think of, no^
sparing to take of the best Silks they could meet with to put them into a Garb,
suitable to such a manner of housekeeping as they then held: So that what he
had unjustly got^ vanished in as easy and unjust a manner

Diomedes so soon as he had Moneys, cleared his Accounts with Mormerent, and
speeds him on his Journey toward Antwer^ thinking there to do some feat that
might countervail the hard measure he had at Rotterdam. Arriving at Antwerp he
met with a Youth, in drift and humor one of the very same stamp he was of
himself, to whom he imparts his mind, and made an Overture to him, how that if
he would join with him in some certain enterprises he had in hand, that he
would affoard him a competent allowance whereon he should live a very splendid
Life, discovering to him the whole scope of the project.

The Proposal, liked Zenodor very well (for so he was called) who promised him
upon the word of an honest Gasconier, that he would act his part so gentilely,
that Diomedes should be well served in his project.

Hereupon Diomedes went to a Mercers shop where he bought several pieces of
Silk and as much Plush as would make a Coat, which they got a Tailor to make
and furnish with trimming suitable. Which done ^^ey left Antwerp and came to
Rotterdam. where they bought 6 Money Chests well ^ound with Irons, and having
filled them with bags of Sand and Flint, they went for^ard for Amsterdam, where
Diomedes hired a very stately House and furnished it with Movables and
Utensils, so that none ever had been in the house but they looked upon Zenodor
to be a very rich Gentleman, being ^here a stranger and unknown. Which
universal Opinion was confirmed by many no^able stratagems, as we shall impart
to the Reader in their course.

Zenodor new newly settled in his State, nothing aild him but want of money to
maintain that Grandour. All the Actions he had learned by heart, and was as
practical as his Master, Hypocricy and the art of ^eigning he had at his
fingers ends, all the Tokens of Generosity he could counterfeit, and make show
of a magnanimous spirit: the greater sort he knew how to make flexible by
Flattery and parasitical expressions, and as for the Vulgar he could cut their
throats with a feather. In short he was every way accomplished for a Son of
Fortune, which Diomedes observing, fully resolved to make him fit for his turn
and not to spare for Money, nor to lose a Lamb, for a farthings worth of Tarr.
He goes to his Money chest to take out some Money he had occasion for, and
finding his bags much lower than he expected he began to make a calculation,
and found that there was 800 gild. or upwards taken out upon which he called
the Maid to whom he had sent the Key, and taxes her with the Theft, which she
nevertheless resolutely denied, saying that it was done in presence of the
other Maid, who was also called in, that they might confront each other. The
first denies that she had it, and the other that she took it; yet both spoke
the truth, for she that took it gave it over to the other to keep. In short
they denied it so stoutly that Diomedes began half to be persuaded that it was
his own error, and that he must be mistaken in his calculation, and was fain to
put up the matter so, without much controversy, lest the Maids should detect
some Villainies he was factious in, and they made privy to.

Thus it was low tide with his Cash, and he forced to make use of his Wits to
get so much as might serve his occasions and supply Zenodor to maintain his
Grandour, lest he for want of reparation (like an old house that goes to decay)
might prove a lost purchase, and all the expenses in Money, he had already
bestowed on the Tool, might be but thrown away. Yet no stratagem he could think
upon or undertake that would prove effectual for a speedy Levy, he therefore
carried a parcel of Silks to the Vendu-^aster, or Outcrier, to convert into
Money, which having done he furnishes Zenodor with 1800 gild. who takes two
Maids ^^to his service, and a Footman; the Maids ^o keep his house, and the
Footman to ^^ppear abroad with him.

Besides these Diomedes furnishes him with a thorough-pac'd villain (who had
many time ^ssisted him in this kind of Rascallity) to be ^n the house with him,
and baptized him ^y the name of a Steward.

These two being excellently well versed in the Trade, made the World have a
honorable esteem for the Lord of the Stage, by many external appearances, as
when they bought a considerable quantity of sheet Leed, about the solidity of
Ducatoons, which they cut out as an Apothecary, or Confectioner does his
Lozenges, into round pieces, and put them into Baggs: which done Zenodor made
great acquaintance with some eminent Merchants; these he frequently invites to
Supper, during which time his Steward continually passes by the door, with bags
under his Arm, and makes an ^ncessant rattling of Money; sometimes coming down
to desire his Master to take some other course, or else that Telling of Money
would continue all night, whereupon he would make answer, that if time faild
them that they should dispatch it with the Balance. And thus by degrees it
passed from hand to hand, that Zenodor was a Gentleman of a vast Estate.
Besides that one stratagem he was wont to have Letters sen^ him upon sleeveless
affairs, although the Tenure thereof importing some great money business, which he
would here and there negligently let fall for others to take up, or perhaps
having any in presence when he received them, read aloud that they might hear
him. Ever now and then he would be bringing of Money-chests upon sledges, which
were only filled with baggs of Leed, made as we have said before in the form of
Ducatoons; these he would take out in presence of the Neighbors and give his
Cashier and Page order to bring them into such and such a Chest above stairs,
and so speedily got the name of a Rich Gentleman, for, Mundus vult decipi, the
World will be deceived.

When Zenodor was now fully known abroad for (...) man of great worth in regard
of his vast Estate, Diomedes thought it high time to make use of his Implement,
and to receive fruit of a Tree of his own planting, seeing his Condition grew
meaner and meaner; he therefore went to diverse Merchants to buy up Goods, who
refused to credit him; he therefore asked them if they were content that he
gave them Zenodor's security, ^one ever refused him, on condition he ^ould make
him his security, but rather ^^ged him to receive more Goods upon that account,
by which Diomedes got a great ^^itare, to the value of 140000 gild. in wares,
which as fast as he could, he converted into moneys.

The Maid that kept his shop seeing now so many rich opportunities, could no
longer contein her self within the limits of ho^^sty, but ever now and then
would take an odd piece of Money, whether by bargaining too hard with a
Customer, beyond the price imposed, or clandestinly converting that to her own
use, which she thought her Master would never come to know of; this Diomedes
did really believe, for that he had often missed odd pieces of Silks, and as an
evil Doer is an evil Dreamer, so Diomedes measured her Corn by his Bushel. Now
it happened upon a time that 3 Men were carried by to Prison, which the Maid
running out hastily to look after forgot the Key of her Trunk upon the Compter,
which he seeing, went to meet her at the door, and sent her of an errand, which
she, not once thinking of her Keys, went to do: in the mean time Diomedes goes
up stairs and unlocks her Trunk where he found Seven Hundred Rix-dollars, upon
which he called in two Neighbors, and in their presence took them out with
some pieces of Silk which he also found there, locks the Trunk and lays the Key
in the same posture and place he found it in.

About 2 or 3 days after the Maid having occasion to go abroad resolved to take
some Money with her, to buy one knick-knack or other, and finding the nest but
the birds flown, comes running down stairs, crying out, she was robbed, and her
Trunk had been broke open. Upon which Diomedes made answer that she was not
robbed, but his Shop and Money-box, with one telling her what he had done, and
in what manner, to wit, in presence of 2 Neighbors, and threatened her besides
that if she would not make a candid confession of all, he would deliver her
over into the Hands of Justice. The Maid swore and cursed her self with many
imprecations that she was wronged, and that the money was honestly come by: in
short they fell out so desperately, and words on both sides grew so loud that
People began to throng about the Door, and Diomedes thought it his best course
to give over, lest she should bolt out some of his Roguery, which she was well
acquainted with. For in the middle of their Controversy she gave him now and
then a backblow or hint of Rope-merits. So that for that time they left off,
but falling into a more serious discourse at night she entered into a new
Covenant with him, that for the future he should not tax her with such enormous
Crimes as she protested she was never factious of, and with one told him how
that every one knew that the Mercer was robbed, and that ^he knew him for the
Party that was guilty of the Fact, etc. These and other reasons compelled
Diomedes to take all in good part, and put up the matter. Whence we may observe
that the wicked practices of some men prove a bridle to hold them in, and arm
them with Patience, so that they are fain to smother such abuses as inwardly
torment them, and are oftentimes forced to comply with that which they have all
their Life time to repent.

Fernelia (for that was the Maids name) was none of the meanest Beauties, but
very ill bred, and with all inclinable to strife, whose litigious spirit none
ever could endure, till she came into his service, which for the aforesaid
reasons, sore against his will he was fain to bear. Many times he attempted to
violate her chastity, but could never obtain his will, for which he took a
special liking to her, and at long last fell a courting her in a seeming way,
but because she was of very mean Parentage he had no great stomach to adventure
himself with her. However she held her self very coy. He therefore to show her
more kindness and the respect he had for her gave her a larger liberty, and
hired another Maid to be under her, and by the means of Zenodor furnished
himself so with Goods that he left of the Retail-trade, and fell to Wholesale,
shutting up the Windows and Doors. Fernelia seeing the great respect he had for
her, and that the other Maid as well as the Man began to stand in aw of her,
she began privately to act her part to inveigle him so much as was possible at
an under: and to that end went oftentimes to a Popish Chapel, under a great
show of Devotion and Piety, knowing him to be that way inclinable, being the
Religion he was educated in. Every night at going to Bed she would mutter over
a bushel of Ave Maria's, interluding always a Pater noster, and that so as he
could very well hear her. One of her Pharisaical prayers which was afterward
found in writing was after this manner:

O Holy Mother Virgin, I thank thee, That out of thy bountiful Goodness, thou
wast pleased to work upon me this Conversion, which to me is more dear than
Gold or precious Stones; That thou have granted me the Power of renouncing all
Earthy and corruptible ways, and to come to thee with an unfeigned Heart, as
becomes me. Hitherto have I erred from thy ways in heresy, and have been wholly
bent to what was evil, although now I am reduced to what is just in thy eyes, and
wholly inclined to worship and serve thee, all the days of my Pilgrimage in this
vain and transuory World. Hitherto was I in love with vanity and things that
mount no higher than Earth, and last no longer than till my change shall come,
which is but an atom to that vast infinite and incomprehensible Entity of Divine
Majesty, and the time of their Enjoyment no more than a Minute to Eternity, and
yet have I coveted and thirsted after this perishable Mammon, as a Thief
unjustly endeavors to make himself Master of what properly belongs to another,
whose end is misery and everlasting Grief and Torment. But now O Holy Virgin my
soul is totally bent toward thee, and my zeal wholly inclined to purchase that
unperishable Good, like the virtuous, whose reward is everlasting joy Oh! how
happy? how happy and joyful am I? that I am not like others, Oh? how ought I
to praise thee? and how shall I be able to manifest my gratitude to thee, who
have wrought upon me this happy Conversion, and reduced me out of the way of
Error and blindness? Henceforward I will do my utmost endeavor to serve my
Master faithfully, and do my duty in that State of Life and Vocation whereto
thou have called me. My Master to whom I am in duty obliged to serve, I will
serve faithfully, and do what is upright and just that so my future course of
life may be an expiation to purge me of my former Errors, which now with tears
I heartily relent, that so I may in this world rest secure in thy holy
Protection and dwell with thee eternally: Amen.

Ave Maria etc. Ave Regina Coeli, etc.
Diomedes hearing her incessantly at Prayers by night, would sometimes set his
Ear to the Keyhole [or perhaps sometime his eie] and hearing her often repeat
this and other Prayers, wherein she made great manifestation of honesty and
Integrity of Life, he could not but look upon her as a sincere and pious
Convertit, since he could never really tax her with any unjust Fact, but as he
might sometimes suspect her, which suspicion was now clearly removed by this
subtle and Hypocritical conduct, and further more that he had made proof of her
Chastity. With these thoughts he arrives at this conclusion that he would
absolutely make her his Wife: and in order there to fell upon a fresh Suit and
renewed his Courtship, to which she would not seem to hear, saying she was too
young (and I know not what excuses) but was ever careful to hold him within
reach, still showing him a very friendly countenance, that he might not draw
away his affections and fix'em upon another. Her attire she made after the
newest mode, and her head she trickt up with Points and Laces, leaving her
Breasts not plainly open, but just so as his eye might have the benefit of an
acceptable Object, thereby to allure and make him more eager in the pursuit of
his scope. Every morning as soon as she rose up, she went and paid her duty to
the Looking glass, and set her Locks in order, as the Mercer does his Silks in
the shop-windows, washing her Virgins face with perfumed Waters, then setting
of all her accoutrements, which during commonly a third part of the day,
Diomedes blindly supposed it to be spent in Devotion. Every day he invented new
Delights to caress her with, as inviting her to go abroad in a Chese volante,
or else to divert themselves by water in a Yacht and all to purchase her good
will. Long dured this Courtship between them, and many Jealousies there were on
both sides. Never could she go out, but he dogged her, and every one that
passed by the Door if they did but cast an eye upon her, he concluded it was
some Corrival, and every young spark that pulled of his hat, he took for a
Competitor, that oftentimes he could not refrain from asking her, who it was,
which she for her own advantage would tell him it was the one or the other, tho she
had never seen them in her Life before, only to increase his Jealousy; for she
observed, how she had the ascendant of his heart: and to add to the matter she
contrived several Letters, as if she had a World of Suitors; one whereof was
after this manner, as near as I can remember, for I have lost the copy.

DEAR MADAM.
MY last may save me the labor to express the Joy, or Sadness I am liable to
upon your Smiles, or Frowns. The Heavens are my wittness that my Integrity,
Zeal and Fidelity do deserve the one, although some would endeavor to make me
fear the other. But I am better assured of your Constancy, than that my Enemies
should deterr me from the hopes I repose in your worthy SELF by such weak
Stratagems. Madam, I am sorry that your affairs at home are so urgent that they
prove a let to the Blisses I might enjoy by those whisperings which we must be
content to exchange at stolen opportunities: but since those seasons fall out
so rarely I humbly beg of your goodness, to let us remedy that defect by
frequent writing, in hopes whereof, Iremain

MADAM Your most humble, and most obedient Servitor A. D. H.


This Letter with another she cunningly laid in a French Dictionary, which she
had some time before borrowed of her Master, the Letter being written in that
Language which she spoke expertly well, and occasionally upon her going out a
Doors upon a certain Message, she asked Diomedes about some words in French,
that she was sure he did not know, but must have recourse to that very place in
the Dictionary to resolve her in, and seeing him step into the Parlour, (as she
was sure) to fetch the Dictionary, she stepped out.

Diomedes turns over the leaves, and finds the Letter, for there the Book
opened of it self, and at the first glance saw the words DEAR MADAM, was so
surprised, that taking out the Letters, he closed to the Book, and quite forgot
the words she asked him about: when he perceived that she was gone he read the
Letter, which struck him into a deep Melancholy, wherein he continued till she
came home, expecting his last doom with the turning of her eye, she when
returned knew the occasion of his sadness and finding the stratagem take well,
tormented him so much the more, by coy answers, and averse looks. Long lasted
this misunderstanding between them, and yet he never met with a positiv denial,
for so doing she feared he might quite renounce her and implant his affections
on another, so as that all her subtility could not revoke them. Seldom ever
went she to Church but he out of Jealousy would follow her and take his place
at a convenient distance, where he might see her. One time it happened that in
Lent she went to Vespers, being pretty late in the Evening when the Church went
out, and coming out of Doors he espied a young Gentlewoman both of Habit, Body,
Gesture and all things else like her, whom he followed and endeavored to close
up with her. It happened that Fernelia came out just after him and seeing him
go jig by joll with another, suspected it was some new Darling or other, which
because of her own obstinacy he courted, thought it high time to accept of his
proffer, and to dally no longer with him, and according to that resolution,
arising from a casual passage gave her assent to what he proposed and within a
few days after ratified the matter.

Our Bridegroom invites all his Creditors to a splendid Feast setting Zenodor
in the highest place at Table, thinking now for the last time to treat them at
their own Charges, they being upwards of 170 persons (as the Party employed to
invite them confessed) none knowing that he was Debtor to them all.

Diomedes had for this end prepared a great Table which was made on purpose,
for the entertainment of so many Guests, placing (as was said) Zenodor at the
upper end and his principal Creditor at his Right hand, and next to him one to
whom he was indebted a little less, and so gradually all his Creditors according
to the greatness of their claims. The table was set with all sorts of
delicacies that was acceptable for the pallat. After the meal was over they
fell to play and pastim, as is there usual upon such occasions, which continued
till about 12 a clock at night: when the Bridegroom took his Bride and
conducted her to Bed, which was very gorgeously set out.

But before he enjoyed the delights of a nuptial bed fell out a dismal chance;
for Cecil the other Maid envying the good Fortune of Fernelia studied how she
might deprive her of the Caresses she trusted to receive from her hasty
Bridegoom: and well knowing that the Bride was ever more fearful of Ratts, she
went to a Maulsters house that was not very far from thence, and prayed the
Servant that when he took a live Rat in the Trap that he should keep them for
her; and the night before this jovial day he chanced to take a couple which he
delivered to Cecil. The Rats she took and having bruised the feet of the one
between two Stones, she put them both under an Earthen Pot in the Bed and
covered over with the Bed-cloaths that it could not be discerned, and the Ear
of the Pot so fastened with the sheet that by turning up the Clothes the Pot
must also turn up. The Bridegroom and his Bride being both undrest he turns up
the Coverlet and sheet, upon which one of the Ratts ran out and the other lay
wallowing upon the Bed. The Bride seeing this, shreeked out, immediately
swounded away, and fell upon the Floor, as insensible as the feigned Nio^^ that
was transformed into a stone. No less amazed was he to see his Jewel in such a
Condition, he not knowing in the World what to do, for endeavoring to raise
her up and if possible to draw on her Morning Gown, found her as heavy as leed,
and cold, her Countenance was as pale as a dead Corpse. Long strugled he to get
her up but all to little purpose insomuch that he was fain to cry out.

Upon this noise all the Guests that were merry at sundry sorts of Pastime came
rushing in, where they found her laying upon the Floor, and he covering her as
much as was possible with the skirt of his shirt. No means were spared they
could devise to recover her again, some burned gums, another comes with the
Vinegar Bottle, till at last she began to move and reach out her Arms which
gave them all hopes that she would recover: in sum they removed her into
another chamber, where the bed was warmed for her and 2 or 3 Gentlewomen sat
to bear her Company, although the rest being surprised with this sudden casualty
lest off their Diversion and went home, leaving the new married Couple to their
Retirement.

Three days after this Fernelia lay sick, and bedded not with her Bridegroom
till the fourth night.

When all those things were past, and the jovial days ended, Diomedes began to
make speculation upon his Darling, who for the first 2 Months gave him all
imaginable contentment, insomuch that all what ever she desired or demanded was
granted: so that nothing was seen between them but the real Tokens of Love, and
with great assuredness he imparted all to her that he had in his Heart, little
distrusting that it would prove so great a trouble to him in after times; for
this morning had a foul evening, and this Beggar he had set a Horseback was
quickly upon the Gallop.

When the subtle Fernelia was made privy to his Heart, and was sensible of his
Imperfections, began to act for Empress; and bridled him so in, that he had not
the lest word to say for himself, but, like a Bear with a ring in his snout,
must go where his Owner leads him, to clear himself it was in vain, for so he
might prove himself a Liar, and to Hector it out was unsafe, for he knew the
perils he was under if she out of a rash and insubid humor should, publish his
Knavery abroad; thus he still continued in torments and subject to the greatest
and worst of Plagues, which is a Woman's Tongue. Her Pater-Nosters were now
Metamorphosed into Oaths and curses, her Ave Maria's into Nicknames and
Rehearsals of his Failings, her Hypocritical Prayers were transformed into a
perpetual scolding and despightful language, all which he was forced to take in
good part. Emilia it is true could use her clapper with great Dexterity, but he
had the same advantages against her, which this had against him; Olimpia's
Tongue was also well hung but she ever had reason on her side, which he with
reason could never either blame or oppose, and by both these came his Fortune:
but from this it was far more intolerable being by him advanced from the
Dunghill, to the spire of Fortune: her tongue was void of all reason and
Moderation, nay the very Quintessence of all the Shrews tongues in Europe. For
knowing well that although before she was the Maid, and he Lord and Master, yet by
her hypocrisy and show of Probity she was mounted as high as he; where he way
Cajus she was Caja, was he Leo? she was Leaena: nay although she would allow him
to be the Head, she would be sure to be the Cap: In short their Harmony was
such that he could not endure an Equal, nor she a Superior.

The shop was solely managed after her pleasure, and servants taken in, and
cashiered as it best liked her. She hired many young men to keep her shop but
either finding, them by assed on her Husbands side or too dull, ever turned
them away, till at last she met with two for her turn, both of a stamp: these
she frequently admitted where it was illicit for any save her husband. Never
went he abroad but they were a junketting together; and seldom stayed he at
Home, for Home was his Hell: this gave them occasion frequently to carouse
together, with a crew of infamous Whores and Rogues, and all at the Cost of the
Good man of the house, whose ill-got wealth, was spent upon a way as
dishonorable and light.

Such were now the animosities between them that they seldom lay together, a
thing purposely created by her self, the better to entertain her Paramours, who
took their Turns; Nor did she spare the shop to serve them in what they desired
or demanded. Money they had always at command, and liberty was at any time
granted them to go abroad which besides neglecting their business, was a good
occasion to spend money in.

In ommitting many Instances of her disloyal behavior and light deportment
toward her husband one I cannot pass by, which fell out upon his going out of
town, upon which Journey the whole Gang had notice and an Invitation to a merry
Banquet; and not only those of her own crew, but also all the Rascallity in
Amsterdam they were acquainted with, were summoned to the Rendezvous, and
accordingly at the time appointed made their Appearance, where they were all
splendidly treated with a sumptuous Table, furnished with all kinds of
Delicacies, as are customary upon such solemn Occasions. When supper was ended,
they fell to Singing, Dancing and Playing upon different Instruments; others
fell to Gaming and play; and others recreated themselves with other
Divertisements. In sum they spent the fore part of the night in variety of
Pastime; till the most part grew a little lightheaded, upon which nothing would
serve them, but that each should go to bed with his Darling, others there were
so sensual and shameless among them, that they ran up and down the house naked
to the shift: and threw their Clothes all on a heap together. This Frolic
lasted till about 3 in the Morning, at what time Diomedes comes unexpectedly
home, and knocking at the Door was unadvisedly let in by a Youngman and a
stranger in the house took it to be some of the Company that were newly gone
out. Diomedes seeing a strange face wist not what to say, and the Youth much
less: but hearing a great noise and rattling above, he steals softly up stairs
into another Room, where he waited to see what all this would turn to at last.
Now was he in a thousand doubts what to do, not daring to go in for fear they
seeing no other shift to escape might fall upon his bones, or otherwise that
his Wife, who when enraged would out run the compass of reason, and so teach
him to climb the Ladder, for with one word speaking he was a man of Death. But
seeing all the Candles put out he went foftly into the Room where their Clothes
lay on a heap, and took away their Breeches, Shoes and Perry wigs which he
locked up in a Room apart and went out, walking the streets till he saw light
in a Tavern whither he went and calling for a Manchet and a Pint of Sack, he
looked over all the Papers that he had found in their Pockets, having also
plundered them of their Watches, Gold and what else he could come by. Amongst
those Papers he found diverse Bills of Exchange and Letters of Importance which
gave him light enough to know that several Merchants Servants were in the Rout:
and having informed himself who they were and where their Masters lived, as
also others among them who were married men, he dispatched Letters to such
Merchants as he understood those Youngmen served, including the Bills and
Letters which he found in their Pockets, these he sent away with a Porter, who
he thought did not know him. He sent also letters to those honest Gentlemen's
Wives, who had their Rendezvous at his house, and told them where they should
find their husbands.

The next morning when they all awaked some so besotted with Liquor that they
hardly wist where they were, but had quite forgot the mad Frolicks they had
acted the night before, others who had sitten up late at play could hardly be
awakened by their Companions: in sum it was high light day before any of them
stirred; but hearing some people at the Door, who had knocked 3 or 4 times
before they within knew. Fernelia hearing that some body knocked at Door and saw
it light day, was in a lamentable consternation, not knowing what to do:
fearing first that it was her husband who might be returned sooner than was
expected; and secondly how to get the Company out without being taken notice
of. Still they continued knocking at the Door, and thundered as if they would
knock the house down: Fernelia, calls her man Tom, who lay behind her, for he
was her chief Minion, and the only person for whose sake the had made this
splendid Treat: Tom begins to rub his eyes, and gruntles, loath to rise, still
she thumps him and told him there was some body at Door, by degrees, tho with
much ado she gets Tom to creep out of his nest, they all the while knocking at
Door. But now comes the mischief! Tom hears'em knock and would slip on his
clothes to let them in, but could find no Breeches; long hunted he up and down
the Room, but all labor in vain, no Breeches were to be found. Fernelia seeing
him so slow to go to the Door bawls out, You Lubber what do you intend to do?
will you open the Door, or not? Tom replies he could not find his Breeches, and
without his Breeches he would not go: while Tom and his Mistress stood jarring
together the rest awakened, and seeing it was day began to look for their
clothes, but none could make a complete suit, some wanted a stocking, another
wanted a shoe, a third wants his Perrywig and Coat, in short they were all in a
great trouble, not knowing in the World what to do; the People at Door still
continuing knocking so that abundance were gathered together before the house,
one not knowing another business. At last Fernelia prevailed with her Paramour
Tom to go down breechless, and return one answer or other. Who so soon as he
enquired who there was, heard a diversity of voices and that of Women as well
as Men, was at a stand whether he should open the Door or no; for not
withstanding his excuses, as that his Mistress was not a stirring and the like,
they still insisted to come in. They above hearing who were at Door, by their
Voices which they knew, strictly forbid Tom to open the Door, and held a
Consultation among themselves what was best to be done in this case. Some were
for running out at the Backdoor, but it being high light day, and people all
abroad it was not held for good, for that the Men wanted their Breeches, and
the Women either their Gowns or Petticoats. At length it was concluded by
mature deliberation that Fernelia should go to the Window and demand what they
would have. But looking out she espied the Schout coming with half a dozen
Women, who were the Wives of those Men that were within; upon which she ran up
and gave them warning, and prayed them as they tendered their wellfar, to run
out at the Backdoor, with such clothes as they had; upon which some ran out as
they were, others supplied themselves with Diomedes his clothes, in short they
ran all out like so many mice at the appearance of a Cat, leaving Fernelia
alone with her two Men and Maids. By that time they were all got out came the
Officer to the Door, who upon his knocking was let in with an infinite train of
People, as well those that were concerned, as others, who in spite of all they
could do rushed in. The Schout seeing the Backdoor open, ran out that way,
where he was informed by the Neighborhood what way his Game lay, which he
pursued, taking only a Merchants Book-keeper 2 Vintners and a Shoemakers Wife,
who, to make their escape went aboard a small vessel, but the Master not daring
to conceal them when he saw, the Schout come to demand'em, surrenders them all
into his hand; upon which they were carried half naked through the streets to the
great amazement of all the Town, and so committed to safe Custody, where after
16 days they had a Hearing where the Schout made a heavy demand, either a
corporal Penalty and Banishment, or an Equivalent sum of Money, and such as
neither of the Vintners was able to pay without Ruin of their Families: so that
their Wives who were the Parties aggrieved wrought all they could that they
might be banished; which sentence was passed upon them. The Book-keeper was for
this and other Crimes, which he was found guilty of, condemned to be publicly
whipped upon the Scaffold, and set in the Rasp-house for 13 years; and as for the
Shoemakers Wife she saved them that labor having that Morning her Sentence was
read strangled her self in the Dungeon with her Garters.

The rest who escaped the hands of Justice for that time, either fled, or
reconciled themselves at Home, the Servants to their Masters, and the Men to
their Wives, who knew well that what the Schout demanded would tend to their
own Ruin, whether Money or Banishment, for which reason they rather chused to
brook such enormities, than seek revenge which would cost themselves so dear.

Diomedes either out of Fear or Shame absented himself so long, till Fernelia
had made sale of all they had in the House and Shop, which she converted into
Gold, intending to run away with her Paramour (as not long after she did) But
Diomedes coming home prevented her Journey for that time. So soon as he entered
in he saw all the Goods taken down and the shelves empty, as also all the
Furniture that was in the whole house, at first concluded, that he had made a
Cudgel for his own pate, and that the Schout had made a seizin of all they had
for this Delinquency, for as yet he had no certain information how things went,
and she for her part palliated the business so long as she could. All the
Arguments he used were but lost labor; for she scolded as hard as ever, and
threatened to publish his Roguery to the World, which he knew was the High way
to be hanged. He therefore resolves with himself not to make any stir till he
had got as much as he could by Zenodor, his Implement of Credit, and afterward
revenge himself of her and leave the Town.

With this Resolution he went to an English Merchant with whom he made a
bargain for some Kerseys and Leed, amounting to 4300 gild. but treating upon
the Conditions of Payment, Diomedes would have him to deliver the Goods upon
Credit, which the Merchant would in no wise yield to; Diomedes therefore offers
him the security of Zenodor: the Merchant replies that he knew him not, but
within a day or 2 he would give him an Answer upon the Exchange. Diomedes for
that time goes his way, and the Merchant subtly went to enquire after
Zenodor, sending first one to offer him a Purchase for a small sum pretending
that he was a little necessitated for Money at that time, which was the only
reason of his so doing, and that he should not suppose that it was a defective
or endamaged Commodity but worth a 3d more if sold upon Credit. Zenodor makes
his excuse and said he was out of Cash. Besides this he sent another Emissarie
or Explorator, who asked him if he would sell him either Rent briefs, Lands, or
Houses, saying that he was to take a Journey for Italy where he was to stay
some years, and was willing therefore to see his Money well bestowed before he
took his Journey thither, adding thereby, that he would not stick out for a
small matter if he saw any Purchase that liked him well. This Zenodor also
waved, saying he had none of all these to convey at that time. When the
Merchant understood this, he gathered that Zenodor having neither Money to lay
out upon an advantageous bargain, professing Merchandise; nor yet any Estate to
alienate, that he was no sufficient Person. Diomedes, not daring to appear upon
the Exchange, went the day appointed very early to the Merchants house, and
desires to know if he was satisfied with his Man. The Merchant would not make
him any direct reply as to the person, but desired him to excuse him, for that
he was not minded to part with his Goods but for ready Money, with which Answer
Diomedes was fain to march, sadly troubled that his Machine failed him, in a
time so constringent and urging.

When he saw that the angry Stars, had made this Enterprise unlucky, and that
his attempt had such a poor Event, as in comparing it with the success of his
former undertakings he reckoned this. He fell upon another Project which was
the last and worst he ever met with, if all circumstances be considered.

He applies himself to a Merchant who had a Bargain of Elephants Teeth, Indico
and Rice. Of these three Commodities he bought to the value of 7500 gild. but,
a Child once burned dreads the Fire. Or as the Latin Adage, Ictus piscator
sapit, So the Merchant who had but newly had a mistake in giving Credit so
lightly, would not part with his Goods without either ready Money or very good
security. Diomedes not able to make up such a sum complete, promised him that
he would give him the security of Zenodor. But this Merchant as well as the
former refused to deliver any parcel of the Wares till he had spoke with
Zenodor: but told him because he would not detain him in suspense, that he
would go with him after Exchange time and see if he liked him, seeing Zenodor
was a Gentleman he had no knowledge of, neither personally, nor by fame. Upon
this they took their leaves of each other. Diomedes immediately repairs to his
Tool Zenodor and tells him of the business, praying him to humor the matter
well, which Zenodor promised to do; and in order thereto sends his Cashier and
Footman out with Baggs of Counters and Leaden Plates, instructing them how
they should demean themselves, and be ready at such an Hour. Diomedes at the
time appointed went to dance attendance, and brings his Merchant with him:
where coming Zenodor sat at Table, but ordered them to step into the Parlour,
promising to wait upon them immediately. The Merchant seeing that Zenodor had a
great house and rich furniture (at lest in the Room where he then sat) seemed
to be well satisfied with the Party, but the more when he saw so many bags
brought in one after another: but by that time Zenodor was come down to know
their pleasure one of the men infortunately let one of the Bags fall, which
being very ponderous burst up the seem, and thereupon let all the leaden pieces
tumble about the Floor, which the Merchant seeing, began to smell a Cheat and
distrust his Party. Diomedes and Zenodor were so suddenly surprised, that they
could not invent any speedy excuse to palliate the Roguery. The Merchant seeing
them so look one upon another and both blush, concluded that it was a stratagem
and consequently without any open offense let them know that if Diomedes would
have the Goods and pay down ready Money, he would not dispose of them within a
certain of Days, or otherwise he desired to be rid of his bargain: so that
Diomedes found there was no hopes of taking the Cully that bout. When the
Merchant was gone they began to chide the man who let it fall, although durst not
much provoke him, well knowing in what posture affairs stood with them.

Monsr. de Kleyn (for that was the Merchants name) was well satisfied with the
accident, being delivered (as he had reason to believe) from the snare, yet
could not but tell it abroad how narrowly he had escaped a scouring; which was
presently noised through the Town, and brought so long from hand to hand, that
the Creditors of Diomedes came to have notice of it: Of which Diomedes himself
being sensible foresaw into what state he was like to fall, especially when all
had him in the eye for a Cheat.

And besides all this the continual storming of Fernelia, who was now grown
past shame, and so impudent that she began to be a Town-talk was the occasion
of some fear on the other hand, for he was sure that in case Justice should
demand him, Fernelia would be the first that should betray him, as indeed
hearing of this mischance she endeavored to do, having sent Letters abroad to
several places where she knew he had offended, as also to every one of his
Creditors respectively, though with that secrecy that none knew from whence,
enclosing in each of them a Pasquil in Rhyme which she caused also to be
printed, and cried about streets by the Hawkers, to the great detriment of our
decayed Merchant.

The same night that she had dispersed those in famous Libels against her
husband, she held a consult with her Paramour to run away and having changed
all she had into Gold and Jewels, the next morning betimes she set forth,
leaving her husband, house and the remainder of the Goods.

Diomedes and Zenodor also having a hint of what was noised abroad, were
sensible that an incumbent danger threatened them, they gathered together as
much Moneys as they could on a sudden and set forward for Paris.

Brutus the Mercer whose Shop Diomedes had pillaged, and the injured Parties at
Rotterdam coming now by these Libels to hear who it was that had been the
Agressor, went privately to the Schout with Intention to apprehend him: but
coming to his house found nothing but a Child of 3 years old crying in bed, and
a few pieces of Silk, which it seems Fernelia thought not vendible. They
therefore dispatched Letters abroad describing Zenodor and Diomedes, that they
might be apprehended.

The Debtors also came and seized upon what was left, and by an Order from
Court exposed all to public sale, of which when they had made a Dividend could
not make One per cent. The Child was immediately sent away to the Hospital to be
educated, among the Orphans.

When Diomedes and Zenodor were arrived at Paris, and Zenodor no more able to
be any way instrumental to his Patron, Diomedes demands the Goods which the
other had in possession. And advised him to seek for a new Employment; but
Zenodor foreseeing approaching poverty and himself destitute of further means
to live with that splendour which he had of late done, would in no wise yield to
the delivery of what he had, alleging that he ought to have an equal share in
them, since his help was the greatest Instrument in the acquisition of all
Diomedes of late enjoyed. In brief the dispute continued so long between them,
that they drew upon the Place and pushed several times at each other. Till
Diomedes receiving a stab under the right Pap fell down to the Earth. Zenodor
seeing him so disabled had notwithstanding his Fury compassion of his
Antagonist, and instead of dispatching him holp him up upon his Feet, brought
him to a Surgeon and used all possible means he could, to bring him to a
recovery: begging forgiveness a hundred times, and prayed him notwithstanding
this fatal difference to continue friendship, with many solemn promises never
to forsake him. Diomedes knowing what occasion he had for his help, did freely
pardon him, although, mente mansit alta repostum. he in wardly continued the old
Grudge, and fully resolved to revenge himself upon him.

When our Patient was restored to his former health, he prayed Zenodor to take
a Journey with him to Rotterdam where he would fetch 8000 gild. in Gold that he
had hid in the Ground.

Zenodor not in the lest distrusting any thing showed himself very free and
willing to go with him, and the next day they both left Paris: but after 2 days
Journey Diomedes feigned himself very sick and prayed Zenodor that he would be
so kind as to fetch a Doctor, which he did.

The Doctor came and feeling his Pulse could not find any great matter of
alteration; yet unwilling to declare that his opinion was so, lest he should
miss of such a benefit, he orders him some gentle Medicines with a cordial
Julep, and for that time leaves him to the care of Zenodor, withal telling him
he must keep warm and use all means he could to get a little sweat.

The next day Diomedes, appears still worse than before, and therefore willed
Zenodor to take the Journey himself, describing him to a hair the place where
he should delve for the Treasure, which Zenodor taking for a great mark of
Friendship and Fidelity made himself ready for the Journey. On the fourth day
that they had stayed there, Zenodor setts forward betimes in the morning, with
Instructions from Diomedes that if he could not find the place that he should
give him further directions afterward by writing, and therefore appointed him
a place where he should take up his lodgings when there. So soon as he was set
out, Diomedes dispatches several Letters by Post to his Creditors at Amsterdam,
to whom Zenodor was engaged for him in great Sums, as also to some others whom
Zenodor had helped him to rob, informing them that at such a time and place
they should find Zenodor, who had by him a considerable Sum of Money.

So soon as those of Amsterdam received those Letters, they strove who should
be there first, without giving notice to one another, for that they supposed he
had so much Money about him: and coming there nearly about one time they
apprehended and transported him to Amsterdam, where he was very fairly
committed to Prison, there to abide and expect his Trial. Zenodor was hereat
mainly surprised, but more vexed at the treacherous dealings of Diomedes, for
the Letters he had written were shown him.

After 21 days was a Jail-delivery, and Zenodors Case laid open before the
Schepens, where not only a long Indictment was brought against him, of many
enormous Cheats, but also house-breaking and Delinquencies of a higher nature,
which being so clear and heinous were adjudged worthy of Death: whereof he
received Sentence and was executed upon the Scaffold, where the Executioner lay
his head before his Feet.

However we must mind you that before the Sentence was pronounced they urged
him to a candid Confession of all he had done, and willed him to detect his
Accomplices: which he (in hopes that the Bench would show him some mercy) did:
and amongst the rest de la Grange, who during his noble housekeeping acted for
Steward. The same de la Grange, as he told them was frequently at the House of
one Ioffr. P -- a notable Bawd near the Lutheran Church, upon the Cingle, which
was a Rendezvous for a Gang of Rascallity; that lived merely upon Cheating,
Theft and other Villainy. Upon these directions the Substitute Schout was sent
the next morning by 3 of the Clock, where he by an order from the full Benche
broke open the Doors and found de la Grange and 5 Jews, each in bed with a
Whore. The Jews who are in such cases according to a special Ordinance, to that
end provided are carried to Goal and left to the Rigor of the Law. The Mock
Steward was also served the like, and about 2 Months after received his
Sentence, which was to be whipped upon the Scaffold, cauterised with a hot Iron
in the shoulder and put into the Rasp-house, there to remain 8 years, although not
long after he broke out, but for a Murder committed upon a Hamburger, was
brought to Goal and shortly after beheaded with the Sword.

Diomedes who staid no longer at that place than that night he sent away the
Letters for Holland, ran away under a color of going to take the air, without
paying his Host; betaking himself directly for Paris.

Being arrived here he was at a great strait, what course to take in hand to
supply himself with money, seeing himself now for want of that brought to the
extreme point. All that ever he could invent or think upon was to little
purpose, for he could not see any mean honest, or dishonest, to redress his
decaying state. He ruminated all his Pockets to see if there were any of those
Golden Relics left, may the very lining of his Breeches. In this desolate
Condition he wandered up and down the streets ready to starve for want of
relief, that finally he was fain to sell his Clothes and purchase an old
patched Suit, in which he could with more confidence ask an Alms.

It happened upon a time that coming to a House where they sold very rich
Pointwork and seeing none in the shop, made bold to enter in, thinking that if
any chanced in the mean while to come forth to beg relief, but when he saw that
none came down, he assumed the freedom to lift a very rich Cravat, of Point di
Veneza which he cunningly drew up his sleeve and so marched off with his
purchase that he had bought without bargaining, and paid for without Money:
which he soon found a Chapman for, selling it for 90. Livers, which was not
half the value.

Having received the Money he went to a Salesman to buy him a new Suit, and by
the way met with a great crowd of People, who were looking upon a Fist-duel
between two fellows in Pesants habit, which when over, he speeds him away to
Market where coming, to a shop he looked him out a Suit amounting to the value
of 60 gl. which having drawn on, and found it fitted him to a hair he began to
look for Money in his old Breeches; but much mistaken for some of the
Horn-thumb Gang had done that Office for him. Our decayed Merchant feeling no
bottom in his Pocket was in a main conster^ation, and turning to the Salesman
told him how his Money was gone; at which the Man in a fit of Anger unharnesses
his Worship, where in hopes of handsell, gets a handsome breed of Lice. Diomedes
on the Contrary in hopes of new Rigging, was fain to draw on his old Robes
again and depart, and glad that he made his escape so.

With a sorrowful and desperate heart he betook himself without the Town,
where sitting down humbly upon the Grass, by the way side he fell to his old
Trade again.

After he had fitten here 2 or 3 days, came a poor Woman, who seeing a
Personage of her Calibre, stepped toward him, entering into discourse together,
she desired him to inform her of the Guise of begging about Paris. Diomedes
thus unexpectedly meeting with a Female of his own trade, with a raiment of
diverse colors, stockings turned over the shoes, hair loose about her head, her
face scorched with the sun, never a shift to her back, and in short all foul
and nasty, yet well proportioned of Body, he stood staring, thinking he had
else where seen her, for both by her Voice and Countenance, as well as her
Language, being something guilty of the Nether dutch Idiom and Prosodie, he was
certain that she was an Amsterdammer, and after a serious view descried the
very features of his dear Fernelia; on whom not withstanding, her unworthiness
in times past, he had hearty Compassion, seeing her in such a low condition.
Longer could he not conceal himself, but as a fire that burns inwardly seeks a
Vent and to burst out, so the eager affections of that close, tho unhappy
union, would not endure to be smothered. However he kept himself some what
strange, altered his voice, and made her such wary answers as she could not
perceive who he was, till such times as himself listed to detect it. He
inquired further after her Life, Parentage, State and Fortune, which she
punctually replied to, yet with that obscurity and mental reservation that had
he not known the matter before hand, should have gathered very little from the
rehearsal she made of her Course of Life: but in the mids of this Discourse,
she observed tears run down his cheeks and his ejes full, called to mind his
Physnomy and upon her challenging him he altered his voice again being no
longer able to restrain himself, which confirmed the matter.

Upon this they embraced each other, and she acknowledged him for her husband:
as he also owned her for his wife, resolving for the future to be partakers of
one Fortune and be sharers in what Providence should allott them. Diomedes
began to enquire of her, how she came into that calamitous condition, which we
shall impart to the Reader in a few words, and show how that Virtue promotes a
Save to the Dignity of a Lord, when on the contrary Vice reduces those that are
advanced to the high est pitch of Fortune to the lowest degree, and vilest
condition fatal to Men.

After I had been, quoth she, raised to such a Condition and to that Estate by
your means I verily believed it impossible for me ever to fall to the State
wherein I now am; and as those who by Money could command all that their Heart
lusted, so I who was not bark-bound for that, was loath to deny my self of any
thing that might indulge my senses, and not only contented herewith I sought
further to pamper my self with what was not lawful, and by consequence violated
my marriage bed (as is not unknwn to you) but seeing how that it was not safe
for me to make any delay at Amsterdam, for fear of being taken notice of by
Justice, and how that I was manifestly going to decay, I resolved to make Sale
of all I could in your absence and run away with my Paramour. But being come
into Flanders some words happened to rise between, us which (as I believed)
were by him created on purpose, for being upon the way and far from any Village
he tied me to a tree, stripped me naked and took the remainder of the Gold I had
with him, and leaving me there to shift for my self since which time I could
never hear of him. After I had lay here more than 50 hours not knowing whether
Hunger or Cold should be the greatest cause to bring me to my end, I happened
to hear some people in the Woods by night, and calling out they came and
released me, but not without forcing me to their wills. Being thus set at
Liberty I wandered many days through the deserts not daring by reason of my
nakedness appear at any house, or speak to any body that I saw: my Lodging was
among Cattle upon the cold ground, and my Diet what I could find upon Trees,
but being now in despair of ever coming to my former health, or recovering my
strength again, I lay down with an intent to die and to endeavor no longer to
keep my soul and body together. Lying in this condition more likely to feed
Wolves than Worms, came a brace of Hounds in pursuit of a Hare, which having
lost and finding me they began to howl out, and would not leave me till the
Huntsman himself came, who seeing a naked Woman was strangely altered at the
matter, and having compassion on me began to enquire how I came there in that
deplorable condition, but through faintness I could hardly make him any answer,
only I desired him to trouble me no more, but suffer me to take my leave of the
World which had ever been a burden to me: but he not willing to see me perish
went to some Cottage not far from thence where he fetched me a few old clothes
which he threw about my body, but when he would have raised me, found I could
not stand upright upon my legs, but was fain to set me upon his horse and hold
me up, bringing me in that manner to his own house, where he set me by the
Fire, and gave me warm Diet till I began to recover my strength. Nor did the
kindness of that true Christian stop here and appear only in that, but being
himself a man of mean condition and slender Fortune, he went to his Lord and
other Gentlemen round about in the Country, who sent me both Money and Habit,
besides many daily Visits that they made and comforted me. When I was well
recovered and a little hearty, I took my leave of them all respectively, going
to their houses and thanking them for their great Bounty and Charity, but more
especially the Honest Huntsman. One of the Gentlewomen who had been the most
liberal of the rest at my departure gave me 2 Pieces of Gold with a Letter to a
Person of Quality at Paris, desiring them to admit of me into their household:
but such was my unhappiness that going over a Bridge I was met with a small
company of Soldiery, which I took for Deserters, these after they had miserably
plundered ravished me by turns. The greatest favor they were pleased to show
me was restoring me the Letter which I was to bring to Paris, for that they
knew it was not serviceable to them: although when I was arrived at Paris that for
the honor of the Lady in the Country I durst not deliver it, since I was so
meanly apparreled, so that in conclusion I was forced to take this trade of
begging upon me, in which condition I have continued ever since, but find,
alas! Charity is faint and cool, and envy as vigorous and hot among those of
our Fortunes and profession,

More she would have said, but sorrow pressing too hard upon her heart put a
stop to her proceeding in that Narrativ: and Diomedes on the contrary desiring
her to relate no more, for that it wounded him to the Heart. The Tears that ran
trickling down her Cheeks he wiped with a lap of his shattered weed, and asked
her if she would be partaker of what he had to eat, which was a crust of moldy
Bread and a cruse of Spring Water, that she thankfully accepted, and sat down
by him.

So soon as Table was over, they fell into a Study what practice to follow to
get into a fashionable way of living again; not forgetting to rip up their
former splendour, which was a greater grief to think upon, than their present
calamity and despair. In short they did not approv of this course of Life, for
calling to mind their former success and Fortune, they resolved to attempt
higher things, and since Paris was a City well peopled, and consequently the
best place for their turn, they betook themselves thither, where being arrived
watched for their prey like the greedy Vultures, but finding nothing that they
could lift in 3 or 4 days time, Diomedes bethinks himself of a new Machine, and
calling Fernelia asks her if she had not the Letter which was given her by the
Lady in the Country with her; she answered, Yea. Diomedes therefore willed her
to dress her self in the best wise she could and apply her self thither not
knowing what Providence may allot them, since they were now put to their last
shift. Fernelia was very unwilling to do it, since she was in such mean
apparel, and might rather be looked upon as a Cheat, especially the Letter
being of an old date, and if it were either transcribed or altered that the
matter would smell the worse, the more if the Lady who delivered her the Letter
should since have been at Paris. As to the first thing (replies Diomedes) you
scruple at, there will be no great difficulty in it, the rather for that you
have a just excuse consistent with Truth, which will rather be an advantage
than a let to your purpose: but if in case the Lady has bin in Town since the
date of this Letter, without Doubt, she will have discoursed the matter, and,
as it were, broke the Ice before you, and given her an account of your former
misfortune, which will the more induce them to believe what has since verily
befallen you.

These reasons moved her to hazard the matter and dressing her self in the best
wise she could, waits her opportunity to deliver the Letters but was not
suffered Admittance till she told one of the Pages that she had a Letter for
his Lady, which she desired him to deliver. The Page receives the Letter and
forthwith reached it over to a Gentleman Usher who gave it the Lady. So soon as
Madame de Oquendo had read the Letter (for so was her name) she sent for
Fernelia and for an hour or two discoursed and examined her about
circumstances, fearing whether that it was the real handwriting of the Lady,
her Cousin. In short she ordered her to come after 8 days and she would her
self in the mean time consider how to dispose of her, and with that left her
and went into the Hall.

Fernelia finding here such good encouragement watched her opportunity, and
after 8 days went to wait upon the Lady, who by that time had received a Letter
from the Country, which happily confirmed the other Fernelia delivered. Madame
d'Oquendo, whose husband was a Spaniard, and she now and then a little possessed
with Jealousy, was hardly willing to take her into the house, for that, as we
have already mentioned, Fernelia was a Woman of a singular form. She
nevertheless ordered her to stay there so long till she should hear of some
other place.

Fernelia thus admitted into the household, got into good apparel and fed at a
plentiful Table, began to look as lofty as ever, often wishing that she might
but be rid of her Husband who came now and then to speak with her.

About 14 days after came another Letter from the Lady in the Country, which
further confirmed that there was such a Letter sent by an indigent Person, and
in all things agreeable to what the other specified, so that the Parisian Lady
being now out of suspense as to the verity of the matter, used Fernelia very
civilly and promoted her from the common rank of Servants, to the Quality of a
Waiting Gentlewoman, and at last committed to her care all the House and Family.

Being thus on a sudden advanced, and of such repute in the sight of all the
whole house, the Lady seldom ever troubled her self with the disposal of any
thing, but left the management of the Market to Fernelia, who ever now and then
imbezled something for her Darling, which she privately sent him with a charge
never to come anigh the house, for fear of suspicion.

Diomedes willingly absents himself, having all his heart desired, but very
impatient to play so long at small Games urges her often times by writing to
make a shorter dispatch, which she nevertheless would in no case assent to,
till forced to it by his frequent importunity, and personal visits which at
last he presumed to make, which hatched a terrible mischief, and, that Pitcher
that had gone so often to the Well, came home broke at last.

It was about the preparation against Lent, at what time some Noblemen of the
Romish Faith, among other superstitious Rites, do usually hang their Private
Chapels and Altars with Purple, covering all the Crucifixes and Images with
the same, so that Fernelia professing skill in those things, was ordered to buy
so much as they should have occasion for in the Chapel.

Which when done, all was hung and disposed of, save only two Windows; but
coming too short, the Lady was not willing to buy any more, but taxed the Man
that hung the Altar for being too profuse, and not observing that what they had
bought should serve their turn. The man when thus chidden made answer that he
had but made use of so many else, and would have meted it in her presence: so
that he clearly manifested that the fault lay not in him, upon which the Lady
in person went to the Mercer to inquire whether they had any more of the same:
The Mercer replied, that they had no more, nor that none in Paris had any such
in 10 years: In short the Lady came to understand that Fernelia had bought so
many Else more than the man had used, so that the fault must needs ly in one of
them three; either Fernelia, the Mercer, or the Upholsterer. However the Lady
put all up in quietness and made no more talk of it, till Diomedes came
according to his usual custom to pay his dear Fernelia a visit, having a new
suit with a Vest and Lining of the very same Purple, whence she began to
suspect that Fernelia had embezled the Goods, and therefore imparted the matter
to her sister at that time in the house with her. Fernelia hearing them often
whisper, and by some other circumstances gathered that they had her in
suspicion, resolved before 2 days were at an end to march off, and therefore
gave Diomedes notice of it, who the next evening came to give attendance.

Fernelia packs up as much Plate and Jewels as she could very well come at,
although the latter she could not so easily come by, it being Lent, and a time
when the Parisians appear with less splendor abroad than at other times. With
this she steals clandestinly out at a backdoor where she meets with Diomedes,
who eased her of her burden, both marching on a good pace till they thought
that they were out of harms way.

A great Ingratitude! but afterward as well rewarded by the severity of
Justice, as you shall shortly hear.

The Plate they converted into Money as soon as they could, till fearing that
the Goldsmiths might have Tickets to apprehend them: so that what remained
Diomedes melted, intending to sell it afterward when they had occasion for
Money.

So long as this Money lasted they made good cheer, not sparing for any thing
that might add to their delight but drawing toward the last mite, they
bethought themselves of some other course to take in hand, whilst they had
some Moneys at command.

It happened that pretty early in the morning he came to a Watchmaker, not far
from the Louvre, who was very busy in hanging out his watches, having lay them
in confused order. He prays that Watch-maker to read him a Letter, pretending
that he could not make any sense of it, which the Watch-maker did not once
refuse, but read and expounded it to him on the best wise he could. Fernelia in
the mean while drew back her Arm and took up two Gold Watches ^very
clandestinly, Diomedes also seeing one very richly enammeled made a shift to
lift it without being taken notice of by the Watch-maker. But it seemed that a
youth who sat behind at work seeing that, so soon as they were gone told his
Master of it. The Watchmaker in all have follows and siezes them, Diomedes
would have stoutly denied the matter, but Fernelia was so altered that he
confessed the crime, restored him the Watches and begged forgiveness of him. It
is true, the Watchmaker would have done it, but having made a great concurrency
of People together, he feared to be called in question for it, said, he could
not answer it if he did. While they disputed the case came an Officer of
Justice who after a little enquity what there was to do, took Diomedes and
Fernelia, and hurried them both to prison, where they were to remain till the
next Jail-delivery.

The Remainder of their Money was now speedily brought to a Catastroph, and
being unacquainted with the Laws of the Country, they were in great distress,
fearing that they should at that time take their leave of the World, but,

The Day for the Sessions appointed being come they were brought to Trial and
since there was no evident token that they had before been convict of any other
crime, the Bench was not so rigorous. The Sentence was to be whipped and seared
in the shoulder with a hot Iron, and afterward Banished.

In this condition they were ledout at the Gates of Paris, and set their course
to wards Biscay, where finding charity very cold by the way they resolved to
hazard another risque. For passing by a fair house in the Country, they
applied themselves to the Master, desiring to have a nights Lodging in the Barn
or Stable, which was granted them. About midnight, they rose up when they
supposed all to be secure and asleep, and lighting a Candle which they had in a
dark Lanthom, took out the Casement and so got into the house, where they found
a Cabinet in which was six Silver plates, and 3 dozen of Spoons, besides a
Saltseller and 2 Porrengers, all of the same metal, which they took away and
marched out softly, tending toward Bilboa.

So soon as they were arrived there, they converted all into Money, thinking to
imbarque themselves for England, and there to spend the rest of their Days, but
as the Proverb says, When Knaves fall out, Honest men get their own. Diomedes
and Fernelia, fell into a hot contest, about I know not what trifile, so that
words between them grew exceeding high, and Fernelia was so vexed that she
resolved to send him to the Gallows, and make her self mistress of the Money;
pursuant to which intent she went to one whom she entreated to assist her under
the promise of a great reward. The Ruffian, who was a Person ever ready to do
such a Turn, promised her that he would not fail to do his endeavor.

That night they consulted to leave Diomedes asleep, and having first taken all
the Money, they paid the Hostess, and sent a Letter privately to the Praetor of
theCity who immediately went to apprehend him.

When Diomedes found how cases stood, that Fernelia had betrayed him, and was
marched off with the Money, he gave notice of it to the Praetor, who thereupon
dispatched some Persons with a Pouvoir to take her and bring her back to
Bilbao. The Ships were also visited, and the high ways traced; till at last she
was found in the house of a poor Pesant, not far from the City, where she had
stayed 2 nights, was brought to Bilbao, and there committed to safe Custody.

During the time of his Imprisonment came Mordechai the Jew to Bilbao, whom he
had cheated of a considerable Sum of Money, as was mentioned page 72. who
hearing that a Hollander was committed to prison, out of pure compassion went
to visit him; but seeing that it was Diomedes instead of giving him comfort,
aggravated the matter, and threatened to bring in his Action against him.

Lebechea seeing the Jew in earnest, acquainted his keeper, when he was gone,
that such an one, and a Jew was there in the City, requiring him to acquaint
the Gentlemen of the Inquisition with it, which the Keeper not daring to
conceal, immediately went and detected him, upon which he was apprehended,
examined, convicted of Judaism, and burned at the stake.

When Diomedes had been about 5 weeks n^ Prison he came to a Trial, and the
Pesant was sent for where he had stole the Plate, in order to prosEcute him.

Diomedes and Fernelia were brought before the Seat of Justice, where the Judge
first with an austere countenance threatened to put them to the Rack, but
afterward with more blandiloquence willed them to make a hearty Confession,
which without many Arguments they did, and so received Sentence, Diomedes to be
hanged and Fernelia whipped. At the day appointed Diomedes was brought forth, and
made a signal appearance of Repentance, although not doubting of a Pardon till the
last hour but much mistaken, for the Executioner without any delay performed
his charge and duty. Fernelia although by reason she was of the weaker sex, was
more gently dealt with, yet what by the stripes she received, and what through an
inward smart and horror of Conscience she fell sick and died in the field. So,
Courteous Reader, you have seen the Condign Punishment and Requital of an
impious Life, and the Reward of Villainy in him who had so unjustly rewarded
others, whose wicked Projects had never respect to the best of Friends, nor
ever spared his nearest Allies so long as his Will was seconded with his Power,
and till FUNIS became his

FINIS.

