THE Dutch Remonstrance Concerning the Proceedings and Practices OF JOHN DE
WIT Pensionary, AND RVWAERT VAN PVTTEN his Brother, with others of that
FACTION.

Drawn up by a Person of Eminency there, and Printed at the HAGUE.

And Translated out of Dutch, August the 30th. 1672.

LONDON Printed by S. and B. G. and are to be sold by R. C. over against the
Globe in Little Britain.

THE DUTCH Remonstrate, etc. Translated out of Dutch.
EVery one not without Reason, stands amazed, not being abel to apprehend how
it is possible that in less than forty days, the King of France should subdue
above forty Cities and eminent Fortresses; formerly belonging to this State.

A disgrace to our Nation, and a blot so great that it is never to be washed
off from the not sufficiently famous Batavians.

Yet if the Reader pleases, seriously to consider the following Relation: I
doubt not but he will in some measure be satisfied.

My Opinion then is, that the King of France did not make so great a Progress
purely by force of Arms, but by the concurrence and assistance of some
Governors of this Country; (Oh that they had never been so!) who being bought
thereto, instead of Fathers, became Traitors of our Native Country, which to
demonstrate clearly we are to consider,

That the King of France did no way surprise us, but gave us sufficient warning
before hand; as well with words to our Ambassadors, as in deeds with his great
preparations made by him, beyond any example, through his whole Dominions; as
also by his Majesty's erecting several unheard of Magazines, as well in his own
Realm as without, nay on our Fronties at Nuys. The preparations whereof were so
great, that an experienced Officer, who has borne great Commands in the German
Wars, as also under the King of Sweden, Denmark, and other Princes, coming to
Compliment the Lord of Amerongen, who at that time was on the behalf of this
State at Colen, taking an opportunity to view the forementioned Magazine,
declared to me at his return, that he had never seen nor heard of the like;
believing it to be sufficient to contain Provision and Ammunition enough for
two, nay three hundred thousand men.

That he could not see this State was concerned thereat, asking moreover, if
they did not intend to defend their Country; because they made such small
preparations for the defense thereof; that the Ashes ought to be stirred, and
the Fire extinguished, before the flame grew too big.

I confess that at that time I little regarded this saying, because according
to my Duty I censured favorably and expected nothing but good, and
faithfulness from our Governors; but I have by the sorrowful event, found that
I might not without a good Argument, have condescended to the forementioned
Officers opinion.

For who knows not that the first care of a Governor for the defense of his
Country ought to consist,

In erecting sufficient Magazines, fortifying of Towns and Castles?

Furnishing the same Towns and Fortresses with valliant and faithful Governors
and Commanders, sufficient Garrisons, Trenches and Ammunition for War, and
especially to deprive the Enemy of as much Ammunition and Men as possible. But
let us examine whether any of all these things were done with vigor and we
shall to our sorrow and irreparable loss and disgrace rather find the contrary
to have been acted by the wicked and strange directions of those corrupt
Governors: for notwithstanding it was well known that at the beginning of the
King of France his preparations for War, that there scarce was any Saltpeeter
in Europe, but what was in the hands of the Netherland-East-India Company; and
notwithstanding it was proffered the State by the said Company yet they refused
the same, and rather desired that it should be sent to France, and so serve as
a knife to cut the throat of the Netherlands at once: which was not sufficient,
for besides that, (instead of publishing edicts to prevent the transporting of
Amuniton to the Enemy which ought to have been their chief care) they
encouraged and maintained the sending of all necessaries for War to the Enemy:
of the truth whereof every one may be assured, since it may be heard from the
mouth of the Lord Jucchen Governor of Wesel, yet living in the Hague; that his
excellency about four or five Months ago, being advised in a Letter by a Loyal
Subject, that four Ships laden with Powder and Shot and other Amuntion for War
were coming up the Rhine, to pass by Wesel, adding moreover the Merchants
names, that had sold and bought it, where it was Laden, what Powder-mill the
Powder came from, and from whom the other Stores etc. and that the Master of
the Ship had a Pasport for Colen, nay that it was to be carried to Nuys, into
the French Magazine; advising him also that by virtue of a certain Order, (sent
to his excellency some years ago, that if the Bishop of Munster should make any
Invasion) he would please to stop the said ships; whereupon going himself to
the Rhine, ask't whether any persons had seen such ships pass by as were
mentioned in his Letter of advice; (because this is a very remarkable business,
I think it will not seem amiss to give an account of the circumstances thereof)
when one of the standers by answering said, that two such like ships were past
by and gone up higher, that they were laden with Powder Shot and other
Ammunition, which instead of being unladen at Colen according to the Pastport,
were carried and put into the French Magazine at Nuys: that he had this account
from one of the Masters of the Vessels that were returned from thence very much
discontented that he had been forced to unlade contrary to his Pastport.

The Governor hereupon sending for the forementioned Master of the Vessel and
having understood the truth, according to the forementioned relation from his
own mouth, moreover that there was a third Vessel laden with the same sort of
goods was yet below Wesel, and coming up the Rhine. Whereupon staying till the
evening, and not seeing the said ship, the Governor fearing that she might pass
by in the night, sent some Musketeers thither, strictly Commanding them to
enter and stay in the Vessel till it should come up to the City, and be
searched by his Excellency. Who on the following day examining the said Ship,
found the same to be laden as before; when taking the Pastport from the Master,
he immediately caused it to be exactly Coppied, and keeping the Original, sent
the Copy with the Post, who went away that day, or else an express had been
sent to the State, or Counsel of State, whom he informed in a letter, all what
had happened, and therefore desired speedy order how he should Govern himself
in this affair.

There was at that time but little Powder and s^ot in Wesel, so that the
Governor was not a little rejoiced, hoping that by this opportunity the City
would be well provided at a small charge to the Country.

But instead that the said ship should unlade there; the Governor received an
order signed by the Secretary, that he should not only free the Vessel which he
had stopped, but also permit all ships that had such Pastports to pass freely and
unmolested on their way, which his excellency immediately condescended to.

Two days after past by another Ship that had twice as much Ammunition aboard
her as one of the former, and from time to time several others of the same
nature steering the same course.

Whilst the Governor from that time forward solicited the Counsel, that the
City Wesel, being so considerable a Town and of such great consequence to the
State, ought to have 6000. men in Garrison, and sufficient trenches and
Ammunition: all which the Governor often times requested in his Letters to the
Counsel of State, who at last gave orders for the making of Trenches about the
said City, and furnishing the same with all manner of necessaries.

But instead of putting a Garrison of 6000 men into the same, they drew
immediately thirteen Troops of Horse, and twelve Companies of Foot, all stout
and able men out of it, and put a few Companies, consisting the greatest part
of unexperienced youths in the stead; of which the Governor has often
complained: and to secure this considerable City the more to the Enemy, they
(under pretense that the Governor Jucchen should come and give their High and
and Mighties an account in Person in the Hague) put in another Governor: and
how honorably he has carried himself in the defense of that City appears by
the event, Exitus acta probant. The like pretense they had to turn out other
Governors, as appears chiefly by Colonel D'ossery an Irish man, and a Roman
Catholic, whose Villainies and Traitorous actions, have been manifested
formerly in his ser*vices under other Princes And one whose correspondence with
the Enemy, and notorious Treasons concerning the business of Rynberk are at
large related, in a certain paper delivered by the Captains Vytenbogaert, and
Clark to his Highness the Prince of Orange and the Counsel of State, and also
in a certain apology of the Governor Bassem, and a Comment on the letter from
Tondlemonde, all extant in Print, to which I refer you; wherein also you have
an account how that the Garrisons of the City Rynberk (notwithstanding it was
so considerable a fortress to this State,) were not sufficient to defend half
the Countersharps: and therefore might easily (by the Treachery of D'ossery,
and the falsness of the Governor Bessem) be conquered by the Enemies. And
indeed this D'ossery following forsooth the examples of the Honorable Lords
and Overseers of this forementioned work, in their counterfeit fatherly care)
behaved himself no doubt so honorably in the defense of this City, that he
well deserved a triumphant Gallows of a considerable height, not only his own
falsness, but because so many Loyal Officers which undoubtedly were in Garrison
there, were deluded by his base designs and treacheries to their utter ruin.

And for the better carrying on of these Traitorous courses, three Regiments
more were sent to Mastricht, after it was sufficiently provided, so that in all
probability the Enemy (finding that place so fortifyed) should pass by there,
and come first to Rynberk and Wesel. At the same time when the news came to an
Assembly of a Province now in the Enemies possession, that there were three
Regiments more put into Mastricht, it was said, that his Highness the Prince of
Orange had writ in a letter. that he did much wonder, that such an
extraordinary care was taken for that City only, when as it would be more
necessary to look after other Towns, which were of as great consequence to the
State: this I was informed by a person whose fortuneit was to be present at
that Assembly.

I also heard at that time that a certain Governor being exceedingly troubled,
said, what does all this tend to? I do not like the carriage of affairs, for we
are like to lose our Country for want of men, having 25000 short of what is
absolutely necessary.

And what was the Reason?

They made a great show of raising men, but they acted all things contrary.

For notwithstanding the first levies were made with great trouble out of the
country, and we were assured that by the many men that were likewise raised
there by others, the Governors of those places had taken an occasion, strictly
to forbid the same, insomuch that we knew, there was not one place, nay not one
foot of Land out of our own Dominions left, where we were permitted to levy any
forces: yet nevertheless under a pretense for the good of the Country, it was
strictly forbid by an Edict, not to raise any men within our Dominions, but in
such places where we knew before, there was not a man to be had?

Nay these Officers, (which for the most part were Roman Catholics) knowing
the unwillingness of men to stay with them, were forced to raise two or three
times the men that otherwise would have served, to the great exhausting of the
public Treasures and their own Estates: and yet they could not keep so many of
them together, as to make up half a Company at their place of Randesvouz.
Whereupon the Captains making a complaint to the Governors, that it was a
common practice of the Soldiers, to take their money, and afterward to desert
their Colors; and desiring that these things might be remedied, they shrunk up
their shoulders, saying, it was not in their power to help it. These disorders
whereupon of beating of Drums within the Country was left off, and the
discourse amongst the Officers being, that Holland had money enough, and
consequently might have men at all times.

The other great Leavies and Treaties with the Foreign Princes, viz.
Brardenburgh, Lunenburgh and others, were appointed to be against that time
when they hoped and judged that all things would be lost: notwithstanding it
might have been sooner accomplished, and more effectually, the Princes
themselves having proffered their Assistance.

The Ratification of the Treaty being also kept close till the last hour,
deprived our Ambassadors from making a conclusion.

We may be informed from the Ambassadors, that were sent to Brandenburgh, and
now Residing in the Hague, that they received the Ratification at Hamborough,
not before the beginning of July New Style

The same Lords Ambassadors, declare to the whole World, that the States
themselves may justly be blamed for the so late coming down of the Auxillary
Troops. That at first his Highness the Duke of Brandenburgh was treated
withal, as if they would have bought a dish of Fish of him. That afterward
his Highness instead of being pressed on, advised our Ambassador to stir up his
Lords and Masters, about the furthering of affairs; saying moreover, my Lord
you have Traitors in your Country, matters are very ill managed there. I am
also assured, and it may likewise be heard from the forementioned Ambassadors,
that the Treaty with the Princes of Lunenburgh, and Br^mswick was broke off
only upon a difference of 50^0 Rix dollers.

But note, they would rather want the favor of those Princes, and the 8007 men
which they would have sent this State.

What do you think (said one, of the same Ambassadors to me not long since) if
all the Auxiliary Troops had come down in May, would the French men have gotten
into our Country with so much ease as they have done? But what shall we say! It
was designed so, Ambassadors were sent to all Princes and Potentates, when we
were assured that the Army by the unhandsome proceedings of some, which shall
be nameless, were all blockt up; and how our Ambassadors managed their affairs
in England I shall omit to mention. De Groot would also have made no better end
of his Embassy in France, had he not been seconded by his Brother in Law, that
honest Patriot Momba. One man was not sufficient, therefore we must have a
second. In short, affairs were well ordered; our Magazines exhausted, and the
Enemies filled.

Levies were ordered to be raised in such places, where we knew it was
forbidden and impossible to be performed: And where Auxiliaries were proffered,
and might be had with ease, those were slighted, and put off till such time, as
we supposed, they would be needless and too late.

Most of the Garrisons, and eminent places, were either very badly, or not at
all fortified. Others, which shame forced them to strengthen, wanted one thing
or other to make them insufficient for defense; for those that had men enough
were unprovided of Trenches and Ammunition, and those which were stored with
Powder, Shot, and other Necessaries, wanted Men. And those Places, which we
knew the Enemy would not meddle withal were crowded with with more Men than
were needful. What shall we judge of the eracination of the Strong City and
Fortress de Graffe, and the Contrivance, that the whole Garrison marching
thither, according to Order, were surprised by the Enemy, (who undoubtedly had
notice thereof) and six and twenty of their Colors taken from them. Nay, we
may justly stand amazed to imagine how it is possible, that whole Provinces, as
Overyssel, and Vtrecht, should be delivered up in one day. And whereon depends
that Riddle, that the old experienced soldiers, which were kept Prisoners in
the Churches of the conquered Towns, should not be taken notice of, and yet
beat the Drums daily, for new men: seeming rather willing to give twenty, nay
thirty Gueldres for new and unexperienced men, than for the old ten or twelve,
for which they may be ransomed.

Who thought ever to have lived to see these times in our Provinces, That we
must go begging from door to door for the Horse men, and permit them to go a
way for want of money, as has happened in this Conjuncture in Gronningen: from
whence I had advice thereof from a person, who was an eye witness thereto. When
God intends to punish a Country, he deprives Loyal Governors of their Wisdom,
and permits the wicked to use the same to the destruction thereof.

A certain Member of the States of Holland, not long before the march of the
Enemy, discoursing to one of his Fraternity about the condition, wherein the
Magizines were: said that the Magazine of Holland was so well furnished, that,
though the Wars continued two years, it was sufficient of it self, without any
more supplies: and now, when too late, great Complaints were made, that there
was no place provided, every one calling for Powder, Shot, and other Ammunition
for War; and they were directed to Magizines, which from time to time were
emptied, and consequently had nothing left: The said Lord was asked by his
Associate, Where that great and well furnished Magizine was, of which his
Excellency had boasted of so much not long before: whereupon shrinking up his
shoulders, he said that his meaning was it would serve to furnish Holland only;
but none of the other Provinces, which this Lord, who a few days ago gave me an
account thereof, recented very strangely.

Nay, that which is more, our whole Army being before the Yssel, was two days
before Whitsontide, so ill provided of Powder and Shot that in case of an
Attacque, they would not have been able to defend themselves above twenty-four
hours.

Some of the Deputies upon the Report which was on Whitson Monday, that the
French had taken Burick, coming from Nimmegen to solicit the Lords Deputies
that were in the Field, for Powder and Shot, received for answer, that they
could not spare them any, which was also told me at the same time by a Governor
of Nimmegen.

But Kirk Patrik Governor of Hertogenbosh took better care for his Government:
sending the last week a list to the Counsel of State, of all things which he
wanted.

And to show that his Highness the Prince of Orange used more than ordinary
care and endeavors, sent the Governor (whilst the City committed to his care
was blockt up or besieged) to fetch Powder, Shot, and Canon, which the said
Governor obtained, but then could not find a Vessel that either would or could
undertake to carry the same thither, of which the Governor has made great
complaints here to several persons. Not whether this Governor was blinded by
the orders of his Master, that he could not see the formentioned defects
before, or whether the Overseers of our Countries welfare, judged that it was
of small consequence to this State to preserve this Fortress; the Magistrates
formerly were not of that opinion, but the times change, Tempora mutantur and
nos mutamur in illis,

The King of France needed not to use any force upon the Works, which with so
much care and labor were made along the Yssel, for a far easier way was shown
him to come through the River Rhine, and so to fall into the heart of our
Country.

To which the Treacherous Momba, was no small Instrument, who having so well
ordered that affair beforehand in France, with his honest brother de Groot,
that by what means I know not he was made chief Commander of that part of our
Militia which were appointed for the defense of that Station. When this Traitor
in stead of charging his Regiment to be careful in defending their Post, and
encouraging them to oppose their Enemies, gave orders to march up within a mile
from Nimmegen, and so to leave that Station.

Which when told to his Highness the Prince of Orange, who extremely wondered
thereat, an express Order was immediately sent, that they should instantly draw
down to the forementioned Station again, and endeavor by all means possible to
defend the same.

But before they could approach the same, the Enemy was above half over the
Rhine, so that our forces which were to keep that Station, were as if brought
to their slaughter, and those of Alva his Regiment most of them slain; as a
Lieutenant under the Lieutenant Colonel of this Regiment informed me, as he
was coming along with twenty eight men which he had picked up from several
companies, after the passage through the Rhine was opened to the Enemy.

Et hinc nobis hodiernae illae Lacrimae. Now whether that great Favorite of the
Enemies can by means of his correspondence, free his Brother in Law Momba, from
the punishment due to him for the horrid slaughter occasioned by his means, and
for betraying of our Native Country, the time will learn us. But we hope that
his Conscience will so check him for his own Villainies, that he will not think
of acting any more; if it be possible for a Magpy to leave off hopping.

One of the Lords Deputies of the Field (as I was told by an eminent member of
their excellencies the High and Mighty States of Holland being asked how affairs
were ordered, that such small endeavors were used to oppose the Enemy, he
answered, that he could give no other Reason, but that they had no secret
correspondence to give them any account of the Enemies designs, of which they
were altogether ignorant.

But this Brother, and his accomplices, had too much knowledge of the Enemies
designs, and were too much concerned therewith.

For as I am informed, Momba would endeavor to clear himself by the letters
from the forementioned Lord: And undoubtedly that was the Reason that when his
Highness the Prince of Orange was of opinion that the Enemy ought to be opposed
sometimes in one, and then in another place (to which there then presented good
oportunities) and desiring hereon the advice or order of the Lord Deputies, he
never could get any thing else from them, but shrink up shoulders, and many
expressions of difficulties, never consenting, nor absolutely disapproving of
his Highness proposals; but all things in suspense, tied up as it were his
Highnesses hands, that he could not do any thing in the defense of our Native
Country.

Every one may justly stand amazed, to consider how it is possible that all
things should be thus strangely carried, when there were and are still so many
Loyal Governors at the Helm. For my part, I can satisfy my self, when I think
on the wonderful Carriage of Officers, and strange Government which has been
of late: to consider the power and sway which that Great, and I must confess
most Wise Pensionary (I could wish to God that his wisdom had been employed
for the good of the Country) John de Wit bore during the time of his being
Pensionary.

Has not he under a pretense of freedom brought us into the greatest slavery
of the World? Were his intentions from the beginning till the last ought else?
And did his malicious governing tend to any other end, then to root out and
diminish the luster of that illustrious house of Orange and Nassaw?

Is there any one person that can be said to be ignorant thereof? Can there be
a greater institution of slavery thought on in the World then to force the
whole State, as it were against their Consciences, to suppress the Prince of
Orange? (whose predecessors of blessed Memory, may, next to God only be said to
have brought us to this our freedom, with great effusion of blood and vast
expense of money). Nay to oblige themselves thereto by Oath. We become slaves
when we are deprived of our Liberty, but slaves of slaves, nay slaves of sin,
when we are prevented from doing of good, and forced by an Oath to do evil. No
Governors were admitted to the Regency but with taking this Oath; and so in the
beginning of their Office, were forced to make themselves guilty of so
abominable, and before God and the World, horrid sin of ingratitude, a sin
which not only carries so many unheard of Oaths along with it, but is also the
occasion of so great effusion of blood in our native Country. A sin which can
and may be said to have given the Almighty God sufficient reason utterly to
deprive us again of our so dear bought freedom. And bring us to greater
slavery than ever we were in before. What man how prudent soever he be, can
apprehend how it is possible that one man should infect and poison a whole
State, wherein there are so many wise, honorable, and Loyal Regents and Lords,
to oblige themselves and their successors as much as in them lay, by an Oath,
to such a ruinous and ever crying sin of ingratitude? And yet nevertheless it
was done, for not above 8 or 10 days before the strange Revolution, the
Pentionary of Harlem was forced at the Court, to swear to the forementioned
perpetual Edict. Thus to renew and increase the crying and bloodguilty sin of
our Country. I tremble when I remember that some years ago I accidentally
lighted on a Book, wherein, instead of mentioning the virtues of the praise
worthy and never sufficiently famous Princes of Orange, stood written with an
accursed and Divellish pen, that there were no virtues of the Princes to boast
of, but their vices, as Whoring, Adultery, Drunkning and the like, were at
large described and attributed to every Prince? Who does not stand amazed at
the hearing hereof, and the more when they know that this was not only sold
publicly, but was also licensed and Printed with Authority from the State? The
Councellor-Pentionary had sufficiently examined the same and supplied all the
defects; and esteemed the writer hereof as a Loyal Subject, calling him the
defender of the Countries freedom. But if any thing in that nature had been
done to the prejudice of that long John, or ought had been writ of any of his
Relations, would not the writer thereof have been persecuted with fire and
sword, and the printed paper or book immediately taken and burnt? What has not
this grand designer with the help of his accomplices and hired slaves, which he
rewarded by giving them several offices done to execute his treacherous and
wicked designs? See farther. No sooner were the keys of our native Country
(always so highly esteemed and preserved with great care and circumspection)
villainously given into the hands of the Enemy, but we began to help him to
open the Gates also. Who could ever dream of such actions? No Books afford the
like example. Peter de Groot that perjured and dishonorable wretch, is to make
Peace.

To which purpose he had a blank Commission from the whole State, (without any
Instructions according to which he might govern himself) to treat with the
Enemy; and, to speak plain, to make an absolute agreement for our dear bought
Freedom, Religion, and Native Country.

It would sooner have seemed to me and all the World, a Fable than a truth: had
it not appeared plainly out of the printed Letter sent from the Lords the
States of Zealand, who manifested their Fidelity and great fatherly care, and
also declared, That not without great reason they could not consent to such an
unlimited power as ^e Groot had given him; That it was an unheard of thing in
the Government of this Country (ipsissima verba Epistolae) to give full power
to a deputed person, to treat with a Potentate; but much less with a public
Enemy: Moreover, saying plainly, that they (Nota been) justly suspected this
contrary way of acting, and that it gave them an apprehension that the Enemy
would thereby be encouraged to propose such conditions to such Deputy, which
never can nor must be treated of, viz. their Religion, Freedom, and the lawful
Government of these Countries.

And how the forementioned three points would have been maintained by such a
Deputy, who is a notorious Atheist, a Slave to the Enemy, bought to the
destruction of our whole Government, every one may easily judge. Just at the
time when this Commission was finished, and de Groot yet in the Hague ready on
his departure, I had the honor to speak with one of my very good friends and a
member of the High and Mighty States of Holland, who on my curious question of
What News? changing his countenance (as if things did not go according to his
mind) was pleased to say: We shall in short have a Peace, but I fear a
sorrowful one.

De Groot goes to the King of France, and has plien pouvoir.

When asking amazedly, How will it be then? His Excellency replied. There is a
lank Charter to be laid before the King, and His Majesty is to write.

On which I answered, Then de Groot is a Great Prophet; for this morning a
certain Lord informed me, (as indeed it was true) that the forementioned de
Groot about three Months before, discoursing with him the said Lord, saying
that our Native Country was threatened with a great and terrible War: De Groot
answering, said, Pish! pish! I do not see any such great difficulty therein; I
do believe that the King of France will at the first take some of our Cities,
which we cannot hinder him from, but (Nota) I, I de Groot (striking on his
breast) will make Peace with the King of France in the field about three Months
hence.

And observe the time wherein he received his forementioned Commission, was
about so long after.

The Lord hereupon discoursing liberally with me, said, That he believed the
same; because de Groot was a person who was exceedingly self-opinionated; and
that not long ago, (not naming the time, which I guest at by his words) he had
told his Excellency himself, that he should certainly conclude a Peace; adding
moreover, that though we should lose, and add a pearl to his Crown by this
Peace: yet if we examined the prerogatives and benefits which Holland should
reap from it, we would not account our loss so great.

Though this Lord would not favor me with an explanation of the aforesaid
prerogative; yet I suppose in all likelihood that his chiefest aim was that
Holland should then be separated from the other United Provinces, and freed as
it were from that heavy burden, as they are pleased to call it.

And besides, that then they would be freed from all fears that His Highness
the Prince of Orange at any time should be made Stadtholder of that Province.

One would think it strange how it is possible, that any men should be
transported to such imaginations: But,

-- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
Auri sacra fames? --
He was always more for the French, than the Princes Interest.

This was the reason why the Council Pensionary, in the time of the War with
Munster, durst propose in a full Assembly, to make the Duke of Turenne Captain
General over our Militia.

Ambitious is our Enemy; and full of ambition are also those Subjects; rather
desiring to be governed by a King than a Prince. But see how miraculous is the
providence of the Almighty!

Just when our State was in greatest danger, and tottering ready to fall down;
the appearance of our deliverance was nearest at hand: for it pleased God just
at that time to throw down that Great and subtle Designer (which had thus long
usurped more authority, than ever was aimed at by any of our Princes) and
immediately caused the Prince of Orange unanimously by all the Inhabitants of
those Countries, to be proclaimed S^adtholder of Holland Zealand and
West-Fri^sland, and to restore to him all those Dignities which his
Predecessors of Glorious Memory ever enjoyed.

That Great God grant also, that as by means of His Predecessors, with the
expense of their estates and effusion of blood, the Body of the United
Provinces was framed, and as long as they reigned kept in a good order: the
disjoined Members may by his valor and conduct (wherein we beseech God to
assist him, and to free him from evil counsel, and bless him more and more
daily) be united again.

I do certainly believe that many of our Inhabitants, and also all good
Patriots will judge it convenient to find out all those Governors which are
guilty of betraying our Native Country, and by some severe punishment
inflicted on them and their Instruments, as Momba, D'Ossery, and other
Governors, Commanders, Captains and other Officers, and make them an example to
others.

But as to the later part, I do not altogether approve of their opinion;
nevertheless, with submission to better judgments, my sentiment only is, that
it would be convenient to make a strict enquiry into the Camp proceeding of the
Governors, and such as bore the chiefest commands, and had the charge of
defending Cities and Fortresses, as Momba, Van Zanten, Bassem, D'ossery, and
the like: as also those persons, whether Officers or others, that have been
assisting to the Governors in executing of their treacheries, and had daily
correspondence with the Enemy.

And by punishing all such persons severely, according to their demerits, make
them examples to others.

But there ought not so particular a regard to be taken of other Captains and
meaner Officers, who cannot be said to have had the lest knowledge of their
unfaithful Governors designs: and would have undoubtedly behaved themselves
most loyal, had they been encouraged thereto by their Governors, and not been
deluded to act those things which they were made believe would be for the
benefit of the country, but proved prejudicial; for which if any should be
punished, most of all the Captains and other Officers in what Garrison soever,
would be liable thereto. And those Captains which should be punished more than
others, would be unjustly dealt withal: or the State constrained to an
execution of so many honest people, which heretofore have behaved themselves
like loyal Soldiers for the defense of their country* and now only brought
thereto by the treacherous (though seeming fair) pretenses and delusions of
their base Governors.

We have also oftentimes seen that Military persons and other inferior
Officers, being accused of some committed abuses, and freed from their
punishments out of a particular favor; have taken an occasion in all future
opportunities to use more than ordinary endeavors for the good and benefit of
the State: Of which there are many examples, whereof one is manifested at this
time in Captain Buket.

I should also judge, that some means might be found out who amongst the Regents
is guilty of this High Treason, and consequently deserving of punishment.

Especially if we consider those Maxims that are used, and also necessary in
our Government: that is, That only a few are to be admitted into the Council
for private concerns, either one out of every Province, or else more or less
according as the business requires. Besides which persons, none may have the
lest knowledge of things of greatest consequence, especially in times of War,
when the welfare of the State does not a little depend, that the Regents
designs against the Enemy may be kept secret, and not divulged and brought to
the ears of the Enemy. Which private consultations were well observed by the
Council Pensionary, who permitted his creatures to be of the Privy Council, and
excluded several good Patriots, who his Excellency judged would oppose him in
the carrying on of his wicked designs: and those which he could not exclude, he
wrought so upon, that he made them to vote such things as his wisdom thought
fit.

And therefore those loyal Regents which sat at the helm, might now easily
(being under the conduct of his Highness the Prince of Orange) find out with
what malice their wicked Brother Counselors have ordered all things to the
ruin of our country, and the furthering of the Enemies designs.

Whether in their ill care for the Fortresses, badly storing the Mag^zins,
granting of unlawful Passports for the transporting Ammunition to the Enemy,
bad management and preventing the raising of Levies, detaining of our
Ambassadors, and ratifications of the Treaties, the ill performance of them:
moreover in the strange conduct of their appointed Governors, Commanders, and
others; and the like base carrying on of affairs.

For if once the thread be found, the bottom will soon be unwound.

Yet notwithstanding all which, my judgment is, that the public inquisitions
and the punishments ought to be referred, since undoubtedly it will be of a
dangerous consequence; partly because that by the manifold difficulties which
in all appearance would (...) true, the Loyal Regents, Fathers of our Native
country, would be prevented from using other means, which in this conjuncture
of time are more necessary to oppose the Enemy: And partly, that when the
treason is found out, the punishments must necessarily follow.

Which my forementioned Opinion I leave to every ones serious consideration:
How it is possible that the executing of the punishments (which undoubtedly
would be inflicted on several of the supremest Governors, which have so long
managed the Helm of our Government,) could be effected, without fear of great
inconvenience to this State, which in this conjuncture must by all means
possible be prevented.

Those that please to read the History of Barneve^t, will find, that it is not
to be done without great difficulties, which necessarily ought to be diverted
and referred till some other and more convenient time, when either all things
may be buried in Oblivion, or else the Traitors condemned to lose their Heads,
for betraying our Native country, as the Lords Magistrates shall think fit.

And therefore, is it not abominable that private persons dare daily presume to
do Justice, nay to inflict sufficient punishments on all and every one, whom
they do but in the lest suspect to have been concerned in the ill management of
Affairs; which does no way beseem them? But we will hope that the prudence of
the Lord Stadtholder will prevent the same for the future.

I am very sensible that many Patriots, by this delay of punishing the
Traitors, fear that if the treacheries go unpunished, the State will be left in
a great Labyrinth, and in danger of being wholly delivered up into the Enemies
hands; because when those wicked Traitors being accused of their Villainies, and
seeing as it were their punishments before their eyes; they will use all means
possible to make more and more confusion in the Financie, of which there is yet
a great complaint, and increase all other disorders, whereby the Enemy may get
footing also in the remaining Provinces, in hopes that by that means they
escape their deserved punishment; which fears of the loyal Patriots are not
without some Reasons: since an eminent person was yesterday pleased to tell me,
that if in case the confusion in the Fi^ancie, and the bad payment of moneys,
which by the wicked directions of the Count Governors has been so long in
practice, be not suddenly remedied, it would prove very prejudicial to the
State. On which I answered his Excellency, (wherewith also, according to my
judgment, all Patriots may be satisfied) that his Highness was not made a
Stadtholder to catch flies; and though he did not as yet proceed on an
inquisition and sudden punishment of the Traitors: yet we might well think that
his Highness the Prince of Orange, would, with the help of many loyal Regents,
endeavor by all means possible to gain an exact knowledge of that malicious
governing, which has reduced our State to so deplorable and sad condition; and
that also he will take such care that all those Count Governors shall be
bereaved of all public Employments; but especially for ever excluded out of
the Privy Council: so to prevent all future miscarriages of Affairs, and settle
all things in such order, as shall be most beneficial to the State.

Let us now think on some means whereby our Native Country may be brought to
enjoy its former Freedom, and to know the Light of the Gospel, which in many of
the torn off Members of this State, is already sufficiently extinguished.

We have heretofore, by establishing that cursed Edict, not only refused to
acknowledge our Real Governor and Chief Magistrate of our Country, to which
Nature, and the formerly received Benefits obliged, and sufficiently might have
forced us to: but also despised and excluded Him with many Oaths. Oh horrid
action!

Do we not see and read, that when we despise and disown our just and loyal
Magistrates, that God sends wicked and tyrannical Regents in their places?

I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath. Hos. 13. 11.

Did there ever any greater destruction happen amongst any people, than those
which had shown themselves ungrateful to their Princes, and deposed those to
whom they owed their preservation?

If any where, then, it may well be said to be here. That God being justly
incensed, has in his wrath given a great part of our Netherlands to a King.

God grant that as that sin of Ungratefulness practiced by our Magistrates,
which has chiefly occasioned a curse upon our Country, is removed by a
Miraculous Providence, viz. our Magistrates suddenly revoking that Wicked and
perpetual Edict; showing a sincere sorrow of that base act, to which they were
deluded by the wicked directions of the forementioned Count Governors: he will
also be pleased to remove all other troubles from us. And grant likewise, that
our Subjects may repent of those horrid and crying sins, of which they are
guilty, and thereby have incurred Gods just displeasure.

FINIS.

