A COMPENDIOUS CHRONICLE OF THE KINGDOM OF PORTUGAL, FROM Alfonso the first
King, to Alfonso the Sixth, now reigning. Together with A Cosmographical
Description Of the Dominions of PORTVGAL.

By JOHN DAUNCEY.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Johnson, for Francis Kirkman, Henry Brom, and Henry
Marsh, and are to be sold at their Shops. 1661.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr EDWARD HIDE, Earl of Clarendon, etc. Lord High
Chancellor of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
THe Glories of your Name, make me ambitious to give you a testimony of my duty
and observance. There be some whose vainglory prompts them to think they by
Dedications honor their Patrons, but the whole world will judge me free from
such vanity, when they shall perceive I have made my addresses to a Person, who
besides his height of Nobility, is arrived at such a sublimity of Worth,
Virtue, and Learning, that not only the greatest Wits of the Age are bound to
honor him; but must confess they receive their splendour and luster from him.

Yet thus (my Lord) I make my self guilty of an almost inexcusable presumption:
the wisest of men may as well present somewhat worthy a Deity, as I any thing
which may deserve your LORDSHIPS thoughts. It is not fit a Pigmy should call
down a JOVE to protect him; but where there is so much worth, there must needs
be an insuperable goodness; nor can he be justly blamed who only aspires at
the influence of a benevolent Star.

I want the confidence to beseech your Lordship to approve this Work, the
honor will be sufficient if you accept it, as a pledge of that observance which
all men are bound to pay you. I know your Lordship not only to be vers't in all
History, but (to your glory be it spoken) to have always studied the most
worthy Authors. And History is indeed a Treasure not only enriching men's
minds with noble thoughts, but enanimating them to great and Heroic Actions.

Your Lordships endeavors to make an Alliance between the two Renowned Crowns
of England and Portugal, may justly claim all that can be said of that Kingdom,
as a due Offering. This, though but a Breviate of the Story of it, may
perchance contain somewhat, though not at all worthy your Lordship, yet not
wholly unworthy observation, which I hope may persuade your Generosity and
goodness to grantit protection.

England, my Lord, and every member of it, are beholding to your Lordships
great wisdom; but should I undertake to praise all those noble Virtues for
which you deserve their loves, that Justice which balances all your actions;
that Prudence which a whole Nation has admired; that Magnanimity which has
rendered you unalterable in all the frowns and smiles of Fortune; that
Liberality which has made you Kinglike, and that Temperance which shown in the
height of Heavens, and Heavens-Vice-gerents favors, has made you God-like, I
should be enforced to unite the largest Encomiums, and lay them down as a due
tribute, at the feet of your thrice-renowned Fame.

But (my Lord) I dare only reverence your Virtues, they must rather be the
subject of my admiration than description. Let it suffice then, that whilst all
strive to offer up their labors to this Shrine, it will be sufficient excuse of
my ambition to present this Mite, and amongst the numbers that thus sacrifice
to your Worth, to be thought worthy of that honorable Style of being esteemed
the meanest of

Your Lordships most humble Servants, JOHN DAUNCEY.

TO THE READER.
CUstom rather than my own Genius or Fancy, inclines me to make this address.
Good things are but made worse by excuses, bad things never a whit the better:
it is base and dis-ingenious to court a Reader to a good opinion of ones Work,
and indeed a kind of an endeavor to anticipate his judgment; which to the
wise proves a fruitless labor, and to the fools was altogether needless.

I despair not but wise men may read this Book, the truth is, I desire all
fools would let it alone: if it be unworthy the subject it is writ of, the
disgrace will be less to be censured by an understanding person, and the
faults, I presume, fewer; for those of less judgment will be subject to
attribute even the litteral errors of the ress, to the Authors ignorance.

Though I dare say thus much in Vindication of this COMPENDIOUS CHRONICLE, That
it is extracted out of those Authors who have been ^udged by many to have writ
best concer^ing the Kingdom of Portugal, yet I will not presume to clear it of
all errors; Ne^o nostrum non peccat, homines sumus, ^on Dei: It Is impossible to
be mortal, and not err: yet all lapses cannot be accounted faults. Though I
doubt not but to meet with those spirits which will make them Crimes; for such
is the depravity of the present age, that many men led on by atheistical
Tenants, and blinded with self-conceit, dare adventure to censure even the
Actions of the Deity.

But I shall run into that error I promised to eschew, and though I beg not the
Readers good opinion, endeavor to restrain or affright his clearer judgment:
^et every man say or think his pleasure of the Work; for therefore was it made
pub^ique, and if it be my fortune to fall under any rigid censures, where they
are made with reason, I shall entertain them with ^espect, where without cause,
laugh at them with scorn.

The present Affairs were sufficient motives for me to publish it, both to
clear the right King John the fourth, had to the Crown, and Dominions of
Portugal, and justify that Title which some men's ignorance or self-will would
make deficient, terming a noble Redemption of a Nations Liberty, black and
ignominious Rebellion: and methinks the joy at the Restoration of King ^ohn to
the Crown of Portugal, does so aptly quadrate with our's a^ the blessed return
of our Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, that I think it not
impertinent to conclude with a wish, That as our joy then corresponded with
theirs, so all the Subjects of England would show the same examples of Loyalty
to His Majesty, which Ferdinando Paceica did even to the memory of his King and
Master, Sancho the Second.

J. D.

The general Heads of the ensuing HISTORY.
I. HEnry Duke of Lorain, Earl of Portugal. page 3 II. Alfonso the First, first
King of Portugal. ibid. III. Sancho the First, second King of Portugal. 10 IV.
Alfonso the Second, third King of Portugal. 15 V. Sancho the Second, fourth
King of Portugal. 19 VI. Alfonso the Third, fifth King of Portugal and Algarve.
25 VII. Dionisio, the sixth King of Portugal, etc. 29 VIII. Alfonso the Fourth,
seventh King of Portugal. 29 IX. Pedro, eighth King of Portugal. 40 X.
Ferdinand, ninth King of Portugal. 43 XI. John the first, tenth King of
Portugal 45 XII. Edward, the eleventh King of Portugal. 50 XIII. Alfonso the
Fifth, twelfth King of Portugal. 52 XIV. John the Second, thirteenth King of
Portugal. 54 XV. Emanuel the First, fourteenth King of Porgal 56 XVI. John the
Third, fifteenth King of Portugal. 60 XVII. Sebastian, sixteenth King of
Portugal. 61 XVIII. Henry, seventeenth King of Portugal. 64 XIX. Philip, the
second, third, and fourth of that name, Kings of Spain, and 18; 19, 20, Kings
of Portugal. page 69 XX. John the Fourth, One and twentieth King of Portugal.
88 XXI. Alfonso the Sixth, Two and twentieth King of Portugal. 182 XXII. A
Cosmographical Description of Portugal. 193 XXIII. Of Algarve. 198 XXIV. Of the
Azores of Tercera Islands. 199 XXV. Of the Portugals Possessions in Asia. 204
XXVI. Of the Portugals Possessions in Africa. 207 XXVII. Of Brazile. 208
IF any person please to repair to my shop at the Sign of John Fletchers head,
on the back side of St. Clements without Temple Bar, they may be furnished with all Plays that were ever yet Printed; as also with several sorts of Romances,
and Histories; more especially with the books hereafter mentioned, of which,
though not printed for me, I have sufficient numbers, viz.

The History of Independency complete, being the 1. 2. 3. 4. and last part;
which may be had single by such as have bought the others.

Blood for blood, or Murders Revenged, lively set forth in 35 Tragical
Histories, some whereof have been the product of our late Times, published by
T. N. Esquire.

Venus undrest: or the Practical part of Love, extracted out of the Extravagant
and Lascivious Life of a fair, but subtle Female.

That useful Book for Gentlemen and Travelers, being an exact Description of
the several Counties and Shires in England: by Ed. Leigh, Esquire.

The Fanatic in his Colors: or the rise, height, and fall of Faction and
Rebellion from 1648. unto 1661. with an Apendix concerning Allegiance,
Government, and Order, by T. F.

Summum Bonum: or, A Plain Pathway to Happiness, conducting the Soul to its
Haven of Rest, through the Stormy passages of worldly troubles; to which is
added a short Dialogue of that excellent virtue of the Submission of Man's will
to the will of God.

The Rudiments of Grammar, the rules composed in English verse, for the greater
Benefit and Delight of young beginners, by James Sherley Gent.

A short view of the Life of the Illustrious Prince Hen. D. of Gloucester, and
Ma^y Princess of Orange, Brother and Sister to His Majesty of great Britain,
lately Deceased, by T. M. Esquire.

Scutum Regale; the Royal Buckler; or, Vox Legis, a Lecture to Traitors. etc.

Plays.
The Beggars Bush, a Comedy written by Fran. Beamont and John Fletcher, both in
folio, and in quarto.

The Humerous Lieutenant; a Comedy, in folio.

The Scornful Lady; a Comedy

The Elder Brother* a Comedy.

Philaster; or Love lies Bleeding, a Tragi-Comedy, etc.

A King and no King. A Comedy.

The Maids Tragedy.

The Night-walker: or little Theif, a Comedy all written by the same Authors,
in quarto.

The Qu^^n of Arrag^n. A. Tragi-Comedy, written by William Habington Esquire in
folio.

The Maids Revenge. A Tragedy, written by James Shirley, in quarto.

Loves Mastriss. A Masque written by Tho. Heywood, in quarto.

The City Nightcap. A Tragi-Comedy, by T. B. in 4.

The Obstinate Lady. A Comedy, by Sir Aston Cockain Knight, in 4.

The Obstinate Lady, and Trapolin, supposed a Prince, both Comedies; and
several other Poems, all written by Sir Aston Cockain Knight, in octavo.

Plutus: A Comedy in 4.

Troades a Tragedy, Translated out of Seneca, by Sam. Pordage. Gent. in 8.

A Short and Compendious HISTORY Of the KINGDOM Of PORTUGAL
THe Spaniards have a Proverb very vulgar amongst them, terming the
Portugueses, Pocos y Locos, few and fools, spoken I suppose rather out of
derision, and disdain of that Nation, then that its people and inhabitants
really are so, for whosoever shall read their actions, will judge them to be
managed with as much prudence, as the Spaniards can boast of; nor will any one
believe that they could bring to perfection so great Achievements as they have
done with only a simple valor.

It Is true, I believe them to be less numerous then the Castilians, and yet I
am not of the opinion that they are so few, or their Kingdom so inconsiderable,
as the Spanish Proverb seems to make them, which one may easily imagine, when
one considers that the Romans accounted Lusitania (that is Portugal by it self,
when its bounds did not extend so far as now they do, and without the addition
of Algarve, or Regnum Algarbiorum) to be one third part of Spain; much less can
we think it so now, when not only its proper bounds are enlarged, but likewise
the Kingdom of Algarve added, besides the Island in the Atlantic sea, and
their great conquests in Asia, Africa, and America.

But to return to the Kingdom it self, and its original various fortunes after
the decay and declension of the Roman Empire, was it subject unto, before it
was settled under a Prince of its own. The Alani were the first that preyed upon
it, and endeavored to plant in it, but had scarce begun to do so, but
themselves were driven out by the Swemans, and constrained to go seek another
habitation; these for some time enjoyed it peaceably, making Braga their
Imperial City, till in the general Inundation of the overflowing Goths and
Vandals, they with the rest of that part of the continent, which is
circumscribed by the sea, and the Pyrenean Mountains, became vassals to these
irresistible Conquerors, who living a long time in quiet, enjoyed their
conquest, and were the first that in these parts entertained the Christian
Religion, till the Moors like a more violent flood, fell in upon them, and with
the greatest part of Spain, possessed themselves likewise of that Kingdom.

But some parts of Spain, after many years slavery, struggling for their
liberty, this Kingdom was in part recovered by the King of Castile, and by them
enjoyed, till at length it gained a King of its own, the manner thus:

Henry the second Duke of Lorrain, whom some affirm to be Nephew to Godfrey of
Bolloigne, (though others differ both in the person and his alliance to him)
flying from the fury of Henry the fifth Emperor, came into Spain, where (moved
with a generous emulation of his Uncle, who was gone to the conquest of
Jerusalem) offered his service the subjection of the Moors, and in short time
arrived by his valorous achievements against those enemies of the Christian
Religion, grew into so much repute with Alfonso the 6. King of Castile, that he
gave him his base daughter Teresia in marriage, with his whole acquists in
Portugal for her dower, though with no other title then that of Count, or
Earl, some further addition he made to his Dominions, and in the year 1094. had
a son, who after his grandfather was named Alphonso, at last overborn with the
burden of seventy seven years, he died in the year 1112.

ALFONSO the I. First King of Portugal.
ALfonso his son, who from his very childhood had been bred up under his father
in Military exercise, after his death valorously prosecuted his victories
against the Moors, and against the Kings of Leon; which Wars he managed with so
much courage as was admirable in a Prince so young. The Count of Trastamarense
despising his youth, took to wife his mother Teresia, and from that marriage
drew occasion to wage War with him; Alfonso to vindicate his sleightings,
cheerfully encountered him, and after the diverse accidents of several battles
took him prisoner, and forced him to regain his liberty to give him to wife his
sister Uracca, with that part of the land for her Dower, which had been the
occasion of the War. Yet some there be that differ both in the occasion of the
marriage and the contest.

Alfonso likewise fought several battles with his Grandfather Alfonso the 6.
King of Castile, and in one battle took him prisoner near one of his Castles
called Arcos del val de vez, upon whose release he had conferred upon him the
title of Duke of Portugal; he afterward employed his forces against the
Saracens, from whom he took Leirida, Torre Naova, and several other places.

Whereupon the King Ismaurus, who was the most powerful amongst all the
Mauritamans, calling to his assistance four other Kings, with an Army of four
hundred thousand men, invaded Portugal, but his fortune corresponded not with
his numbers, for Alfonso encountering this great power with a small Army,
overthrew them, and slew, or took prisoners all the five Kings; in memory or
which ^ignal Victory, Alphonso bore five Escutchions in his Arms though others
are pleased to affirm it was in memory of the five wounds of our Savior, seen
by him in a Vision just before the fight.

The soldiers made proud with this ex^raordinary success, thinking the title of
Duke too low for their Commander, saluted Alphonso with the tile of King, which
Alphonso accepted; and returning home enriched with spoils, addicted himself to
the exercise of his Regal power, by calling a general Council of the three
Estates, to wit, the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons, for the better establishing
(by the consent of the whole people) that Crown upon his head, which the
Soldiers love had conferred upon his merit.

This general Assembly being met in the City of Lamego, and in the Church of
St. Almacave, the King came thither, and seating himself upon the Royal Throne,
but as yet unadorned with his Ensigns of Majesty, according to appointment the
King* Deputy Don Lorenzo Venegas, spoke to the Estates as follows, You are
here assembled by the Authority of King Alphonso, to see the Popes Letters and
Resolve, to confirm him for your King: Whereat the whole Estates with one voice
cried, We will that he shall be our King. Upon which the Deputy demanded, shall
he only be your King, and not his sons after him? They all answered, he so long
as he lives shall be our King, and after his death his sons shall succeed. Give
him then the Royal Ensigns, said the Deputy. They answered, we give them in the
name of God, and therewithal the Archbishop of Braga placed the Crown upon
the Kings head, and gave him the Scepter in his hand, with all accustomed
Ceremonies; which done, his Majesty rose up, and drawing his sword spoke to
this effect, Blessed be God that has been my helper, with this sword I have
delivered you, and overcome our enemies, and now that you have made me your
King, let us make Laws for the government of the Kingdom. They answered, so we
will, dread Sovereign, we will make such Laws as shall seem good and convenient
to you, and we and all our children and posterity will be wholly at your
command.

And accordingly several Laws were then and there immediately made; the sum of
which were:

1. That King Alfonso should be Master of the Kingdom, and that after him there
might be no troubles in the choosing of a King, his Son should reign after him,
his Grandchild, and so from Father to Son in secula seculorum.

2. That if the eldest Son should dye during the life of the Father, the next
brother should be King, and so forward.

3. That if the King should dye without issue, having a brother he should
succeed, but not his sons without consent of the Estates.

4. That if the King should have only daughters, the eldest should be Queen
after her father, upon condition that she be married to a native of the
Kingdom, and that he be a Nobleman, who should not have the power to take upon
him the name of King, until he had a son born, nor should he till then wear a
Crown on his head, or take the right hand of his wife.

5. That it should be for ever held for a Law among the Portugals, that the
Kings eldest daughter should marry a Native of the Country, that so the Crown
might never descend to Foreigners, and that in case she should marry a
Foreign Prince, she should be excluded from her right of succession, for they
would not have that Kingdom, which themselves by their own valor, and by the
effusion of their own blood, without the aid or assistance of any strangers,
had made, so go out of the race of the Portugals.

The Crown by these Laws and Statutes confirmed, Alfonso as he was advanced in
Title, so he addicted himself to higher and greater enterprises, in five
months siege he added the great and populous City of Lisbone to his Crown, not
without the loss of thousands of valiant soldiers, and as many hazards of his
own life; some affirm that in this War the number of the slain amounted to no
less then two hundred thousand men.

This magnanimous King likewise made innumerable acquists both of one side and
the other of the Tagus, he slew both the Kings of Leon, and Castile, but at
length wounded in a battle, he was no longer able to follow the Wars in person,
for what with his wound, and what with age, being now sixty six years old, he
had not strength enough to mount on horseback, he therefore bequeathed his
command over his Armies to his eldest son Sanctius or Sancho, but still
reserving to himself the superintendency of all.

Having thus relinquished the Wars, he addicted himself wholly to works of
piety, and to endeavor the flourishing of the Christian Religion; he built
within his Kingdom one hundred and fifty Churches and Monasteries, all which he
enriched with great revenues.

Amongst the rest he built that at Conimbria, from whence that famous
University, called, Academia Conimbricense had its Original. In this Monastery,
called that of the Holy Cross, he died, at ninety one years of age, on the 9.
of December Anno 1185. and here he remained, buried in a little Tomb, situated
in an Angle of that Church, till such time as King Emanuel, affected with the
Fame of his Sanctity, erected for him a most stately Monument, which is at this
day to be seen.

By Uracca his first wife, daughter to the Count Trastamarense, he had no
children, whereupon at fifty two years of age, and in the seventh year of his
reign, he took to wife Mafalda, sister to Amadeo Earl of Morenna, by whom he
had many children, Henry the first died in his childhood; Sancho who succeeded
him in the Kingdom; Uracca who was married to Ferdinando King of Leon, though
this match was again made void, the Pope not approving of it; Therasia, whom
some Historians have likewise called Matilda, married to Phillip the first Earl
of Flanders. He had likewise diverse natural children, amongst whom one named
Alphonsus, who was great Master of the Knights of Rhodes.

King Alphonso was certainly a great soldier, a valiant Captain, and a
magnanimous King; in all his words and actions there appeared a kind of
Majesty, and sublimity of mind; his liberality and justice made him feared by
his enemies, and adored by his subjects; strength of body, and greatness of
mind, concurred in him to make him the most worthy and admired of the age he
lived in; he never undertook any War, but either to right his injured subjects,
or to propagate the Christian Religion; amongst his greatest facts of Arms he
never forgot acts of piety, but always before any battle used with vows and
prayers, to beg the protection of heaven. He died, having arrived at the
highest pitch of glory, wept for by his people, and lamented by the very Moors
themselves, who hated him; thus topt with all triumph, happy in a numerous and
as generous an issue, weary of worldly vanities; he departed this life, in
hopes to receive in heaven the reward of his piety and virtue.

SANCHO the I. Second King of Portugal.
SAncho his eldest son (indeed the only legitimate son he had living)
succeeded to Alphonso, he was born at Conimbria the 11. of November Anno 1154.
where he was likewise educated until the fourteenth year of his age in all
those studies and exercises, which are proper for a Prince born to command; he
afterward profited under his fathers tutorage in the Art Military, in which
emulating his fathers valor, and greatness, he did things worthy of himself,
gaining love from the soldiery, and respect from the people; he accompanied his
father in three Victories, in which he nobly adventured his life.

His father being dead, he took upon him the government of the Kingdom, and was
Crowned the 12. of December 1185. three days after his fathers death, being
aged two and thirty years, and finding the Kingdom at the beginning of his
reign freed from the incursions of the Moors, he applied himself wholly to make
the peace enjoyed by his Kingdom, profitable to his subjects; he caused a
multitude of fields to be tilled, most of which were before a receptacle for
wild beasts, and part of them laid waste by the late Wars, with so much
diligence did he addict himself to these things, that by the vulgar he was
called the King of Husbandmen.

He applied himself afterward with the same industry to restore public
edifices and structures, he rebuilt all Castles which had either been destroyed
by the Moors, or spoiled by other accidents of the War; he restored the Cities,
Towns, and Fortresses, to their pristine splendour, enriching them with new
edifices, and supplying them with new inhabitants; he gave likewise great
Revenues to all the orders of Knighthood, but principally to that of Saint
Giacomo.

Whilst thus he took care of his subjects good, and the increasing the Revenue
of his Crown, there were driven by contrary winds and raging seas into the Port
of Lisbone a fleet of thirteen sail of ships belonging to several Christian
Princes, going to the Holy War, with the assistance of these King Sancho,
invaded the Kingdom of Algarve, then possessed by the Moors, making this
compact with the Christian Princes that commanded the Navy, that they should
enjoy the whole spoil of the enemy, whilst he reserved for himself only the
Cities and the glory.

The Impress proved not very difficult, although the City of Sylva the
Metropolis of the Kingdom, made a long and obstinate resistance, for at length
it yielded; but he enjoyed not quietly the possession of this Kingdom for the
Moors, uniting themselves to revenge the injuries done to their Nation, he was
constrained to fly to a defense of himself so much the more dangerous, by how
much the more unequal; and (...) had with the kingdom of Algarve lost likewise
his native kingdom of Portugal, if God of his mercy had not bridled and curbed
the fury of the Moors by a merciless devouring Pestilence, which made them with
the loss of two hundred thousand soldiers, return flying home.

But King Sancho was no sooner freed from these dangers, but another almost
overwhelmed his kingdom, by continual rains, most part of the land was
overflown, by reason of which it not being possible to till the ground, a
famine ensued, and that at length brought forth the plague, so that the whole
kingdom was almost destroyed, the Cities and Towns were depopulated, the
Country remained unmanured; nor was there to be seen over the whole kingdom
other but spectacles of ruin and misery.

This sad condition of the Christians made the Moors once more adventure in the
field, and without any resistance possess themselves of the greatest part of
the Kingdom of Algarve; the City of Sylva was rendered at discretion, whilst
the necessities of the King forced him to buy five years of truce, or
cessation, upon low conditions.

In the mean time he would have sent assistance of ships and men to the
Christian Princes, who fought against the Saracens in Palestina, but the
miseries of his kingdom would not permit him, yet he assigned to the Knights,
Templars, and Hospitallers, who were sometime before come into Portugal, great
Revenues, giving unto them many Castles and Lands.

The truce was not yet expired when the King either finding, or taking occasion
to break it, in the midst of winter assaulted the Cities of the Moors with so
much fury, that the Barbarians not expecting so sudden an assault, were easily
driven, not only out of the Confines of Portugal, but out of the best part of
the kingdom of Algarve.

King Sancho had for wife the daughter of Ramond Berengario, Count of
Barchinona, called Aldonsa, by her he had nine children, of whom eight outlived
their father, to wit, three sons and five daughters, the sons were Alfonso, who
succeeded in the kingdom; Ferdinando, who for his singular virtues was called
into Flanders to marry the Countess Ioanna; and Pietro who was Count
Iregelense, and Lord of the Bateares.

The five daughters were Therasia, Mefalda, Sancha, Bianca, and Beringhella;
Therasia was married with Alfonso King of Leon her Cousingerman, but this
marriage not being assented to by the Pope, was esteemed void, so that after
having born three children, she was forced to return into Portugal, where being
shut up in a Monastery, she spent the rest of her life in pious meditations: it
is reported by some that her Sepulcher being opened in the year 1617. her body
was found whole, and as it were incorrupted, and that many who were sick, or
otherwise had incurable diseases, by vowing to her, and touching her corpse,
were healed.

Mafalda was espoused to Henry the first, King of Castile, although allied to
him in a forbidden degree, wherefore this marriage was likewise declared void;
and she emulating her sister built a Monastery of the Cistercian Order, and is
reported likewise to have done many Miracles particularly in the year 1627.
when her Tomb was opened.

Sancha the third daughter became a Nun of the Order of St. Francis, who lived
about this time. Bianca and Beringella died young, and were buried in
Conimbria, right against their fathers Tomb, though some write otherwise.

After the death of the Queen Aldonsa, which happened in the year 1138. King
Sancho gave himself over to the love of diverse Ladies, amongst whom he had
many children, who proved most of them his greatest vexation and disquiet, for
the pleasures of the senses do not terminate but in the sense of grief. At last
arrived at the age of 57. years, in the 26. year of his reign, oppressed in
Conimbria by an incurable disease, he took leave of this world.

He was buried in the Church of the Holy Cross, on the left side of the Altar,
in the great Chapel, where King Emanuel built him a Sepulcher, like to that of
his father, he left infinite riches, which by his Will he divided amongst all
his children, making no difference between the legitimate and the illegitimate;
he by his Will supplicated Pope Innocentius the fourth to be his Executor, for
which he left in Legacy a hundred weight of Gold, a gift without doubt worth
his pains.

King Sancho was for virtue and for goodness singular in his age, a worthy son
of so renowned a father; he proved fortunate in the utmost events of War, and
then did his triumphs flow in upon him when he dispaired of Victory; he left it
yet in doubt whether he were more wise, or more valiant; he always snowed
himself so great an enemy to sloth and idleness, that to avoid it he would not
disdain sometimes to throw down the Scepter, and hold the plow; Fortune who was
his friend in War, was his foe in Peace, for then, besides the vexation that he
could not vex his enemies, he was likewise enforced to bear the injuries of the
Land, Sea, and Skies; in sum, he was a King worthy the greatest Incomiums, if
he had not too much drowned all his other virtues in illicite Loves.

ALFONSO the II. Third King of Portugal.
ALfons^ the second succeeded to Sancho the first, he was born in Conimbria on
St. Georges day anno 1185. At 27. years old he was Crowned King with the envy
of his brothers, who little younger then he, could hardly confine themselves
within the bounds of Allegiance, and to their discontents did the Legacies left
by Sancho, give new motives for Alphonso, either out of avaritious desire of
riches, or out of obstinacy, detained from them a great part of what was left
them by their father.

These sinister thoughts of the then Prince Alphonso, were discerned by his
father before his death, which made him leave to the brothers, beside some
Cities and Castles, five hundred thousand Crowns in gold.

But scarce was his father dead, but he began to contend with his brothers and
sisters about their inheritance, and because his brothers were retired into
Elginera and Alenquar Fortresses, given them by their father, he under pretense
that they could not be allienated from the Crown, gathered together an Army to
possess himself of them, which he easily performed, his brothers wanting money
to hire soldiers, and so not being able to make the least resistance.

His brothers thus driven out of the kingdom, fled to the Pope for redress,
then in great veneration, because he then pursued no other interest but
justice, who commanded Alfonso to remit the difference to indifferent Judges,
who necessitated to obey, chose rather to accommodate the business with
indifferent Judges, then to run the hazard of a sentence.

He employed himself afterward by the advice of Matthew Bishop of Lisbone, to
fight against the Moors, and though these came assisted with ninety five
thousand men, yet were they forced to yield the Victory to him, with the loss
of thirty thousand soldiers, and four Kings who were slain in the battle.

Alfonso for some years prosecuted this War, but in time he grew so extreme
fat, that he was unable to perform, not only those great exercises incumbent on
a soldier, but every simple motion of the body; yet for all that he ceased not
to apply himself with extreme diligence to prosecute the greatest affairs of
State, and where he could not in person he present, to send such commands as
showed him to be both of great experience and wisdom.

He married with Uracca daughter to Alfonso the eighth (or as others say the
ninth) King of Castile, and Leonora, or Elinor, daughter to Henry the second
King of England, by her he had diverse children, the first was Sancho, who
succeeded his father in the kingdom. Alfonso the second son, whom by right of
his wife, was chosen Duke of Bologna, and afterward came to be King of
Portugal. The third son was called Ferdinand, who obtained the principality of
Serpa, and married Sancia Fernandez, daughter of Ferdinand Count of Castile.
The fourth died a child, called Vincenzo. The last was a daughter, called
Leonora, and was married to the King of Dacia. Alfonso arrived to the eight and
fortieth year of his age, and one and twentieth of his kingdom, when in the
year 1233. he was constrained to pay the last debt to nature. He was buried in
Alobaccia in a little Church built by himself, more for devotion then
magnificence. But after many years the Abbot Giorgio di Melo causing that
little Church to be demolished, carried his bones to that of St. Vincenzo,
where they now repose in a most sumptuous sepulcher.

Under this King (as many affirm) lived for certain time St. Antonio, Protector
of the City of Padona, a Saint held in great veneration among the Roman
Catholics, he was a native of Lisbon, not so much esteemed for the Nobility
of his birth, as for his holy life.

Alfonso, taking away his extreme fatness, was a man of a very comely presence,
and of singular eloquence, his nature did make him pleasant with all, but only
those of his own blood, which fault in him did much diminish his subjects love,
and that general respect was due to him; though he was a man noted for
covetousness, yet he oftentimes gave great gifts to his friends, and always
consumed the greatest part of the revenue of the kingdom. The Portugueses while
his father was alive, did extremely desire him for their King but did not at
all now lament his death; either because new things always please the people,
or else because he after his fathers death, showed himself indifferent from
himself, or from what they thought him; whereupon not being wholly like his
Progenitors, he renewed in his subjects their grief for their loss.

SANCHO the II. Fourth KING of PORTVGAL.
SAncho the second, who succeeded his father Alfanso, was born in Conimbria the
eighth day of September 1207. bringing from the womb such mortal infirmities,
as made most believe he would sooner arrive at the grave then the Crown, his
mother having tried all humane remedies, applied her self to divine, making a
vow to God that if he lived past his adolescency, she would make him pass the
hood of the Religion; which vow she afterward inviolably performed, whence he
was by the vulgar as ridiculous in words, as judgment, called Sancho
Cucullato, or the hooded Sancho.

He took upon him the administration of the Scepter at twenty six years of age,
not following the footsteps of his Predecessors, in studying ways to govern the
kingdom, but spending all his time either in Hot-house, or in a Bath, or
inventing other ways to recover his health.

Thus his infirmity having rendered him unapt to command, and the weakness of
his body having likewise weakened his wit and judgment, he left both the rule
of the kingdom and of himself to Ministers, who governing according to their
proper affections, let him enjoy no more then the bare name of King.

He joined himself in marriage with Messa Lopez, who although she were of blood
Royal, yet was by much too inferior a match for King Sancho, so much the rather
in that she was widow to Alvaro de Castro, a Cavalier of an ancient and Royal
family, but not to compare with the Kings of Portugal.

And he himself assented to this match, more to satisfy his favorites, then to
any affection that he had to it; which made the new Queen either to show her
self grateful to those had wished her so well, or rather because she nursed in
her bosom some dishonest desire, applied her self extremely to favor the
favorites of the King.

And these made proud by the love both of the King and Queen, omitted no way to
oppress the subjects, to the prejudice of justice, to the destruction of the
State: many of the prime Nobility made their complaints to the King,
representing to him the calamities of the people, the oppression of the Nobles,
and the ruin of the kingdom, if he did not with a resolute hand put a stop to
the rashness of those wicked men, who were bringing a deluge of miseries upon
his Dominions.

The King at these complaints was extremely moved, and overcome by the goodness
of his own nature, had resolved to chastise to public a crime with a public
punishment; but the Queen with her Artifices easily changed the opinion of her
husband, and made him believe that those accusations proceeded from envy, not
from truth, whereupon laying the complaints of the other aside, these
State-mothes only triumph in his love and in his faith.

This made several Prelates incontaminated with their own interest, but moved
out of a real affection to their Country, acquaint the Pope with the weakness
of the King, and the plots of the Queen, adjoining that the marriage was
celebrated in a prohibited degree, there being between them too near
consanguinity, and that nevertheless they had not sought to the Apostolic seat
for a dispensation.

Hereupon Gregory the ninth, with exhortations and admonitions prefixed a time
to king Sancho to free himself from his wife, and withal to this purpose sends
as his Legate Apostolic, the Bishop of Sabina. At the appearance of the Bishop
the King made show of an humble and ready obedience; but he being returned, he
again receives his Queen into his embraces, from whence the simple believed
that he was either bewitched, or had had some amorous potion administered to him.

The Queens favorites now again restored, gave themselves over to exercise the
greatest insolences imaginable, they despoiled the people, disposed Offices at
pleasure, made Justice it self follow their humors, nor did there remain any
thing either humane, or divine, which was not contaminated either by their
cruelty, or avarice.

Hereupon a great part of the Commonalty no longer able to comport their
insolences, led on by Rannondo Viego, took Arms, and coming in a tumultuous
manner to the Palace, forced away the Queen, carrying her prisoner to a Castle
upon the confines of the kingdom, where they did not fear neither the
authority, nor force of the King.

And because not only the licentiousness of the Queen, but the weakness of the
King, did concur to the destruction of the kingdom; some Prelates had again
recourse to the Pope, who in a Synod then sitting, with the consent of all,
decreed, That Alfonso brother of the King, should be called from Bologna to
govern the kingdom, and to remedy those disorders which had near brought it to
utter destruction.

Alfonso comes, and with Arms in his hand, possesses himself of the greatest
part of the kingdom, whilst Sancho seeing himself abandoned of all, and
hopeless of any help from the Castilian Army, cast down in mind, he gives
leave to those few soldiers which were with him, to depart, and retires to
Toledo, where addicting himself wholly to devotion, with an admirable patience,
seems to rejoice at his private life.

Being settled in Toledo, he dispences with a large hand to the poor those
riches he had brought from Portugal; he builds a little Temple wherein day and
night with uninterrupted supplications, he recommends himself to God, and
implores his mercy; there never issuing out of his mouth a word of resentment,
or grief, for his change of condition; and although provoked by the insolences
of some who despised Royal Majesty without a kingdom, he never expressed
himself but in words of mildness and goodness.

Whilst he in Toledo exercised these actions of true patience, many of his
Subjects did demonstrate signs of as great fidelity. The Governors left by him
would never abandon his service, nor yield up those places they had received in
charge from him, neither could the prayers of their fellow subjects, nor the
spiritual thundrings of his Holiness the Pope, nor the vigorous Arms of Don
Alfonso, remove them from their resolution; with a generous faith they
sustained all the Dangers and Disasters of long and tedious Sieges, till they
received Advice of Sancho's Death.

The one of these was Ferdinando Paceico, who resolved to die before he would
render up the Fortress to him consigned. The other named Martino Freira, who
after a years being besieged in Conimbria, being advised by Alfonso of his
brothers death, he desiring a Truce, posted to Toledo, and causing the
Sepulcher of King Sancho to be opened, put the key of the Castle into his hand,
and afterward returning, gives it to Alfonso, excusing himself that he could
not before show the desires of his heart to serve him, he being obliged to what
he did by his oath, and by his faith. Alfonso perceiving this noble generosity
in him, confirmed him in the Command, without seeking any further of him than
an inviolable Sacrament: Martino returned thanks to the king for his so great
love, but refused the Government.

King Sancho the Second, died in the year 1245. at 39 years of age, having
reigned thirteen; He was a man of a most noble aspect, carrying in his face,
and in his eyes, no ordinary Majesty; his nose was somewhat of the biggest, yet
did not at all disfigure him, he was very curious in trimming his beard, which
somewhat inclined to red; his countenance was somewhat earthy, his continual
indispositions having made a paleness inherent to him.

His piety was his principal ornament, nor was there any crime which did more
incense his goodness, than that which was dyed in blood. There wanted nothing
in him to render him worthy the greatest Encomiums, but health and the counsel
of prudent men, by whom he might have been served without design, and without
self-interest. Want of these two things were the occasion that a most just man,
wholly composed of goodness, fell into those miscarriages which made him in the
conceit of men impious and unjust.

He was buried in that Regal Chapel built by himself at Toledo: True it is,
that most Writers disagree whereabouts his Tomb was placed, because the Chapel
being rebuilt and made greater, the Sepulchers were over-turned, and placed on
the side of the wall without Elegies or Epitaphs, so that you can have no other
then men's opinions for that, without any certain foundation.

ALFONSO the III. The Fifth KING of Portugal and Algarve.
ALfonso the Third, who succeeded Sancho the Second, was born in Conimbria the
5. of May, An: 1210. he was by his father, by reason of his brothers uncertain
health, educated with great diligence in those studies which might adapt him to
Command; but Sancho's life deceiving the vulgar opinion, he was called by the
Queen of France thither, who obliged him to marry Matilda, Countess of Bologna,
then Widow of Fillippio Crispo, and Daughter of Fillippio Augustino: Alfonso
was at the time of his marriage twenty seven years, and being of stature great,
strong of body, and of an invincible courage of mind, he was by the Pope
elected Captain of those Knights of the Cruciada, who from France and other
Provinces, were thought worthy to carry their valor to the Holy War; but he was
diverted this Honor, by the necessity of his return into Portugal, to put an
end to those Troubles, which were moved by the ambition of some, who presuming
upon Sancho's pliable nature, were to act a fell Tragedy upon the Stage of the
kingdom.

At his first arrival he appeased those Tumults of the people raised against
the wickedness of the evil Ministers, who by reason of his brothers weakness
did what they list, and having after his death reduced all the For^resses of
the kingdom to his obedience, he addicted himself by severity, to purge away
those vices which before ruled even in the most potent Personages. This made
him envied and maligned of many, but the glory of his fame did divert all
opponent Factions, and made him triumph over the imprudence or obstinacy of the
most disobedient.

Homebred sti^s being quite pacified, he gave his mind to the increasing and
adorning of his kingdom; many places destroyed by continual Wars with the
Moors, he peopled with noble Colonies, re-edifying many decayed Towers, and
building many new Edifices: He likewise with an extraordinary liberality,
erected most stately Temples and Monasteries: He instituted for the increasing
of Commerce with his Neighbor kingdoms, several solemn Fairs, delighting much
in Traffic, and for the encouragement of it, remitting his Customs.

But these singular virtues of Alfonso were darkened by a thick shadow of lust,
not abstaining for to satisfy his sense from seducing the most noble to his
pleasures. Interest of State making him afraid to repudiate his wife, he
contracted a most nefarious Marriage with Beatrice the illegitimate daughter of
Alphonso the Ninth king of Castile, and his Concubine Maria Villenia. This
Beatrice was brought up with greater love, charge, and attendance, than any of
Alfonso's children. Alexander the fourth then Pope, moved with the tears of the
Countess of Bologna, the complaints of her friends, and the indignity of the
action it self, admonished him first by Letters to remember both his wife and
his duty as a Christian, but those saving documents prevailed nothing with the
shut ears of deaf Alfonso; whereupon the Pope fulminated forth an
excommunication against him and his kingdom, prohibiting divine service
throughout all his Dominions, hoping that these celestial arms might soften
Alfonso's obdurate breast; but it prevailed nothing, till at length the death of
the Duchess procured his pardon, which Urban the sixth granted, rather to
satisfy the clamors of the people, then out of his own genius, or that Alfonso
desired it.

Beatrice now Crowned Queen, and the succession confirmed by the birth of two
children, Alfonso had a desire to prosecute a War against the Moors; but
Lusitania having no confines upon Mauritania, he procured to be invested King
of the confining Countries, still possessed by the Moors, and that done, he
drove them from the Confines, increasing his kingdoms glory, and his own
reputation.

Alfonso had by Beatrice three sons, Dyonisio or Denis, who succeeded in the
kingdom; Alfonso who married with Violanse daughter of Prince Emanuel, son to
Ferdinand the third King of Castile; the third son called Ferdinand, died in
his infancy, he increased the number of his children by his amorous
conjunctions, those thus begot were Egidius and Ferdinand, made Knights
Templars; Alfonso, Dionysio, or Denis, married to Maria Rivera; and lastly
Leonora, wife to Count D. Gazzia de Souza, a man no less potent by his great
riches, then friends.

Alfonso was blessed with a most comely countenance, sparkling eyes, a most
comely proportion of body, but so large that it struck no small admiration into
the King Sebastian, when he made him be taken out of his Sepulcher; yet was not
his body more large then his soul was sublime; he was extreme profuse in gifts,
which made him beloved by those who found themselves benifited by them; his
prudence was by all admired, and amongst his virtues there was nothing wanting
but a more serious veneration of Religion, greater gratitude toward his first
wife Matilda, and less dishonesty in his loves; in his latter days he was
extremely troubled with the gout, which so tormented him, that impatient of his
pain, he permitted himself to be transported by excess of passion.

He died in Lisbon in the year 1279. at sixty nine years of age, and in the two
and thirtieth year of his reign, not accounting till the death of his brother
Sancho, he was buried in the Church of St. Dominica, from whence his body was
removed to that of St. Vincenzo, and laid in a great, but no curious, Tomb; on
the other part of the Church is to this day to be seen the Sepulcher of his
Queen Beatrice, whose body preserved by Balsoms, is to be shown in the Chapel,
looking so firm as if it had but lately yielded to death.

DIONISIO, The sixth KING of PORTVGAL.
DIonysio or Denis his son, succeeded to Alphonso, who was born in the year
1260. and called Dionysio because born on the day consecrated to that great
Areopagite; when he arrived to age fitting, he was instructed in those Sciences
which are necessary to adorn a Royal mind; he could perfectly speak many
foreign Languages, but applied himself chiefly to Latin Poesy, and may be
said to be the best Poet of any King; he endeavored to reduce the Portugal
Muse, before rude and inharmonious, to a smooth and sweet verse; he published
many Elegies and Epigrams, which as they attest to posterity his Kingly
learning, so they stirred up in others a glorious emulation.

He was about twenty years of age when his father died, and was immediately
admitted to the government, to the great displeasure of his mother, who was in
hopes to have been made Queen Regent, and was either, because she thought, that
she who by her pains and diligence had united several Cities to the Crown of
Portugal, was slighted, or because she feared lest her son being unexperienced,
should either persuaded out of a youthful folly, or drawn by the flattery of
Courtiers, consume with an unbeseeming liberality the riches of the kingdom.

Yet her anger could not move him to admit her a share in the government, for
he was often used to say, That man was blameworthy who being past eleven years
of age, could not moderate himself without the help of others; but that of all
things it was most base to desire the assistance of a woman. The forces of
Alphonso King of Castile, father of Beatrice, could not prevail to make him
change his opinion; but between mother and son these discords were easily
accorded, and she at length being brought to the utmost period of her life, he
piously went into Castile to visit her, and comfort her at her last gasp.

But though he accorded with his mother, he did not so easily adjust things
with his brother Alfonso, and with Sancio King of Castile, with whom he fought
many battles; the War outlasting Sancho's life, but from those cruel contests
at length a happy peace was produced, which to render perpetual, Ferdinand King
of Castile took for wife Constanza daughter to Dionisio: and on the other side
Alfonso espoused Beatrice ^^ster to Ferdinand.

The discords between the Kings of Arragon and Castile were remitted to this
Kings prudence; in composing of which, and making those kingdoms happy in
peace, he showed admirable effects of his wisdom.

His liberality gained him the love of all men, and made him equally respected
both of subjects and strangers; he commanded that the waste fields should be
distributed amongst the poorest Country people, assenting that it should be
freed from all taxes: there were none poor but such who were not able to gain
their living, either weakened by age, or some other infirmity, and these were
maintained at the Kings charges.

He never oppressed the subjects either with tribute or taxes, yet left to his
heirs a full Exchecquer: he made many Laws, which to this day are in force, his
Successors after him forming them into Statutes; amongst other things he made a
Law for the preventing tediousness in Law suites, assigning certain prefixed
days to end all differences, both taking thereby away a great unnecessary
expense of time and money, for which very act this King is to this day
reverenced among the vulgar.

In his time the Order of the Knights Templars was extinct, whereupon in stead
of them, he instituted another under the name of the Order OF CHRIST, to whom
he gave many Castles and Lands for their maintenance; their Roab was a black
Cassack under a white Surcoat, over which a red Cross stroaked in the middle
with a white line; their duty was to expel the Moors out of Batica, the next
adjacent Country, they have since been famous for many memorable acts.

He first instituted the University at Conimbria, called Academia
Conimbricense, which he enriched with the most learned men of that age.

He took to wife Elizabeth daughter to Peter King of Aragon, who among all the
Queens of Portugal was most memorable for her Sanctity; of this marriage was
born Alphonso, who succeeded his father in the kingdom, and Constance who was
married to Ferdinand King of Castile: he had likewise another son, but
illegitimate, whom he named Alphonso Sancio.

This bastard son was affected by his father with such a tenderness of Love,
that he preferred him before all his other children; which the Prince Alphonso
ill comporting, there grew at first a hatred between the brothers, in which the
fathers indulgence taking part with the base son, so exasperated Alphonso, that
it raised a civil War between him and his father.

Dionisio had many other sons by diverse Moorish women, they with feminine
glory boasting themselves great with child by the King, one amongst the rest
was Peter Count of Barcello, who writ a book of the chief Portugal families;
others there were who grew up to the disturbance of the kingdom, the oppression
of the subjects, and discontent of their father, in his old age reduced to a
low estate, and afflicted with the civil Wars, he was forced by the Prince his
son to fly as it were an exile into Castile: with his departure the
dissentions seemed to cease, but Alphonso's heart was not at all mollified
toward his brother, not being able to comport the generosity and courage of
Alphonso Sancho's spirit.

The King Dionisio was tall of body, of chestnut colored hair, his eyes black,
but he withal pale and livid, and more conspicious for the Majesty of his
countenance then the beauty; he was pleasant, humane, and without pride; after
he had reigned 46. years, he died at 84. years of age in the beginning of the
year 1325.

At the end of his life he left by will one hundred and forty thousand Ducats
to be distributed amongst Religious men, Pilgrims, and unportioned children; he
left likewise maintenance for five hundred Cavaliers, who were enjoined in his
name to fight against the Turks in the Holy Land: he was buried in Lisbone in
the Cistercian Monastery, dedicated to St. Dionisius the Areopagite.

His Queen Elizabeth, lived near eleven years after his death, retired into the
Monastery of St. Clara in Conimbria, begun to be builded by her husband, and
perfected by her: here laying aside her State, she ^ed a holy life, and is
reported to have done many Miracles.

ALFONSO the IV. Seventh KING of PORTVGAL.
ALfonso the fourth, seventh King of Portugal, who succeeded his father
Dionisio, was born in Conimbria, in the year one thousand two hundred and
ninety, before he came to the government of the kingdom, he was married to
Beatrice daughter to Sancha the fourth King of Castile, and in the seventh
luster took into his hands the reins of the Government.

In the beginning of his government he ruled his subjects with great
negligence, addicting himself wholly to the sport of hunting, and thereby
giving his Ministers liberty to Tyrannize at pleasure; some who loved him, and
hated flattery, did publicly advertise him, not to abandon the government of
men, for the delights of killing wild beasts, that he was destined to hear,
govern, and judge his people, and that whilst he did so, they would not fear
to suffer for him any danger, nay they would encounter death it self for his
sake: that it would redound little to his glory to have killed thousands of
Wild-Boars, or to have taken ten thousand Stags, but much to have administered
Justice, and sustained his Scepter with reputation.

These advertisements more free then secure, stirred up the fierce nature of
Alphonso, and ready he was to have 'chastised their freedom, who would be
governed by a King, and not by a Huntsman; but at length considering with
himself the truths they had spoken, he pardoned the liberty of their Speech,
and took them into the number of his dearest friends.

And that he did esteem them so, appeared by his taking their counsel, wholly
leaving off his hunting, and addressing all his endeavors to the government of
the kingdom: the first of his impresses were against those who had furiously
armed themselves against his father Dionisio: and because those affections good
or bad which have once had growth in the mind, are very hardly rooted out, the
hatred that he bore to his brother Sancho whilst he was Prince, now renewed
whilst he was King.

For whilst his brother was absent, he caused several wicked men, who
flattered the fortune of the King, to testify against his brother, and charged
him with all the imagined thoughts of soul, as crimes committed, during his
fathers life; upon which Sancho was by the Judges, in compliance to the Royal
will, deprived of all his honors in Portugal, banished the Country, and all his
goods confiscate. Sancho was at Castile, when hearing of this sentence, he by
Letters entreats his brother to restore him to his grace, promising that he
would serve him not only as his brother, but as his King.

But his prayers not at all softning his obstinate brother, he getting
assistance from the King of Castile, takes Arms, resolving to force that reason
and justice with his sword, which his supplications could not obtain: In fine,
after a long continuance of War, in which the subjects were made subject to
infinite oppression, he made with his brother a peace more necessary then
secure.

About this time D. Iuan Emanuel, son to the Prince Emanuel the Nephew of
Ferdinando, surnamed the Holy, was famous among the Spanjards, both for his
great Nobility of birth and riches; this Iuan Emanuel had a daughter called
Constance, who not yet marriagable, was promised to King Alphonso the eleventh
of Castile, but this King offended by certain secret occasions, broke his vow
to her, and espoused Mary daughter to Alphonso King of Portugal: after a little
time passed, the King of Portugal thinking Constance to be a fit match for his
son the Prince Pedro, first writ to his son in Law Alphonso, and soon after
began to treat with Iuan Emanuel, both the one and the other returned answer to
his messages, the King of Castile with dissimulation, and Emanuel with
sincerity offering his daughter.

The King of Castile either out of vexation that she whom he had repudiated,
should still be a Queen, or envying to the Prince Pedro the possession of so
worthy a woman, after many artifices to hinder the marriage, put himself in
Arms to hinder the passage of Constance into Portugal.

From this War happened infinite destructions and murders, which after the
effusion of a sea of blood, were ended by the Authority of Pope Benedict the
XII. and Constance was married to Prince Pedro.

About the year 1340. Alb^acen that potent Miramamolin of Morocco and Granata,
with a mighty Army of four hundred and seventy thousand men, came against
Alphonso King of Castile, threatening indeed the ruin of all Spain, when
Alphonso by the advice of his Council, sent to desire assistance of his father
in Law the King of Portugal, and that he might the better speed, he made his
wife the daughter of Alphonso the messenger: who willingly heard and listened to
the Ambassie, and not only promised assistance of men to further this
expedition, but to go himself in person.

Being arrived according to his promise, it was determined that they should on
both sides assault the Moors, which accordingly they did, and that with so
prosperous success to the Christians, that after an innumerable slaughter of
the Saracens, they gained one of the most rich and most glorious Victories that
has been in the memories of man, so great quantities of silver and gold found
they in the Moorish Tents, that one would have imagined all the riches of
Africa had been transported into Spain.

The reason of the Barbarians transporting over so great Treasure, was supposed
to be out of the assurance of Victory, which they flattered themselves withal;
they had designed Spain for their Country, and thereupon all those who had
thoughts of planting there, brought over all that could either better, or
conserve their fortune.

This Victory was gained nigh to the River of Saledo, the two Kings gave part
of their spoils to Pope Benedict, who then resided in Avignion, giving him
likewise four and twenty Colors taken from the enemy, among which was the
proper Standard of Alboacen King of Marocco, with many horses, and many Moorish
Princes, taken prisoners in the battle.

For his own portion of the prey, Alphonso King of Portugal brought home the
son of King Iulinenza, made prisoner with his proper hand; he likewise with his
own hand placed five Colors taken from the enemy, in the Church of St.
Vincenso, that posterity might behold them as a memorial of his valor and glory.

Scarce was he returned into Portugal, but he permitted himself to be overcome
by certain evil Counselors, and be persuaded unjustly to take away the life of
Agnesa di Castro, by whom his son Pedro had had diverse children. After the
death of Co^stance, the Prince kept her like his wife, and it was publicly
believed that he would one day make her his Queen: This accident was the
occasion of cruel Tragedies in the kingdom, for it stirred up a civil War
betwixt the father and son; but all ascribed it to a just judgment of God upon
Alphonso, who suffered the same injuries from his son, which he had done to his
father.

The Queen Beatrice bore Alphonso the fourth, six children, three sons died in
their infancy, and Pedro who was the fourth, succeeded; the other two were
daughters, to wit, Maria, who married Alphonso King of Castile, and Eleanora,
who was espoused to Piedro the fourth King of Arragon.

King Alphonso the fourth of Portugal, over-loaden with the burden of seventy
seven years, in the month of May in the year 1356. departed this life, after he
had exercised the Kingly Office thirty years and a half, he was buried at the
going into the Cathedral at Lisbon, together with his wife Beatrice, having
left to the Priests of that Church rich Revenues, not only for the expenses of
his sepulcher, but for the celebrating continual Anniversary Masses for their
souls.

He was equally strong and valiant, nor was it ever known that the greatest
danger (...) strike terror into his undaunted mind, he observed with a strict
punctuality the rules of ho^nesty and justice, and toward God he with (...)
ordinary piety was both zealous and rever^^^ he made several Laws for the
benefit (...) kingdom, which are still continued among the Statutes of that
Realm.

If he had not taken Arms against his father, or if he had moderated his hatred
to his (...) or if he had not imbrued his hands in the (...) blood of Agnesa,
envy it self could (...) have found out any subject of blame in the (...)
course of his life, he resembled his (...) many virtues, but was much inferior
to him in liberality; his death happened to him in that condition when he had
little reason to desire longer life, for it was when he saw his actions of
glory forgotten though he was yet alive, for his subjects began only to
remember his faults, which being fresh in memory, made his loss the less
lamented.

PEDRO, The Eighth KING of PORTVGAL.
PEdro the first of that Name, who succeeded his father Alfonso in the kingdom
of Portugal, was born at Lisbon, in the year 1325. two years before his father
came to sit at the he^m of government, at the time of his being Crowned, he was
about the age of three and thirty years.

He was the only male-childe that lived of four, and some danger there was of
him in his youth, he being very sickly till he arrived to about eighteen years
of age, which made his father to be assured of a Successor for his Crown, to
defer the marriage of Leonora his youngest daughter to Pedro King of Arragon,
till he perceived him in a perfect measure of health.

He was about the age of one and twenty years married to Constance daughter to
D. Iuan Emanuel, by whom he had only one son named Ferdinand, who succeeded
him in the kingdom, and she, as if she had only come into the world to bear
him, and having performed that task, died.

After the death of the Infant, D. Pedro fell in love with Agnesa de Castro, a
most beautiful woman, and descended of the blood Royal, by her he had many
children, amongst whom one was John, who afterward was the first of that name
King of Portugal: this Lady being accused to King Alphonso at his return from
his great Victory over the Moors nigh the River Saledo, was by him (for what
crimes is unknown) put to death, which so incensed Pedro that he took up those
Arms against his father, which he laid not down till his death.

As soon as he was come to the Crown, he brought to condign punishment those
who had wrongfully accused and counseled the Lady Agnesas death; he afterward
renewed the old War betwixt his father and the King of Castile, about the
stopping of his espoused wife Constance.

But because the Pope had before made up this breach, he by his Letters
commands Piedro to desist from further prosecuting the War, which he for the
present obeys: but soon after upon a slight pretense, again enters into Castile
with his Army, whereupon an excommunication was thundered out against him, which
forced him to retire, and to gain his Pardon, turn his Army upon the Moors,
from whom he took the strong Port Town of Pharo, in the kingdom of Algarve.

At his return home he fell sick, and in the tenth year of his kingdom, and
about the three and fortieth of his age in September 1367. he died, he was
buried in the Cathedral of Lisbon, not far distant from his father, having
caused before his death three Tombs to be erected on each side, he caused the
bodies of his wife Constance, and the Lady Agnesa, to be laid, reserving the
middle one for himself, where he was accordingly buried.

He was a man of as comely a personage as any whatsoever of the Kings of
Portugal, of a sweet and affable disposition, nor did he want any of his
fathers virtues, but one vice they both had, which overshadowed all their
virtues, warring against their fathers.

FERDINAND, The ninth KING of PORTVGAL.
FErdinand the first of that Name, succeeded his father Pedro, in the kingdoms
of Portugal and Algarve, he was born at Lisbon, in the year one thousand three
hundred forty seven, and was the only child of Constance, daughter of D. Iuan
Emanuel: He arrived at the Crown at the age of about two and twenty years, in
the year 1369. as soon as he had fininished the Ceremonies of his Coronation,
he prosecuted the War his father had begun against the Moors, and in several
battles drove them quite out of Algarve; he built a Monastery upon a Promontory
of Land, called Cape St. Vincent, now by us the Southern Cape, which stretches
it self out into the Atlantique sea.

He addicted himself to the planting and peopling of that kingdom, distributing
the waste Lands among the Inhabitants, he repaired many Cities, Towns and
Castles, which had been destroyed by the fury of the War; he built several
Churches and Monasteries in that kingdom, all which he enriched with great
Revenues, but particularly a Monastery for Franciscan Friars, erected in Silva,
the chief City of that Territory.

About this time it was that Pedro, son of Alphonso, the eleventh king of
Castile, having committed several tyrannical outrages, intolerable to his
subjects, oppressing and destroying his subjects, putting away and after
murdering his wife, daughter to Peter Duke of Burbon, was by his bastard
brother Henry, chased out of his kingdom, and forced to live an exile.

He at first seeks for aid to Ferdinand King of Portugal, but in vain; he next
addresses himself to Edward the black Prince of Wales, who was then at Bordeaux
with an Army of thirty thousand men; he consents to assist him* and encountering
Henry on the borders of Castile with near one hundred thousand men, utterly
discomfits him, and established Pedro in the Throne, who shortly after falling
again to his former tyrannical courses, is deserted by his subjects, taken by
his brother Henry, and put to death.

Ferdinand had but one only daughter that survived, named Beatrice, who was
married to Henry King of Castile, and thereby excluded from the right of
succession, according to the Law made in the first Assembly Estates held at
Lam^go, in the reign of Alfonso the first King, so that in this King ended the
legitimate Line of Henry, Duke of Lorrein.

This King had now reigned 18. years, and lived forty, when seized by a violent
sickness, he gave up the ghost, in the year of our Lord God, 1387. and was
buried by his Ancestors in the Cathedral Church of Lisbon.

JOHN the 1. Tenth KING OF PORTVGAL.
JOhn the first, bastard son to Pedro the first, by Agnesa de Castro, who
succeeded Ferdinand in the kingdom, was born in Lisbon in the year 1356. he was
in his minority educated in the famous Conimbricense University, where he
addicted himself to all those studies which became a Prince, though it is to be
supposed at that time he thought not to have arrived at so great height as to
be King of Portugal.

When he was grown to the age of about three and twenty years, he was by his
brother made a chief Commander of his Armies, in which Military employment he
behaved himself with so much courage and magnanimity, as was admirable; his
valor soon gained the love of the soldiers, and his courtesy and affability
the affection of the people; the very Moors his enemies would applaud him, as
both a perfect soldier, and a Courtier.

His brother being dead, and his Nephew, Beatrice incapable of succession by
reason of her having married a foreign Prince, he claimed the Crown, as next
of the blood, but his claim was at first made void, by reason of his being
illegitimate, when afterward the Council of Estates, finding that if they
should refuse him, they might perchance choose one less deserving, conferred
the Crown upon him, yet so as he should receive it not as his indubitable right
by birth, but as given him by election.

Yet some Writers there be that affirm, that there were several legitimate sons
of his father King Pedro then alive, who all laid their several claims to the
Crown, as of right belonging to them before him, but that he being at the time
of his brothers death General of the Armies in Algarve, and having gained so
much upon the soldiers and people, presuming upon their affection, and his
desert, laid claim to the Crown, which they being no way able to resist, were
forced to rest content, and permit him to enjoy what was likewise willingly
conferred upon the people, so that he came to the Crown partly by force, and
partly by election.

But howsoever he came by it, enjoy it he did, and entered into his government
about the two and thirtieth year of his age, and in the beginning of the year
1388. received with great applauses by the whole kingdom, as a Prince from whom
they expected great and good things, having already had so large experience of
him.

Soon after his Coronation, he married Philippa, daughter to John of Gaunt,
Duke of Lancaster, which match he the rather inclined to, because Henry the
bastard King of Castile, in right of his wife Beatrice, pretended a title to
the Crown of Portugal,, which he hoped he might the better oppose by matching
into that ^amily, which had equal, if not more indubitable ^ight to the kingdom
of Castile.

For John Duke of Lancaster having married Constance, the eldest daughter to
Peter, the deposed and murdered King of Castile and Leon, claimed a right to,
and was a great stickler for those kingdoms, yet never enjoyed any other but
the bare title.

King John having settled his kingdom, applied himself to the prosecuting the
War against the Moors, who being quite driven out of his con^ines, he resolves
to follow into their own country, and be the first King of his Nation that ever
past the sea: to this purpose he man's out a potent fleet, and having fraighted
it with a sufficient Army, puts to sea, and lands in Mauritania, where in
several battles he discomfits the Barbarians, wastes their Country, burns
their Villages, and possesses himself of a Seaport Town, called Seplene, or
Ce^ta, whereby he gained both a retiring place, and an inlet into the Country
when he pleased.

By his Queen Phillippa, King John had a noble and numerous Issue, first Edward
(so named from King Edward the third of England his Godfather) who succeeded
in the kingdom; secondly, Ferdinand, a man of so great abstinence, and so
devoutly religious, that the Portuguese added him to the Calender of their
Saints; he was in the Wars against the Moors taken prisoner, and during his
captivity behaved himself with such an admirable patience, as worthily deserves
our wonder, never murmuring to be linckt together with one of his meanest
servants, and with him forced for his living to grind in a Mill, though such
was the piety of the servant, that if he could he would willingly have
performed the task himself, and excused his Lord from the toil, if it had been
possible; at length he was ransomed, and returning ended his days in a recluse;
the third son of King John was named after his own name; the fourth Pedro; but
the fifth who most worthily deserves to be recorded, was the Infant Henry.

This Prince, whether emulating the great actions of his father, or out of a
natural inclination in himself, was the first that encouraged the Portugueses
to affect foreign Voyages, he first set out with a great fleet in or about the
year 1425. and made discovery of the Islands in the Atlantique sea, which at
first were called from their being newly found out Insulae Novae, or, the New
Islands, afterward, and now vulgarly called the Azores; he likewise in many
other Voyages made discovery of the Islands of Maderae, Holy Port, and Capo
Verde, and sailing farther along the Coast of Africa, was the first that found
out the way by Sea to Guiana, at length wearied with travel, and overpressed
with age, he retired, and lived upon Cape St. Vincent, which place he choose,
because of the constant sereness of the Air, being a great lover of Astrology,
and the Mathematiques; he died about the year 1465. and was buried in the
Chapel of that Monastery built by Ferdinand the first.

King John reigned in all forty seven years, H. ^.
having from the King of England received the honor of being Knight of the
Garter; as likewise did his two sons Prince Edward, and the Infant Henry. He
died in the year 1436. leaving the World full of his glory.

He was a Prince in whom all Virtues seemed naturally to flow, endowed with all
imaginable Ornaments, both of body and mind, of a tender and affable Nature,
yet in the field as Valiant as the fiercest; though it is by some observed, that
he was never perceived upon any charge given upon the enemy (many of which he
made in his own person) to change countenance, or show any sign of discomposure
from his constant temper.

EDWARD the I. Eleventh KING of PORTVGAL.
EDward the first of that Name, King of Portugal, was born at the City of
Braga, in, or about the year of our Lord one thousand three hundred ninety and
two, he was educated during his youth in all those exercises befitting a a
Prince under the tutorage of the Archbishop of Lisbon, in which he profited
so, that in his most tender years, his great judgment was deservedly wondered
at: after he had past his minority in studies, he several times accompanied his
father in the Wars of Africa, where he showed great proofs of his magnanimity
and courage.

He came to the Crown at the age of forty four years, or thereabouts, some
report that being to have the Ceremonies of his Coronation performed, the same
morning that the Crown was to be put upon his head, a Jew, one of his
Physicians, and a great Student in^ Astrology, came to him, and falling down
on his knees, very earnestly begged a boon of him; the King demanded what it
was? He answered, that his Majesty would be pleased for some days to defer his
Coronation: The King wondering at ^o strange a request, demanded, what it did
con^ern him? To which he answered, that it did ^ot only concern him, but all
his Majesty's ^aithful subjects, and the whole kingdom of Portugal, for that by
his skill in Astrology he ^ad found, that if he then proceeded to the Ceremony,
his reign would be both short and ^nfortunate. At this the King was somewhat
^^artled at first, and seemed as if he would con^^der of it; but after very
little deliberation, ^ither out of magnanimity, or mis-belief of that Art, he
commanded the Ceremony to proceed.

Whether this were true, or no, that he was ^hus forewarned, cannot be
confidently affirmed; but most certain it is, that in that short time of five
years reign, he was very unfortunate, loosing several battles to the Moors in
Africa, and was in very great probability to ^ave utterly lost what ever his
father had gained upon that Coast.

He was married long before he came to the Crown, and had four children, to
wit, two males, Ferdinand, who died an Infant; Alfonso, who succeeded him in
the kingdom; and two ^emales, Ioane, married to the King of Castile, and Leon;
and Leon^ra, married to the Empe^or Ferdinand, and mother to the Emperor
Maximilian.

He died, after he had reigned five years, and those with such bad success,
that it was thought ^y many to have accellerated his end: He was ^ndifferent
tale of stature, of a reserved countenance, and as reserved in his mind, very
w^lful in his resolves, and refusing any counsel, but most extremely outrageous
when he was thwarted in any thing he had designed, though with never so
apparent symptoms of reason, which many have attributed to be the cause of all
his disasters.

ALFONSO the V. The Twelfth KING of PORTVGAL.
ALfonso the fifth, his son, and the twelfth King of Portugal, who succeeded,
was born at Lisbon, in, or about the year of our Lord 1420. a Prince in whom
appeared evident tokens of courage, greatness, and magnanimity, even in his
youngest years; he came to the Crown about the age of one and twenty years, in
the year of our Lord 1441. and was no sooner settled in his kingdom, but rigging
out a Potent Fleet, with an Army of about Thirty thousand men, he passed into
Barbary, to prove if by his better fortune, he could regain that ho^nor which
his father most unfortunately had lost.

Nor was his success less then his desires, o^ then what his valor merited; for
having in several battles overthrown the Moors, he a^ ^ength per force took
from them the strong Towns of Tanger, Alcazar, and Arzilla, which he strongly
fortified, and engarisoned with Por^uguese Forces.

During his reign several Voyages were made to the new Islands, or Azores,
where the Por^ugals now began to fortify, and inhabit, as they did likewise in
the Islands of the Madera, Holy Port, and Capo Verd^; thus began this Nation by
degrees to grow famous at sea, by reason of their new discoveries, and of the
great Traffic they began to have.

King Alfonso left behind him several children, two of which came to be Kings
after him, to wit, John his eldest son, who succeeded him, and Emanuel his
second, who reigned after his brother.

He was a Prince of a very affable and courteous disposition, mild to all men,
and if he were not too merciful, a man scarce guilty of any fault, yet in the
Wars he was as magnanimous as a Lion, and fierce as a Tiger, being often
observed to hazard his own person somewhat too desperately. He died at Lisbon
in the forty third year of his reign, and sixty fourth of his life, in the year
of our Lord 1484.

JOHN the II. The Thirteenth KING of PORTVGAL.
JOhn the second, succeeding to his father Alfonso the fifth, was born about
the year 1456. and entered into the Government of his kingdom at the age of
about twenty eight years, a Prince who being educated under his fathers arms,
could not but be partaker of some of his virtues; an honorable emulation of
which he showed in his first coming to the Crown, by a prosperous expedition
against the Moors.

At his return from Barbary Crowned with Victory, he set out two Armata's to
sea, the gallantest and best accounted that ever Portugal had before that day
seen, the one directed his course to the Azores, which Islands were now
indifferently well peopled, and began to afford a Traffic to the Portugal
Nation; from thence this fleet was to go and touch at the other Islands
discovered by the Infant D. Henry, in the Atlantique sea, and supply them with
necessaries.

The other fleet more Warlickly fitted and supplied with all sorts of
necessaries, both for War and Peace, as designed both for a Conquest and
Plantation, steered its course along the Coast of Africa to Guiny, where
landing its Soldiers and Planters, they soon drove away the heathenish
Inhabitants, fortified themselves, and made an absolute Conquest of the Realms
of Congo. The fleet afterward made discovery of that Coast, as far as the Cape
of Good-hope, planting and fortifying as they went.

King John having now reigned fourteen years, with happy success in all the
enterprises he undertook, by an unfortunate accident came by his end; for very
much delighting in hunting, which sport he was very eager at, pursuing a Stag,
his horse leaping over a ditch, gave him a violent fall, of which in three days
he died, in the forty second year of his age, and fourteenth of his reign,
leaving his kingdom by reason of his dying without any legitimate Issue, to
Emanuel his brother.

He was of a very swarthy complexion, but withal of a pleasant countenance,
affable and courteous, a great lover of Justice, and more inclin^ble to
severity then mercy; he was especially careful in seeing the Laws against
murder rigorously put in execution, being often used to say, that he who
pardoned a murder, did commit (...); his great love to hunting made him not
altogether so diligent in State Affairs as he ought to have been.

EMANUEL the I. Fourteenth KING of PORTVGAL.
EManuel who succeeded him, was born in, or about the year 1462. he took
possession of the Crown of Portugal at the age of about thirty and two years; a
Prince who had been bred up in all sorts of learning, that might make him
either a Divine, or a Statesman.

At his first entrance in the Government, he addicted himself so wholly to
Religion, that he took little care of the management of the kingdom affairs, so
that whilst he was never from Churches-duties, both Church and State was
likely to go to ruin by the evil administration of those Ministers whom he had
entrusted.

The Arch Bishop of Lisbon, who foresaw the ruin which approached to the
kingdom by the Tyranny of the Officers of State, presumed freely to tell the
King, that though (...) could not blame his zeal and devotion toward God, yet
he must needs advise him, that God had placed him as King and Governor over his
people, that the Divine Majesty would be better pleased if he would with his
prayers to the Almighty for their welfare, add his care for their protection;
that it was a duty incumbent upon him to provide for his subjects felicity, as
of parents for their children, whilst according to the Apostle, He that does
not take care for his family, was worse then an infidel; that for want of his
superintendency the kingdom was posting into the road of destruction, by reason
of the ill administration of his Ministers, that according to his duty he could
not but advise him to free them from oppression, etc.

These Speeches of the Arch Bishop extremely stirred up the Kings affections to
his people, both because he was sensible of the great love the Arch Bishop bore
him, and because he knew what he had spoken was truth; he therefore takes the
Helm of State into his own hands, calls those unjust Steward to account, frees
the people from their oppresses, where he finds cause punishes them severely,
and finally, makes several Laws for the good and benefit of the people, whose
affections he in short time so far gained, that they surnamed him the Good.

And having thus settled his kingdom to the content of his subjects at home, he
next applies his mind to the aggrandising of it, to which purpose in the year
1500. he fitted out a great number of ships, which he divided into three
Fleets, sending one toward the East, the second toward the West, and the
third toward the South, to make discoveries.

That, which steered their couse toward the East, were the first Christian
Fleet that ever passed the Cape of Good-Hope, and found out the passage by Sea
into the East Indies; that toward the West, made discovery and took possession
of Brazile in America; that toward the South, reinforced and added to their
former Conquests in the kingdoms of Conga. and Angola.

These happy discoveries thus made at the return of the fleet from the
East Indies, a more potent was sent out with a convenient Land Army, to take
possession of some places in the Country; these discomfited the great Armies of
the Turks and Sultan of Egypt, possessed themselves of the Island of Ormus in
the Persian Gulf, an Island so rich and well situated, that the Arabians used
to say, that if the whole world were a ring, that would be like the Diamond in
it; many other Forts and Places upon the Seacoast they likewise subjected, and
fortified, and returned home richly laden.

Thus were the riches of India, which before had been brought over the vast
Arabian deserts upon the backs of Camels, to Grand Cairo in Egypt, and from
thence by Sea transported to Venice, and so dispersed over these parts of the
World, were now brought home by Sea, a longer, but less chargeable and far
quicker way.

Emanuel, while his Fleets were performing these glorious services abroad,
governed his kingdoms in peace and prosperity at home, blessed with a noble and
numerous Issue, to wit, six sons and two daughters; the sons were first, Prince
John, who succeeded him in the kingdom: secondly, the Infant D. Lewis:
thirdly, the Infant D. Alfonso, who was after a Cardinal, Archbishop of
Lisbon, and Abbot of Alcobaza: fourthly, the Infant D. Henry, Cardinal and
Archbishop of Braga: fifthly, Infant D. Fernando: sixthly, the Infant D.
Edward. The daughters were first the Infant Isabella, who was married to
Charles the fifth that famous Emperor, and King of Spain: and secondly, the
Infant Beatrice, married to Emanuel Duke of Savoy.

Emanuel having long governed this Nation to his great glory and renown, at
last in the seventy third year of his life, and forty first of his Empire,
yielded to fate at Lisbon, in, or about the year 1435. and was buried in the
Cathedral of that City amongst many of his Ancestors.

He was a Prince in whom the Divinity seemed to have been at a strife, whether
his body or mind should be made more amiable, for the features of his face
were worthily to be admired, yet his outward part could not boast more beauty,
then his soul could, that imbellisher of man, virtue; I can not well say
whether he was more severe, or merciful, but where he met with offenses that he
could not pardon, he was always pitiful; in sum, he so lived, and so ruled,
that he deservedly merited that Glorious Name of Emanuel the Good.

JOHN the III. Fifteenth KING of PORTVGAL.
JOhn the third of that Name, who succeeded his father in the kingdom, was born
in the year 1504. and educated in the University of Conimbria, in all those
Sciences befitting a Prince, he arrived at the Crown at the age of one and
thirty years, Heir as well to his fathers virtues, as kingdoms.

He prosecuted those discoveries made by the Fleets of his father in the East
and West Indies, in the first of which he took and possessed many Islands and
Towns, his Armies encountered and overthrew the potent and formidable kings of
Bengala, Pegu and Siam, and likewise obtained many signal Victories over the
Moors of Malacca, Sumatra, and Molucco, who were as well provided of Artillery
as any Princes of Europe: His Armies in West Indies had no worse success,
taking and fortifying diverse places, no^ was fortune less favorable to him in
Guiny.

During his fathers lifetime, being about the age of three and twenty years,
he was married to Catherine, sister to Charles the fifth Emperor, and King of
Spain, by whom he had Issue Prince John, who died during his reign, but left
behind him a son named Sebastian, who succeeded this John his Grandfather in
the kingdom.

John the third reigned in all eight and thirty years, making many Laws for the
increasing and encouragement of Traffic, to the great enriching of his
subjects; he died in the sixty ninth year of his age, and in the year of our
Lord 1573. being buried in the Cathedral at Lisbon.

SEBASTIAN the I. Sixteenth KING of PORTVGAL.
SEbastian, Grandchild of King John the third, was his successor in the
kingdom, which he entered into at about three and twenty years of age.

Scarce was he well seated in his Throne, or had sat in it much above a year
and a half, when he was by Ambassadors from Muly Mahamet, then turned out of
his kingdoms of Fesse, and Morocco, by his Uncle Abdemelech, implored to aid
him in the recovery of his kingdom, with promise that if by his means he could
drive out Abdemelech, he would freely resign to Sebastian the kingdom of
Morocco, and content himself with that of Fesse.

Ambition of glory, and hopes to propagate the Christian Religion, makes
Sebastian readily undertake the enterprise, and to that purpose makes all
possible speed to levy Men and Arms, he sends to Phillip the second King of
Spain, who promises him the assistance of ten thousand men, but fails; yet
Sebastian not discouraged, resolves with his own forces to proceed, to which by
an accident he got some addition, for as he was almost ready to go, Stukeley an
Englishman, created by the Pope Marquis of Ireland, as he was going with a
small fleet of ships, and about six thousand Italian soldiers, to assist the
Irish Rebels against the Queen of England, was by tempest driven into Lisbon,
him with much entreaty he persuades to desist from his intended design, and
accompany him into Barbary.

Thus set forth, he arrives at Tanger with an Army of about thirty thousand
men, here he meets Muly Mahamet, with a very small addition of forces, and much
less then he expected, yet he marches forwards toward Abdemelech, who by
letters would have advised him to have returned in peace, but in vain; so the
two Armies meet in the plains of Alcazar, where Sebastian is utterly
discomfited, himself, Muly Mahamet, Stukeley, and several persons of quality
slain, three Kings fell in this field, for Abdemelech was killed in the hottest
of the battle, this was fought in August 1578.

Yet some there be that have affirmed that Sebastian was not slain in this
battle, but that for shame and sorrow he returned not home, but wandering from
one place to another, was at last found out and known at Venice, and from
thence carried to Naples, where he was kept three days in a dark and dismal
dungeon, without any sustenance but a knife and a halter, that he was after by
the command of the King of Spain sent thither, where he died miserably. That
whether this were the true Sebastian, or no, was not certainly known, but that
he was so like him, that the Spaniards used to say, if it were not he, it was
the devil in his likeness; but however, he being thus lost to the Portugals,
they Crowned in his stead Henry the Cardinal.

HENRY the I. Seventeenth KING of PORTVGAL.
HEnry the Cardinal, third son to Emanuel the first, who succeeded Sebastian in
the kingdom, being both by reason of his age, to wit, 67. years old, and his
function (being a Churchman) deprived of all means to give the people any
hopes of Issue, it was during his short reign of his years, the whole discourse
and debate, not only of Portugal, but of all Christendom, who of right ought,
and who probably might succeed King Henry in that Crown and Kingdom, several
pretenders there were, whose several Titles the ensuing Table will make clear.

Emanuel the first, had eight children.
1 John, King of Portugal, who had Issue John, Prince of Portugal, who had
Issue Sebastian, King of Portugal.

2 Lewis, Infant, who had Issue Don Alfonso, the Bastard. Christopher, and
others.

3 Infant D. Alfonso, died without Issue. 4 Henry, the Cardinal, King of
Portugal, died wirhout Issue. 5 Fernando, Infant, died without Issue. 6 Edward
Infant, who had Issue 1 Mary, wedded to Alexander Farnese, Prince of Parma, a
forreigner. Reinuce, Prince of Parma.
2 Katherine, married to John, Duke of Bragance.
7 Mary, married to Charles the fifth, King of Castile, and Emperor, who had
Issue Phillip the second, King of Spain.
8 Beatrix, married to Charles, Duke of Savoy, had Issue Philbert, Duke of
Savoy.

The several claims to the Crown were in (...) eight, and all the pretenders
endeavored by (...) the most weighty arguments they could to j^^stifie their
several Titles; first the people cla^^med Iure Regni, a Privilege to Elect
the^^ own Kings; but it was soon answered, th^^ until the Royal Line of a
kingdom were qui^^ extinct, they could claim no right in the El^^ction, for if
they could, they might by the sam^ reason at any time depose the lawful Heir.
(...) Popes challenge to be Iure Divino, Arbitra^^^ (if not Donour) in all
controversies of Crown^ but especially in this, because Alphonso the (...)
King, to obtain that Title, became tributary (...) the Sea of Rome, was
slighted and dis-regarde^^ The third claim was that of Antonio, the b^^stard
son of Lewis Infant, who alleged, th^^ his mother was lawfully wedded to his
fathe^^ and endeavored by all means to clear (...) aspersion of his being
illegitimate; some strug^lings he made for the Crown, as hereafter sha^ be
spoken more at large. Catherina de Medice^ the widow of Henry, the second King
of France was the fourth that pretended a Right and (...) to the Crown, as
being descended legitimatel^ from Alfonso, the third King of Portugal,
cha^^ging all th^^ had reigned since to be usurpers^ To this it was readily
answered, that all Lawyer^ had ever allowed one hundred years, sufficien^ to
clear and make firm the Title of any king^dom, and that there being the
prescription (...) three hundred years against her, her claim (...) utterly
void. The fifth that pretended to (...) Crown was Philibert Duke of Savoy, as
son to ^eatrice the younger daughter of Emanuel, though it is to be supposed
that he laid not his ^laim out of any hopes to prevail, whilst he was
descended but of the youngest daughter, and Phillip the second of Spain of the
eldest: but (...) is rather to be thought that he was incited to ^ut in his
claim by the rest of the pretenders* who knew that of the claimers who were not
Natives, he was the fittest person of all others ^o resist and annoy. King
Phillip not only by ^eason of his personal valor, but also because of his
Countries bordering upon the Duchy of Millan, which with the assistance of the
French, ^is neighbors on the other side, and pretenders ^o that Dukedom, he
might with ease at all ^imes invade.

The sixth who-presumed a right to this kingdom, was Reinuce the young Prince
of Parma, who demanded it in right of his mother the eldest daughter to the
Infant Edward, alleging that Iure Primogeniturae, the male Line was to be
^erved before the female, so that until the Line of his Grandfather Prince
Edward, were wholly extinct, neither Phillip the second, nor ^he Duke of Savoy,
could have any pretense to that kingdom.

Catherine, Duchess of Braganza, and youngest daughter to the Infant Don
Edward, was the seventh that laid claim to this Crown, who alleged, that in
all successions whatsoever, these four qualities were to be considered, viz.
the Line, the Degree, the Sex, and the Age; that the better Line ought in
justice first to take place, although others should have advantage in the other
three qualities; that in all successions of Crowns, the last possessor was to
be succeeded ^ure hereditatis, which allowed the benefit of representation;
that she representing the Infant Don Edward, the better Line did by
representation preceed Reinuce (the Law never allowing a Grandchild that
benefit) and that by her better Line she did exclude King Philip, who descended
of a daughter, but especially by the prime and fundamental Laws of the kingdom,
(put in execution against B^atrice, daughter of Ferdinand the ninth King of
Portugal, who having married out of the kingdom to the King of Castile, her
right of succeeding was utterly lost, and King John chosen in her stead) she
was to be preferred before all other claimers whatsoever, in regard of her both
being born and married within the kingdom.

But Phillip the second, King of Spain, who was the eight pretender, having
employed all the best wits in Christendom, to confute and disprove all other
claims, and prove and maintain his, wanted not some objections against this;
alleging, That the successions of Crowns were to be decided by the Law of
Nations, not of the Empire, upon which only her jus representandi Patrem was
grounded, that the nearest male in degree to the late possessor ought to
succeed; that the Infant Don Edward being deceased before his brother Henry
was King, could have no right in himself, and therefore could derive none to
his posterity, for nem^ dat quod in se non habet, that it was very unreasonable
that Catharine should be less prejudiced in her self for her sex, then King
Phillip should be for his mother.

PHILLIP the II. II. III. IV. of that Name KINGS OF SPAIN, And 18. 19. 20.
KINGS of PORTVGAL.
BUt it was no Arguments could confute, or annul the certain and indubitable
right of the Duchess of Braganza, which was clear to the World, both by her
descent, and by the fundamental Laws of the Nation, and this King Phillip knew
well, and therefore, though he carried on his affairs very heartily to the eyes
of men, and seemed unbyassed with proper Interest, by offering to submit his
Title to a disputation, ^^ofessing that the Laws of Portugal were more
favorable to him, then the Law of Castile, and openly acknowledging, that if he
should chance to die before King Henry, his eldest Son being a degree farther
off, would come behind some of the pretenders, of whom himself had the
precedence. Though, I say, he carried himself thus fair to the world, yet he
clandestinely wrought with Father Leon Henriques a Jesuit, and Confessor to
king Henry, and Ferdinando Castillo, a Dominican, and of the Kings bosom
Council, to endeavor by all means possible to divert all Designs in prejudice
of his Claims, and especially that Catherine Duchess of Braganza might not by
Henry be declared to be the next Heir apparent; which he conscious of the
justice of the Title, was very willing to have done.

And whilst these two Fathers prosecuted his interest there with the old, and
almost doting King Henry, the vigilant Phillip provided an Army in readiness,
with which he resolved to enter into Portugal, and with his sword make good his
disputable Title, as soon as that old Kings death should give him the Warning
piece to fall on.

Yet when that was given, and Phillip ready to march with an Army of twenty
thousand men into Portugal, he had like to have been prevented; for Pope
Gregory the Thirteenth pretending still his right to Dispose, or at least to
Arbitrate all Difference concerning that Crown, had sent Cardinal Riario Legate
Apostolic, with Order to dissuade the Catholic King from raising Arms, and
that done, to pass into ^ortugal, and in his Holiness name, and behalf, to
Arbitrate the Right between all Pretenders; which designs of the Popes, this
crafty Spanish Fox circumvented, for having pre-advice of it, and resolving to
pursue his own intentions of assuring to himself the kingdom of Portugal, and
yet approve himself an obedient Son of the Church, he gave order in all places
where the Legate was to pass, he should be most magnificently entertained, so
that by such sumptuous Treatments, the time might be dexterously protracted,
and he possessed of that kingdom before the Legate arrived at Court; which was
accordingly done, and the Legate returned thanks for his magnificent
Entertainments, though he was displeased at the ill success of his Negotiation.

But to proceed to the manner of his possessing himself of this kingdom: No
sooner did the News arrive at the Spanish Court of the death of King Henry, but
Ferdinand de Teledo, Duke D' Alva, was commanded with an Army of twenty
thousand men to march toward Lisbon, and in the Name and Right of his Catholic
Majesty, to make Conquest of the kingdom, if he found opposition.

But all the appearance of opposition which he found, was made by Don Antonio
the Bastard Son of Lewis the Infant, who having got into Lisbon in the Head of
a tumultuary Rabble, rather than a well-formed Army, endeavored at first to
make some resistance, but was soon discomfited, and the suburbs of Lisbon being
sacked to satisfy the soldiers, the City was surrendered to him, whither soon
after the King came, and so by a mixed Title of Descent and Arms, took
possession of the kingdom, Anno 1510. Katherine Duchess of Braganza being
enforced to surrender to him all her interest and pretensions.

The Nobility and People of Portugal were without doubt extremely amazed to see
themselves so suddenly surprised, and made subject to a Foreign Prince, and
especially to a Prince of that Nation against whom they had a natural
Antipathy: but finding themselves in a condition not able to make any
resistance, they thought they should gain more by submitting freely to that
King, than by being forced to it; and therefore they made their humble
submission, which Phillip met as it were half way, and condescended in the
General Assembly of Estates to be sworn to these Articles* or Capitulations
following.

I.
That the said Phillip King of Spain, etc. should observe all the Laws,
Liberties, Privileges, and Customs granted to the People by the former Kings
of Portugal.

II.
That the Vice-king, or Governor, should be always the Son, Brother, Uncle, or
Nephew of the King, or else a Native of Portugal.

III.
That all chief Offices of the Church, or State, should be bestowed upon the
Natives of Portugal, and not upon strangers; likewise the Governments of all
Towns and Places.

IV.
That all Countries now belonging to the Portugal, should so continue, to the
comodity and benefit of the Nation.

V.
That the Portugal Nation should be admitted to all Offices in the Kings House,
as well as the Castilians.

VI.
That because the King could not conveniently be always in Portugal, he should
send the Prince to be bred up amongst them.

These Articles were shut up, or concluded, with a blessing upon such kings as
should observe and keep them, and a curse on those who should break or violate
them. And some Authors likewise affirm, that there was another Clause added to
them, signifying, That in case (which God forbid) that the King which then was,
or his Successors, should not observe this Agreement, or should procure a
Dispensation for this Oath, the three States of the kingdom might freely deny
subjection and obedience to the King, without being guilty, either of Perjury
or Treason:

Though these Articles were thus sworn to, and the Cardinal Albertus Archduke
of Austria son to the Emperor, and Nephew to the King of Spain, appointed
Vice-king of Portugal, Phillip the second durst not inperson yet leave the
kingdom; for he perceived by their murmurs and visible discontents, that their
submission to him proceeded more out of fear then love, and that as he had in a
moment gained that kingdom, so he should as soon loose it; if he should but
give them the least opportunity.

For that the people were highly discontented, might easily appear by their
attentive listening after old prophesies, among which was one of an old Hermit
who told Alphonso the first King of Portugal, of the great victory that he
should obtain over the five Kings of the Moors, that he and his posterity
should reign happily King of Portugal, but that in the sixteenth generation his
line should fail, but that God at length should have mercy again upon them, and
restore them.

Others had respect to a Letter written by St. Bernard to the same King
Alphonso, (the original of which is reported to have been given to the Portugal
Ambassadors, by Lewis the Thirteenth, King of France, Anno 1641.) the substance
of which was to this effect: That he rendered thanks to him for the Lands
bestowed upon him, that in recompense thereof, God had declared unto him, that
there should not fail a Native of Portugal to sit upon that Throne, unless for
the greatness of their sins, God would chastise them for a time; but that this
time of Chastisement should not last above sixty years.

Other Prophesies there were of this nature, and to this effect, which put the
people in hopes of a Deliverance; and many of them flattered themselves that
Don Sebastian was yet alive, and would come and deliver them; nay, so foolish
were some of them, that though they believed him slain at the battle of Alcazar
in Barbary, yet they thought he should live again, and miraculously come to
redeem them.

But that which most of all expressed the peoples Discontents, was what was
publicly spoken by the mouths of their Orators the Priests, in their Pulpits,
who would ordinarily in their Sermons utter speeches much in prejudice of the
Spaniards Title, and in favor of the Duchess of Braganza, nor were they
sparing to do so in the presence of the King himself, who would therefore often
say, That the Portuguez Clergy had made the sharpest war with him.

Father Lewis Alvarez a Jesuit, preaching one day before the Viceroy, took
his Text, Surge, toll Grabatum tuum, and ambula, and turning himself to the
Duke, said, Sir, the meaning of that is, Arise, take up your pack, and be gone
home. But above all this, might the Discontents be perceived in the Noblemens
Chapels, especially in the Duke of Braganza's, where they were wont to sing
the Lamentations of Jeremy, applying all the scorn and reproach of the
Israelites to themselves, as Aquam nostram pecunia bibimus, because of the
Excize put by the Spaniards upon Wine, and other necessaries: And that, Servi
Dominati sunt in nos; and that, Cecidit Corona Capitis nostri, most commonly
ending with this Invocation, Recordare Domine, Quid acciderit nobis Intuere and
respice opprobrium nostrum: Haereditas nostra versa est ad alienos.

Yet did king Phillip bear all these Affronts with an incomparable patience,
dissembling with an admirable prudence his passion (if he had any) for these
Discontents; for he knew the only way to win this Nation to an obedience and
compliance, must be lenity at first, what ever he intended to practice
afterward, and that he had by his exact keeping of his Word and Oath, won much
upon this people, appears in that during his whole Reign, and the Reign of his
Successor Philip the Third, who followed his fathers footsteps, though not
with that craft and dissimulation, they made no attempts, nor were inclinable
to a Revolt, which the ensuing Story will evidence.

Don Antonio Prior of Crato, the base born son of Lewis the Infant, who had by
the tumultuary Rabble, on the Death of King Henry, been elected King, being
expulsed Lisbon by the Forces of the Duke D' Alva, fled from thence into
France, to the protection of that Queen, who (in regard that her Claim was
exploded both by the Spaniard and the Portugal, as an outworn Title, and
injurious to all the kings of Portugal ever since, as unjust Possessors) had
long endeavored to excite Queen Elizabeth of England against the Spaniard, and
to forewarn her and other Princes to beware of his increasing power, who now
enriched with the addition of Portugal, East India, and many Isles in the
Atlantique sea, might in time overshadow all his neighboring Princes, and
therefore advising that it behooved them to think of some way to curb his
Ambition betimes, and restrain his too far extending Power into some reasonable
limits.

Which advice of hers, Queen Elizabeth easily listened too, being always
providently careful of her own, and her Subjects safety, foreseeing how
dangerous the over-swelling Power of that Prince would be, both to Her and her
Dominions, and therefore though she then entered not into a present War with
him, yet when Don Antonio came over to her with Recommendations from the French
Queen, she bountifully relieved him, which she then thought she might do
without offense, considering that she acknowledged him her Kinsman, descended
of the Blood Royal of England, and of the House of Lancaster; nor was there
ever any promise made in any League between the English and Spaniard, that the
Portugals should not be received into England.

Here then Don Antonio resided, till (the Wars breaking forth between Spain and
England) after the Spaniard had received that notable Overthrow of his
Invincible Armado, to whose power and puissance the whole World thought England
would have been but a morsel. Queen Elizabeth judging it more honorable to
assail her Enemy, then again to be assailed by him, suffered a Fleet to be set
forth against Spain, which Sir John Norris, and Sir Francis Drake, with some
other private persons, to their eternal honor, rigged and set out at their own
charge, requiring nothing of the Queen but some few Ships of War; and she
granted to them, that the Ships and spoils taken should be divided amongst
them. The Hollanders likewise to this Fleet joined some Ships, so that the
number of the whole Fleet was about eleven thousand Soldiers, and fifteen
hundred Mariners.

With this Fleet Don Antonio, with some few Portugals set Sail out of England,
having before laden the English with great promises of the recovery of this
kingdom, assuring them that the Portugueses would be ready upon his appearance
to revolt from the Spainiard, and that Muley Hamet King of Morocco, would
assist him with twenty thousand men.

The first place that the English Fleet put into, was the Groyne in Gallicia,
the base town of which they easily took, but attempting the higher town were
twice repulsed, and forced to raise their siege, upon advice, that the Condy di
Andrada had gathered Forces at Burges Bridge, and that the Condy di Altamira
was coming with more, purposing to besiege them in the base town, and so cut
off their way to their ships; which Norris resolved to prevent, and therefore
with a sufficient force marched against them, overthrew them, and had the
slaughter of them for three miles together, and two days after having burnt and
pillaged the villages, they put to sea, steering their course toward Portugal.

But whilst they labored with contrary winds, plying to and fro at Sea, Robert
Earl of Essex fell in amongst them, who being very young, had out of the heat
of Military glory, hatred of the Spaniards, and commiseration of Don Antonio,
declining the pleasures of the Court, and committed himself to Sea, without the
knowledge, and absolutely against the Queens mind, in hopes by reason of the
influence he had over most of the Commanders of the Landforces, to be made
their General.

Two days after his being joined with them, they with much trouble arrived in
Penicha a town of Portugal, which with the loss of some drowned in landing,
they became masters of the Castle, being likewise immediately rendered to Don
Antonio.

Hence the Landforces under the Command of Sir John Norris marched directly,
and with all possible speed toward Lisbon, about Sixty miles distant, Drake
promising to follow with the Fleet by the way of the River Tagus. The Army
being arrived at Lixbon, though they had before at a Council of War, determined
to encamp on the East Side of the town, the better to bar succors from coming
out of Spain, now contrary to their own resolutions, sat down before St.
Kathermes suburbs on the West Side, where as at first they found no resistance,
so they found little help, but what the prayers of some few disarmed men gave
them, who now and then cried out, God save the King Antonio: and indeed other
help they could not afford him, Albertus Archduke of Austria the Viceroy
having before disarmed the Portugals.

The next day when the English, weary with their long march, betook themselves
to their rest, the Spanish Garrison sallied out upon them, who were at first
resisted by Bret and his Companies, till more coming up to their assistance,
forced the Spaniards to give back the valiant Earl of Essex, chasing them to
the very gates; but the English had several Commanders of note, and no small
quantity of private soldiers slain.

In sum, when they had now stayed two days before the town, and perceived that
the Portugals, notwithstanding the great brags and fair promises of Don
Antonio, did not at all incline to a Revolt, and that no advice came of any
assistance from Muley Hamet King of Morocco; but that instead of them, fresh
Forces flocked in great numbers from the East parrs into the City, whilst their
Army was lessened by a violent sickness, their Provision and Ammunition failed,
and their great Guns for battery arrived not, they raised their siege, and took
their way toward Cascais, a small town at the mouth of the river, the
Spaniards following them at a distance, but not ever daring to fall into their
Rear. The town of Cascais they took, blew up the Castle, and so,
notwithstanding all the entreaties of Don Antonio, set Sail for England, firing
in their way Vigo a Port-town deserted of its inhabitants.

This and some small bustles with one or two Counterfeit Sebastians not worth
mentioning, were the only storms, that happened in this kingdom during the
reigns of Phillip the second, and third; for they keeping their words in most
things, though some of their privileges they infringed, had almost brought the
people to a willingness to be their slaves, whereas Phillip the fourth
committing the whole charge of the Government to Count Olivares, (who though
without doubt an able Statesman, yet would seem to have a way in policy by
himself, which no body else could understand the reasons of) lost the whole
kingdom, and all its Territories.

For such was the new rigorous ways which he would prescribe in the Government
of Catalonia and Portugal, both people very tender of their Privileges, the
least breach of which should have been seconded by a potent Force to have
suppressed them, in case they should attempt an Insurrection, when in stead of
having such power in readiness, the Catalonians had rather opportunity given
them to rebel, and spurs to provoke them to make use of the opportunity; for
some soldiers being scatteringly quartered among them, but too few to curb
them, they looked upon that as a greater intrenchment upon their Liberties than
any before, and a design utterly to enslave them: wherefore converting their
patience into fury, they took Arms, massacred those soldiers, slew their
Viceroy, and put themselves under the French Protection.

This Revolt of the Catalonians was a president to the Portugals, who had
extremely suffered under the breach of their Privileges: for contrary to the
second Article sworn to by King Philip the Second, which said, That the Viceroy
or Governor, should be either Son, Brother, Uncle, or Nephew to the King of
Spain: The Infanta Margarita di Mantoua, who had no relation at all to the
kings of Castile, was made Governess, which they might, and perhaps would have
born, had they not been incensed by a more feeling injury Anno. 1636. when the
Tax of a fifth part was imposed upon all the Subjects of that kingdom; an
intolerable grievance, and thought so insufferable by the Southern parts of
the Nation, that they rose in Arms to oppose it, and had set the whole kingdom
in a combustion, had it not been timely quenched by the timely care and
industry of the then Governess, the Infanta Margarita of Mantoua.

Yet this small stir gave an Item to the Court of Spain, of the readiness of
the people to revolt, which made Olivarez endeavor by all ways possible to cut
off the means of their being able to do, but whilst he endeavored to prevent
them, he gave them the means to do it, though he failed not to make use of
those courses which in probability might ensure that kingdom; the chief of
which was, the endeavoring to allure from thence the Duke of Braganza, whom the
people of Portugal looked upon as the person who of right ought to be their
king, and who was the only Native of the kingdom who might restore again the
Line of Alphonso; besides, he was a Prince, who for Power, Riches, and Number
of Tenants, not only exceeded all the Nobles of Portugal, but even of Spain it
self.

And indeed the Duke of Braganza was one of the most glorious Subjects in
Europe, being allied to most Kings in Christendom; which made the Kings of
Spain, though they were Competitors for the Crown of Portugal, treat this
Family with more honor than any other of his Grandees, receiving them almost
with as much respect, as if they were Sovereign Princes; which appeared in
Philip the Second, who most of all desired to abase this Family, yet would
always when the Duke of Braganza came to visit him, meet him in the middle of
the room, and not permitting him to kiss his hand, seat him with himself under
the Canopy of Estate.

To draw him therefore out of that kingdom, Olivarez first politickly offered
him the Government of Milan, a place of great trust and honor, but he modestly
refused it, as not in a condition at that present to undertake so great a
Command, and indeed expressing an unwil ingness to go out of Portugal.

But his unwillingness to go from thence, made the king of Spain, and Count
Olivarez the more willing to draw him from thence, it was therefore given out,
That the king himself was resolved to go in person to reduce the revolted
Catalonians, and that therefore all the Nobility should be in a readiness in
four months time to attend his Majesty in that Expedition. But the Duke of
Braganza being suspicious of the Spaniards, because he knew himself suspected
by them, and likely to be whilst the Portugueses so much affected him, to
assure himself of the ones love, and to avoid, if possible, the others suspect,
retires himself to his Countrey-house at Villa Vitiosa, and there follows his
sports of Hunting, etc. not at all regarding matters of State, withal sening an
Excuse to Count Olivarez that his affairs at present were in so low and mean a
condition, that he could not appear to attend his Majesty in that pomp and
splendour that became a Person of his quality, and that therefore he should do
his Majesty more service in staying at home, when the other Nobles were abroad,
then he could possibly do by attending him.

This Plot thus failing, made the Court of Spain more suspicious of the Duke
then ever before; Count Olivarez therefore resolves to employ his utmost art of
dissimulation to entrap him, which he sets upon by a fetch so far about, that
to the eye of reason it might put the Duke into ambitious thoughts of
endeavoring to assume his Throne, and in a way to accomplish those thoughts,
rather than any way prejudice him: but it appeared afterward that Olivarez
design in so far trusting the Duke, was only because the Duke should trust him.

In answer to Braganza's Letter of Excuse, the Conde assures him that his
Majesty was very well satisfied with his reasons of not attending him in the
intended Expedition against Catalonia, and that he was very sensible of his
good inclinations to his service; That for his own part, he was verry sorry
that his affairs were in so low a condition, for he could not but commiserate
his interest as his own. That his Majesty, to let him know how great confidence
he reposed in his fidelity, had appointed him General of the Militia of that
kingdom, and had for his present supply sent him Sixty thousand Crowns, leaving
it to his choice to reside in what place near Lisbon he pleased.

This strange confidence put in the Duke by the king of Spain, much amazed the
greatest Politicians, who thought it reasonable that the Spaniard should have
permitted the Duke still to have kept retired in the Country, rather then have
given him such a Command, and called him to Lisbon into the continual view of
the people, who looking upon him as the Heir of that House which had been ever
represented to have the only right to the Crown, might easily be enflamed with
a desire to have a king of their own.

And these things was the Princess of Mantoua very sensible of, and therefore
continually solicited the King to know his reason, or to desire him to remove
those apparent opportunities which he had given the Duke of Braganza to effect
a Revolt. But she not only received intricate and enigmatical Answers from the
King and Duke D'Olivarez, but likewise had the former actions seconded with
one, which made her of opinion that his Catholic Majesty had a mind to toss
the kingdom into Braganza's hands whether he would or no; for on a sudden,
without any notice given to her, all the Spanish Garrison in St. John's Castle,
which commanded the City of Lisbon, and indeed upon the strength of which the
whole safety and security of the kingdom depended, were suddenly drawn forth,
and the Castle left to the disposure of Don John of Braganza.

But this was the last act of Count Olivarez confidence in the Duke; for by
trusting him so much, he now thought that he could not but reciprocally repose
confidence in him; and therefore next Summer Anno 1640. he again by Letters
sollicites him to leave Portugal, and come to Madrid, first telling him, that
his Catholic Majesty gave him many thanks, and greatly applauded his Loyalty
in the Exercise of the Office of General, and was very sensible of the good
effects which his Authority had wrought over the Portugals: Next he represented
unto him the present declining condition of the Spanish Monarchy, not only by
reason of the disorders in Flanders and Italy, and the preparations of the
Turk, but more especially for that their most potent Enemies the French, were
now in assistance of the revolted Catalonians, entered into Spain: That it
highly concerned his Catholic Majesty to drive these out of his Territories,
which could not be effected but by a very powerful Force; that he being one of
the prime Grandees of the Kingdom, might by his presence in the Head of a good
number of his Tenants, encourage others to a suitable assistance: That to that
purpose his Catholic Majesty expected him every moment, having designed for
him great Honors, Privileges and Dignities, suitable to his merit.

But as cunning an Angler as Olivarez was, yet he failed of his mark, the bait
would not yet hook in the Fish; for though the Duke of Braganza was accounted
no very great Politician, yet his own safety taught him to know that all these
Trusts, and fair promises were but gilded Allurments to draw him to his
destruction; Having therefore supplied the King with a considerable number of
his Tenants and friends, he found excuses for his own not going in person; and
to take off all suspicion of jealousy or thoughts, that he had any design
against the State, he retired again to his country house. Thus did these two
great personages, by craft and dissumulation endeavor to supplant each other,
only the one strove the others destruction; the other only studied his own
safety and preservation:

During all these passages, the Vice-Queen Margarita of Mantoua was very
vigilant in her Government, and foreseeing what in reason might be the issue of
these proceedings, wrote very importunately to the king, assuring him, that if
it were not suddenly prevented, the kingdom would infallibly be lost. To which
his Majesty returned her no answer: and Olivarez in his (slighting her
judgment, as fitter to govern a private house then a kingdom,) desired her,
that if her Capacity would not reach to the height and drift of those mysteries
of State, yet that her wisdom would prompt her not to discover them.

Yet without doubt Olivarez was inwardly perplexed to see all his plots thus
fail, and foul means he durst not openly attempt, such was both the Dukes
potency, and the great love the people bore him, he therefore at last has
recourse to treachery, and to that intent gives secret advice to Don Lopez
d'Ossis, and Don Antonio D'Oquendo, that when they had relieved Flanders with
men and money, they should with the whole Fleet put into Portugal, and then as
soon as the Duke should according to the duty of his new place and office come
aboard, they should immediately set Sail, and bring him away to Callis; but
this plot was by a strange divine providence prevented, for that Fleet was
totally routed by the Hollanders upon the Coast of England.

JOHN the IV. The One and twentieth KING of PORTVGAL.
NOw was the time come wherein, according to St. Bernards prophecy, the kingdom
of Portugal was to be released from the tyranny of strangers, and restored
again to the Government of a Native King, to which all things seemed so well to
quadrate, that we cannot imagine there was less then a divine hand in it; for
though (all Plots failing against the Duke of Braganza,) the Spaniards
beginning to fear somewhat, drew out as many of the Native soldiers out of the
kingdom as conveniently they could, thinking thereby to lessen the ill humors
which beg^n now to appear, yet they did thereby only the more stir up and
inflame those discontents which were taken at Vasconsellos managing all Affairs
of State.

For although the most Illustrious Infanta Margarita of Mantoua was a Princess
of great judgment and knowledge in State Affairs, yet she permitted her self
to be so much overruled by Vasconsellos Secretary of State, or at least was so
much overruled by him, whether she would or no, that he either by some secret
consent of his Catholic Majesty, or led on by his own ambitious spirit,
confiding in the great favor he had at Court, never permitted the Infanta to
enjoy other then the title of Vice-Queen.

And insufferable was the Government of Vasconsellos to the Portuguesses, who
as much hated his obscure birth, as they did his evil Customs* he was a man
wholly composed of pride, cruelty, and avarice, that knew no moderation but in
excesses: small lapses were by him made capital crimes, chastising with all
severity those whom he did, but suppose dissatisfied with his Government; And
exercising with all rigor the Spanish Inquisition, punished not only the
actions, but the very thoughts of men. The infringing of the greatest
privileges of the Portugal Nation seemed to him but a trifle; which continued
oppressions, in the end so exasperated the whole people, that animated by the
knowledge of their own strength, by the many diversions of the Spanish Nation,
by the late example of the Catalonians, and incited by the absolute ruin which
they saw hung over their heads, whilst six thousand of them were yearly listed
and forced to serve the Spaniard in his foreign wars, they resolved to loose
his yoke from off their Necks, and to disclaim his obedience, by the election
of a King of their own.

Some have been of opinion, that this conspiracy was at least of ten years
standing, agreed and assented to by most of the Grandees of Portugal: I dare
not affirm it, nor deny it; for such great actions of State do resemble
lightning, which once past leave but the greater darkness: the Air of
State-mysteries is not to be flown in by less then Eagles, I shall therefore
omit to search into so great a Privacy, and only recount the public action.

On Saturday the first of February, Anno 1640. (and Saturday's have been often
observed to be propitious to the Portugal Nation,) all the Nobility of the
Kingdom, led on by the Marquesses of Ferrera, and the Count of Vimioso, took
Arms, and accompanied with a great multitude of the inhabitants of Lisbon, and
some Portuguese soldiers came to the Castle, which situate in the midst of
Lisbon, serves both for a Palace and a Castle: this was the residence of the
Vice-Queen, and hither assembled all the Magistrates for Governing of the
Kingdom, the guards which were two Companies of Spaniards and two of high
Dutch, either before gained by secret intelligence, or frighted with the great
numbers of the Portugals, or desire of Novelty, or else perhaps unwilling to
make resistance against those to whom they were most of them joined by
friendship or marriage, without the least opposition, abandoning their post,
gave them free admittance.

Whilst these things had happened, the Secretary Vasconsellos was in the
Chambers of his Office (upon some reasons he had by the Discontents of the
people, to suspect an Insurrection) at that instant writing into Spain, of the
Alienation of the minds of the Nobility from the Spanish Government, and
earnestly pressing that some rigorous Resolution might be taken to prevent it;
which Letters afterward taken, did sufficiently demonstrate his ill will to
the Portuguese Nation.

Whilst he was thus busied, the confused noise of the Soldiers pierced his
ears, at which wondering not so much at the tumult, as at what should be the
cause of it, being accompanied only with a Dutch man, and another of the
Guard, he would have gone down, but was hindered by the Portugals, who came
running up, crying, Kill the Traitor, Kill the enemy of our Blood; whereupon
not knowing where to save himself, he fled, with those two accompanying him,
into an inner chamber, and there with his sword in his hand, accompanied and
assisted by those two that were with him, disposed himself to sell his Life at
the dearest rare he could: but his valor stood him in no stead, for those two
who endeavored to defend him, being slain with two Musket Shot, he seeing it
vain to defend himself there longer, leapt desperately out of the window,
rather to seek his death, than out of any hopes to save his life; for no sooner
was he down, but numberless swords were embrued in his blood, the very women
and children running to tear in pieces his dead body, with the same alacrity as
he used to torment them, when alive.

In the mean time the Marquess of Ferrera was gone to secure the Vice-Queen,
whom having committed to the Guard of two hundred Musquetteers, he calls a
Council, and in a short Discourse sets forth the miseries the kingdom had
endured whilst it lay subject to the Spanish Government, who had sought no
other end but their destruction: Then putting them in mind of the Valor and
Merits of their Nation, he exhorts them to condescend to the Election of a New
King, nominating to them the Duke of Braganza, as the most worthy of the Crown,
not so much for his Power, Riches, or the greatness of his House, as because
the kingdom was his indubitable Right; he being the only Person left of that
Stock, which for so many years had gloriously governed Portugal.

A long Discourse was superfluous to those who were before persuaded. A public
shout interrupted the Marquesses Speech, all of them crying with a loud voice,
That they would have John Duke of Braganza for their King. In the whole
multitude there was not a face, much less a voice that did gainsay this general
Vote; either because they did all really rejoice to see that they should again
have a king of their own Nation, or because none could without danger oppose
themselves to the torrent of so a public Will.

The Duke was at this time at his Countrey-house at Villa Vitiosa, whether by
accident, or because he would always have had occasion to excuse himself, if
the business should not have succeeded, I cannot guess: but by reason of his
absence they thought fit to make choice of two Governors, whom, to avoid the
pretenses of others, they nominated to be the Archbishops of Lisbon and
Braganza.

These began immediately to exercise their Command, and were obeyed with so
much quiet, that in all that great and populous City of Lisbon there was none
slain, but only those beforementioned; the prisons were opened nor was there
any that suffered any wrong, either in their goods or life: All the Shops were
opened as if there had not happened any Change of Government.

Only the house of Vasconsellos was sacked, with so much anger and despite,
that they did not pardon the very Doors and Windows; nay, such was the fury of
the people, that had they not been hindered by the soldiers of the Guard, they
had levelled it with the ground. As for his carcass, it suffered all those
disgraces which a people wronged both in their liberties and esta^es, could
inflict: they ran like mad men to express living sentiments of Revenge upon his
dead and senseless Corpse, vaunting who could invent the newest ways of
disgrace and scorn, till at length almost wearied with their inhumane sport,
they left it in the street so mangled, that it did not seem to have the least
resemblance of a man; from whence it was the next day carried by the Fraternity
della misericordia, and thrown into the Burying-place of the Moors.

The Marquess of Alemquer, after he had by command from the Governor assured
the strongest posts of the City, sent several Soldiers into the streets,
crying, Long live King John the Fourth; which the people hearing, distracted as
it were with very joy, leaving their Trades, ran up and down proclaiming him
with voices of Iubilee, the greatest part through excess of passion, not being
able to refrain from tears.

The Messengers did not run, but fly to the Duke of Braganza, to give him
notice of his promotion to the Crown: The first arrived on Sunday morning
before day; he feigned a great alteration at this Advice, whereupon some have
presumed to say, that he had not any knowledge of the Design. He seemed at
first not to believe it, but told the Messengers, that though he might have
desert, and a spirit fit for the Crown of Portugal, yet he had neither will nor
ambition to desire. That his enemies wronged him, by tempting him with
Stratagems as far from his Genius, as his Faith. But at the arrival of the
Count of Monte Santo, who came to accompany him to Lisbon, he seemed of another
mind; and having been with him in private discourse for the space of about two
hours, without any further delay, then what the relating the business to his
Wife, and to the Prince his son, made, he departed with the Count from Villa
Vizosa, accompanied with about five hundred persons.

Yet others there be that affirm, that he was not only acquainted with the
design of the Revolt, but of Council about it, and that some time before the
Nobility having had a private Meeting at Lisbon, it was at first propounded,
That they should reduce the kingdom into the form of a Commonwealth; but that
not being approved of by the major part, the Archbishop of Lisbon stood up, and
in a most eloquent Speech having laid before them the miseries they had endured
under the Spanish yoke, recommended unto them John Duke of Braganza, as the
indubitable Heir of the Crown, and their rightful Soverign.

This Motion needed not to be seconded with many Arguments to induce a general
Consent, they all most willingly assented to it, and concluded to send Gaston
Cotigno, a man of a fluent and voluble tongue, to acquaint the Duke with their
intentions, and to persuade him to accept the Crown, and free his Country.

Gaston being arrived, with many well-coucht words acquaints him, That there
was now a pregnant opportunity offered to recover the indubitable right of his
Ancestors to the Crown of Portugal: That the Nobility and Clergy were wholly
inclined to redeem themselves from the tyranny of the Castilians, by securing
the Crown upon his head: That the universal odium of the whole people to the
Spanish Government, the present low condition of the House of Austria,
distracted on every side with War; the assured Assistance that France and other
Nations, emula^ing the greatness of Spain, would lend, were as so many Motives
to persuade them not to let slip so fair an opportunity to regain their
liberty: That if he by refusal, should be the sole enemy to his Countries
freedom, they would effect it themselves, and reduce it into a Commonwealth;
with many other Arguments used he, which his love to the House of Braganza, his
hatred to the Castilians, or his own ingenuity prompted to him.

The Duke's amazement permitted him not to return a sudden Answer: but after a
little pause, he replied, That he was highly obliged both to him and all the
Nobility, for their affections to him, but that this was a Business required
great deliberation: That there was no Medium between a Throne and a Chair of
Execution, that therefore he would first advise with himself, and not rashly
attempt so hazardous a business.

He therefore communicates the whole business to his Duchess Donna Lucia,
sister to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, a woman of a noble, heroic, and
masculine Spirit, with her he consults whether he were best accept of the
Propositions of the Nobility, or to prevent all hazards go to Madrid: and being
anxious what course to take, his wife nobly told him: My friend, if thou go
to Madrid, thou do incur the danger of loosing thy life; and if thou
acceptest the Crown, thou do no more: consider then whether it be not better
to dye nobly at home, then basely abroad.

These words of his Ladies (say some) ainmated him to a resolution to accept
the Crown; so he returned Gaston in answer, That he would conform himself to
the councels of the Nobility, resolving to live and run all hazards whatever
with them, for the regaining of his countries liberty.

In the mean time the Marquess of Ferreira used his utmost endeavors for the
reducing of those Castles which still heldout for his Catholic Majesty. The
first day the Castle of Colline was rendered, which for its situation was judged
in expugnable, yet the Captain of it no sooner saw it besieged, but moved
either with Gold or fear, he delivered it up on Articles. The tower of Belem,
and that De la Cabera were suddenly surprised before they within had any
notice of what was done; The strong Fortress of Saint Giuliano, a modern
Fortification, and built to defend the mouth of the river, was ready to
surrender, when a Castellane, who was there a prisoner, and under sentence of
death, for the surrendry of a Fort in Brazile, shut out the captain, who was
gone to parley with the Portugueses, and resolved to defend it many days: he
might have held it out the siege, but finding neither ammunition nor provision,
consumed, as was believed, on purpose by the Captain, who unwilling to have the
blot of a Traitor cast upon him, for so sudden a delivery, thought it fitter
to be forced by necessity to open the gates to the Marquess.

After the surrendry of Fort San Giuliano, the Marquess of Ferreira in the name
of the King, gave the Sacrament of Fidelity, or an Oath of Allegiance to all
the Orders, to wit, to the Clergy, Nobility and Commons, which was received
with so much readiness, that had not the Marquess seen the necessary orders
observed, the people had run into certain inconveniences, so much they strived
to prevent one another in willingness to perform this duty.

On Thursday the sixth of February, His Majesty made his entrance into Lisbon,
with all these applauses that a beloved King can expect from his most loving
Subjects. The rich Liveries given by the Nobles, the Triumphal Arches, the
Streets hung with Tapestry, the multitudes of the people flocking to see him,
and the excellent Fireworks, (which were so many that a Spaniard cried out, Es
possible que se quita un Reyno a el Rey D Felippe, cun solas Luminarias and
vivas sinmas exerci^^ in Poder, Gran senal y efeto sin Duda del Brazo de dios
todo Poderoso! Is it possible that King Phillip should be deprived of a
Kingdom, with only lights and Fireworks without a powerful Army! certainly
this is an evident token that it is the Almighty hand of God,) were the least
demonstrations of that Cities love and joy: so great was the concourse of those
that flocked to see their new king, that though his Majesty entered into the
City by Noon, he could not through the throng arrive at the Palace till two
hours after Sunset: curiosity and love which usually have the force to stir up
all affections, made this people flock so fast to the sight of their Prince.
And because it is prudence in a public joy, to accomodate ones self to the
will of the most, even those who either for envy, or some other cause, hated
the house of Braganza, did not cease to make some demonstration of reverence
and mirth, and by how much the more they thought themselves observed, by so
much the more they strove to seem other then they were.

His Majesty being arrived at the Palace, instead of reposing himself, addicted
himself wholly to consult about carrying on the war; knowing well that only
labor produces true rest. The first consultations were concerning the
expugnation of the Tower of St. John, which of all the Forts in the kingdom
only held out for the Catholic King. To reduce this Citadel, the Marquess of
Ferreira was sent in person with a numerous Army, though for the most part
tumultuary, and ill ordered; but what they wanted in discipline they supplied
in affection, not refusing to engage themselves in the extremest dangers: for
two days the Marquess found strong resistance, but on the third day it yielded,
as it is supposed, forced rather by bullets of Gold, then of Iron. Don Antonio
de Mascarendas, with a Portuguese garrison was appointed commander of this
Fortress, which he very diligently repaired, not only of the damages now
received by Battery, but with other necessary fortifications, to bring it to
greater perfection.

The Kingdom thus suddenly reduced to the devotion of King John the fourth, the
several Governors were commanded to their Countries to levy Forces, who listed
the inhabitants indifferently from the age of Eighteen to Sixty; in whom they
found so much disposition, that many offered their estates, and their lives,
and would follow the Colors, although they had license to depart.

On the 25 of the same month, followed the a Coronation of His Majesty,
accompanied with all those applauses and demonstrations of joy, which could
proceed from a people of infinite Riches, who weary of the Command of
strangers, were consequently ambitious of a King of their own Nation.

In the public Place before the Palace upon a most sumptuous Theater, was
erected a great Stage, and upon that a less, upon the top of which but three
steps higher, stood a Chair of State under a Canopy, all covered over with
Cloth of Gold. About noon His Majesty came forth of his Palace Royal in a Suite
of Chestnut colored Velvet embroidered with Gold, and buttons richly set with
Diamonds: about his neck was a Collar of great vallue, whereunto hung the badge
of the chief Order of Knighthood, called El Ordine di Christo. He was girded
with a gilt Sword, his Robe was Cloth of Gold lined with white wrought with
Gold and flowers, the Sword was born before him by Don Francisco De Alello
Marquis of Ferreira, High Constable of the Kingdom; and before him was the
Kings Banner displayed by Fernando Tells de Meneses Earl Marshal, before him
went D. Manrique De Silva, Marquess of Govea, Steward of the Kings Household,
and so in order his Nobles and Grandees of the Realm one before another, before
all went Portugal King at Arms, with the Heralds Pursevants, etc.

His Majesty being ascended the Stage, and having placed himself in the Chair
of Estate, had the Crown set upon his Head, and the Scepter delivered to him,
with the accustomed Ceremonies by the Archbishop of Lisbon; which done, he
spoke to His Majesty to this effect.

Behold, O most Sacred Majesty, these your Subjects who do more rejoice to see
this day, then of all the days of their lives: They rejoice to see the Crown of
Portugal, returned into its Ancient stock, they rejoice to have found a Father
who will govern them like Children, not Tyrannize over them like slaves. They
here, Great SIR, offer their estates, their lives, and oblige themselves to run
through all the accidents of fortunes, to establish that Crown upon your Head,
which now with so much devotion, with so much readiness they have placed upon
it. They cannot sufficiently express their affections to Your Majesty; could
they bring their hearts, and lay them down at your Majesty's feet, they would
not refuse to do it, so sure are they that they have found a King all goodness,
all love, who will not let slip any means for the Establishing of the Crown,
for the quiet of His Subjects, for augmenting his Dominions, and for the
conservation of those privileges which have been written with the blood of our
progenitors: Be your Majesty graciously pleased to accept this common
resentment expressed pressed by my mouth, there being nothing that more
comforts the minds of good Subjects, than the pleasing of their Prince.

The good old Prelate spoke these words with so much feeling, that the tears of
his eyes testified the affection of his heart.

To this speech of the Archbishops, His Majesty returned answer, in expressions
equal to his love and greatness: That the weight of the Scepter, and subjection
to the Crown, were things always dissonant to his Genius; That he had of late
years given them sufficient testimony of it, whilst they were not more
affectionate in offering, then he was ready to deny the taking upon him the
weight of the Kingdom. That his now condescending to their desires, was only
to provide for the kingdom, which had been acquisted, and agrandized with the
blood of his Predecessors, and to take it from the hands of those, who besides
their unjustly possessing it, had rendered themselves unworthy of it, by
endeavoring by all means to ruin it: in sum, he concluded with thanks for
their love, offering himself ready to adventure his health, and life, for their
preservation, the redeeming them from slavery, and maintaining of their
privileges.

This short discourse ended, His Majesty went to the great Church in the same
order as before, where being set in a Chair of Estate, raised upon a Stage for
that purpose, with a Crystal Scepter in his right hand, at which stood the
Lord Constable, and behind him the Lord Chamberlain, there was placed before
him a Table Covered with Cloth of Gold, and a Cushion thereon, upon the Cushion
lay a Gold Crucifix and a Messal. Here the Archbishops of Lisbon and Braga,
administered the ensuing Oath to the King.

WE swear and promise by the grace of God, to rule and govern you well, and
justly, and to administer justice as far as humane frailty will permit, to
maintain unto you your Customs, Privileges, and liberties, granted unto you by
the Kings our Predecessors. So God help us God, and this his holy Gospel.

This Oath being administered, the three Estates, to wit, the Clergy, Nobility,
and Commons, took the following Oath of Allegiance to his Majesty, one for
every one of the Estates, pronouncing these words.

I Swear by this holy Gospel of God, touching corporally with my hand, That I
receive for our King and lawful Sovereign, the High and Mighty King Don John
the fourth, our Sovereign, and do homage unto him, according to the use and
custom of his Kingdoms.

This, and the Ceremonies attendant ended, his Majesty, accompanied with all
his Nobles, returned to his Palace, whether notwithstanding it was a very great
rain, all the Grandees went bare-headed, where there was a most sumptuous
Banquet prepared, but his Majesty gave himself wholly to consult of
preparations for the War, showing thereby that Kings in their greatest felicity
and delights, should not forget affairs of State, and taking care for the
preservation of their Subjects.

But amongst debates of the War abroad, there happened one of an affair near
home, concerning the placing or displacing Officers of State; and because His
Majesty knew that the charge of such Officers, must needs be with the
resentment of many, and that there is nothing more alienates the minds of men,
then to see themselves undeservedly deprived of their honors, he took away
only the places of two, to wit, that of the Providitore of the Custom-house,
because he was Son in Law to Diego Soarez, and brother in Law to Vasconsellos
the late deservedly slain Secretary; and that of the Count of Castanhie, who
was President of the Tribunal, or Court of Conscience, because he was too much
interessed with His Catholic Majesty.

As for the Infanta Margarita di Mantoua, late Vice-Queen, and the Marquess
Della Puebla kinsman to Olivarez, the Castle called Pasos de Angiobregas, was
assigned them, with fourteen thousand Crowns a year for maintenance. An
honorable prison it was, nor could they desire any thing but liberty, which
showed a great nobleness of mind in King John: but Princes always do like
Princes, and much it demonstrates the Magnanimity of the mind, to honor our
enemies, though they be our prisoners.

Nor must we here forget the magnanimous, and courageous Carriage of the
Duchess of Mantoua late Vice-Queen; during these confusions and distractions,
for King John sending to ascertain her; that she should want none of those
civilities that were suitable to a Princess of her high birth, provided she
would forbear all discourse and practices which might infuse into any an ill
opinion of his present Government. She returned thanks to the Duke, (for she
would not style him King) for his complement: but withal fell into a grave
Exhortation to those Nobles that carried the message, telling them, That they
should lay aside all vain hopes, and not cozen themselves, but return to their
old Allegiance, according as they were obliged by Oath, which if they did, she
doubted not to find them all pardon.

The rest of the Castilians of Authority were confined in the Castle, and all
the soldiers took the Portuguese pay, either because they believed doing so,
to be most for their interest, or else because being most of them linkt in
parentage with the Portugusses, they believed the Portugal interest to be their
own.

Shortly after Lucia, now Queen of Portugal, Sister to the Duke of Medina
Sidonia, with her Son the Prince Theodosio arrived at Lisbon, who were received
with all imaginable expressions of joy: the Queen was soon after solemnly
crowned, and the Prince installed, at whose installation, the Nobles and
Grandees of the Realm, took to him the following Oath.

WE acknowledge, and receive for our true and natural Prince, the high and
excellent Prince D. Theodosio, as Son, Heir, and Successor of our Sovereign
Lord the King; and as his true and natural Subjects, we do him homage in the
hands of the King, and after the death of our true and natural King and
Sovereign of these Kingdoms of Portugal and Algarve, and beyond Sea in
Africa, Lord of Guiana; of the Conquests, Navigations, and Commerce in
Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, India, etc. we will obey his Commands and Decrees in
all, and through all, both high and low: we will make War and maintain Peace
with all those that His Highness shall Command us: And all this we swear to God
upon the holy Cross, and the holy Gospel.

These Ceremonies performed withal fitting solemnity, the King, to show that
the good of His Subjects was his only care, called an Assembly of the three
Estates of the Kingdom, who being convened, and the King seated in His Royal
Throne, Don Emanuel D' Acugna Bishop of Elvas made a Speech to them, to the
following purpose.

THat one of the first laws of nature was, the uniting of men together, from
whence Cities and Kingdoms had their Original, and by which they after defended
themselves in War, and maintained themselves in Peace; That for that cause His
Majesty had called this assembly to consult for the better service of God,
defense in War, and Government in Peace: That there could be no service of God
without union of Religion, no defense without union amongst men, no Regular
Government without union of Councils: That His Majesty did expect to be
informed by his loyal Subjects what was for the good of the State; That they
were to render thanks to the Almighty, who had given them a king that would
govern them by known Laws; That his Majesty did not esteem those Tributes
lawful that were paid with tears, and therefore did from that present, take
off from His Subjects all Tributes that had been imposed by the Kings of
Castile, because His Majesty would not Reign over their goods, nor over their
heads, nor over their privileges, but over their hearts, hoping that they
would find out a sweet expedient, to defend their country against their potent
enemy, who threatened to make them all slaves, and to destroy, and to annihilate
their Nation. That they would therefore, considering His Majesty's goodness and
their own honor, manifest at once unto the world, That as never Subjects had
such a gracious King, so never King had such loyal Subjects.

The Bishop having ended his Speech, the most ancient Officer of the Chamber of
Lisbon, stood up, and in the name of all the three Estates, (who stood up
likewise,) returned humble thanks to His Majesty, for this gracious bounty,
heartily professing that they did not only offer up their goods, but their
lives to His Majesty's service, earnestly entreating His Majesty to dispose
both of the one and the other, as he pleased. And to manifest that their hearts
and their mouths concorded in this free offer of themselves to His Majesty,
they presently voted that two Millions should be immediately raised by the
Kingdom: but His Majesty wisely and polipolitickly declined the imposing of a
Tax upon his subjects, choosing rather to accept of their benevolence; which
made every one strive who should offer most; so in stead of the two Millions,
there was in short time brought into the Treasury four Millions of Gold.

Nor was this money intended by them, nor employed to any other use then to
maintain the Grandezza and Splendour of the King and kingdom, there being no
need of money for the payment of Soldiers, every one offering to serve freely,
and at their own charge, against their vowed enemies the Castilians.

But let us for some time leave the Assembly sitting, and give an account how
this action was resented into the Spanish Court: Most men's minds were struck
with consternation, but Olivares came smiling to the King, saying; Sir, I pray
give me las Albricias to hansel the good news, for now you are more absolute
King of Portugal then ever, for the people have forfeited all their Privileges
by this Rebellion, besides the Estate of the Duke of Braganza, with all his
Accomplices are yours, by right of confiscation, so that you have enough to
distribute among your loyal subjects by way of reward. But however Olivares
seemed thus to dissemble his passion; it was believed that this news struck
deeper into him then any.

The King of Spain upon the first news of the Proclamation of King John, sent a
Letter to him to this purpose:

COusin and Duke: Some odd news are brought me lately, which I esteem but
folly, considering the proof I have had of the fidelity of your House, give me
advertisement accordingly, because I ought to expect it from you, and hazard
not the esteem I make of your self to the fury of a mutinous Rabble, but let
your wisdom comport you so, that your person may escape the danger, my Council
will advise you farther; so God guard you.

Your Cousin and King.


To this Letter his Majesty of Portugal returned answer:

MY Cousin: My kingdom desiring its Natural King, and my Subjects being
oppressed with Taxes, and new Impositions, have executed, without opposition,
that which they had often designed, by giving me possession of a kingdom which
appertains to me; wherefore if any will go about to take it from me, I will
seek Justice in my Arms: God preserve your Majesty.

DON JOHN the IV. King of Portugal.


Thus was this kingdom utterly lost to the Spanish Monarchy, and not only it,
but with it all that they enjoyed by that kingdom in the East- Indies, the
Tercera Islands, and other Islands in the Atlantic Sea, the kingdom of
Algarve, Brazile, together with all they had in Africa, except the Town of
Cexta, which was the whole remained to the Spanish Nation of all those great
Dominions.

But that all men might know the greatness of their loss, and what the Crown of
Portugal enjoyes abroad, take here a brief narration:

First, those Islands of the Tercera, Madera, and St. Michael, so long time
possessed by the Portugal Nation, which though inconsiderable to their other
Dominions, yet deserve to be mentioned; next those many strong places of which
they have made themselves masters in Africa, as in Guiana, in the kingdoms of
Congo and Angola, the great Island of St. Laurence, of Soffola and Mozambique:
on the continent thence passing the mouth of the Red Sea, they have settled a
Trade with Socatra and Calaite; thence passing the Bay of Persia, to the mouth
of the River Indus, they subdued Calecut, Coetium, etc. the Island of Goa,
Ciaul, Daman, etc. thence toward the River Ganges, they possessed Ceilam,
Malacca, Sumatra, Solon, Larantuca, etc. Thence farther they were entered into
the kingdom of Pegu, into Iava-ma^or, and Minor, into the kingdom of China
where they fortified Macoa: In sum, the Kingdoms, Provinces, Islands, and
Cities, that the Portugal Nation had conquered, and were possessed of abroad,
may in some measure be compared to the Ancient Roman Empire; nor was their
valor much inferior to the Romans, if we consider the War they made with the
King of Cambaia, who for puissance and Military courage, or numbers of men of
War, did exceed Xerxes, Darius, or Pyrrhus; the battles they had with
Ismalucco, and Idaliam in the kingdom of Decam, both equal to mighty Kings and
their Armies, consisting of the best Warriors of the East; the War they have
waged with the Moors of Malacca, Sumatra, and Molucco, as also with the Kings
of Bengala, Peug, and Siam, etc. with many other formidable powers. Many of
those places most certain it is, were lost while the Catholic King had
possession of Portugal; but with it he likewise lost, and King John the IV. had
possession of above fifty Towns and Forts accounted impregnable, such were,
Mozambique, Cuama, Monomotasca, Mombaza, Masiala, Dui, Damam, Bazaine, Chiaul,
Onor, Barcelor, Mangalor, Cananor, Cranganor, Cochim Conlan, Negapatan,
Meliapor, the Isle of Ceilam, the kingdom of Iafanapalan, the Cities of Manac,
and Nombrede Jesus; then more Northward, Azarim, Danue Agazim, Maim Trapor, and
many other places, in all which were maintained Governors and Soldiers, and a
Viceroy, residing at Goa, with Courts of Justice, etc. hither many Kings of
the East used to send Ambassadors to maintain amity with the King of Portugal,
and to bring Tribute to him; thus the Portugal Trade in the East extends it
self no less then four thousand Leagues, by which Trade all the Garrisons are
maintained, and all the Ships, (whereof they are oftentimes two or three
Fleets) and much wealth sent home every year; besides those aforementioned, the
Crown of Portugal has several Towns on the Coast of Africa, so strongly
fortified, that the Moors of the Country could never yet recover them, such as
Tangeer, etc.

In America they possess the famous Country of Brazile, which stretches it
self one thousand four hundred leagues upon the Sea coast, containing fourteen
Governments, and many principal Cities, St. Salvador, Pernambuco, etc.

Thus great a loss did the Spanish Monarchy suffer by the revolt of Portugal,
which the Catholic King Phillip the fourth was very solicitous to recover,
and to that end and purpose did not only consult with the greatest Statesmen
at home, but likewise with those abroad, from one of whom he to that effect
received the ensuing Letter.

BY the Letter which your Majesty was pleased to write to me on the 6. of March
past, I am commanded to deliver my advice touching the best expedient for the
recovery of Portugal; Sir, the clemency used by King Phillip the second, your
Majesty's Grandfather, toward the kingdom of Portugal, was a fatal presage of
the present calamities, and future destruction, not only of Spain, but the
whole Spanish Monarchy, because that kingdom was only in name, but never
really conquered, remaining rich, and abundant with the same, if not greater
privileges then before: the Grandees and Nobles at home, the people not at all
crushed, and (which is more then all) the Government in the hands of Natives,
and all his Majesty's other Subjects excluded from all places of Power, Honor,
or Profit. Sir, the Holy Scripture, which is the mirror and rule of our
actions, teaches, that when Salmanazar conquered the kingdom of Israel, he did
carry away, not only the Royal Family, but transported all the Nobility and
people into diverse Provinces of his kingdoms, and into the new Conquests sent
new Inhabitants; yet the Israelites were never such inveterate enemies to the
Assyrians, as the Portugals with devilish madness have showed themselves
against the Interest and conveniences of this Monarchy.

Moreover in the same Scripture it is read, that Nebuchadonosor having
conquered Jerusalem, transplanted all that he found in that kingdom, leaving
only a few miserable inconsidera^le people to remain there.

So Athalia Queen of Judah saw no other way to preserve a kingdom newly
conquered, but by extinguishing all the Generation, upon whom the Jews could
cast their eyes in hopes of revolt.

And Iehu, King elected by God, extinguished all the Family of Ahab, together
with all his dependants, friends, and acquaintance, not sparing so much as the
Priests.

These Sir, are the Rules that the Holy Scripture teaches to be practiced upon
the families and people that abhor the Dominion of their own Sovereigns.

It was, Sir, very fatal to stand expecting and hoping for better times and
opportunities for the securing of Portugal.

In the year 1639. observing the ill affection of that Nation, my advice was,
that without any delay that kingdom was to be secured by force of Arms; others
were of the same judgments, but fate would have it that (for fear of new
troubles) by delays way should be made for Rebellion, then which there could
not have been a greater, although that form of Government, which was expedient
for the Spanish Monarchy, and was always held necessary for the preserving that
Crown, had been put in execution with the greatest violence imaginable.

But when a Jewel is gone, the main inquery should be by what means it may be
found again, not how it came to be lost.

The first means of recovering that Crown may be (what your Majesty's
Grandfather made use of) to buy your rights of your own subjects by gifts and
promises, wherein your Majesty is to be as Prodigal, as the Portugals are
insolent in expecting or demanding, and indeed experience teaches that that
Nation is so addicted to their own Interest, that more may be effected this
way, then by a powerful Army: to him will they be subject who will give most,
or from whom most can be expected herein, prodigality will be good husbandry;
for when Portugal shall be returned to the obedience of your Majesty, all that
wealth which has been bestowed amongst them, will return likewise.

The second means is by course of Arms, but this will be difficult at present,
by reason of the several engagements of this Monarchy elsewhere; I suppose Sir,
that in case Portugal should be conquered by force, all their Conquests in the
East Indies, etc. will remain in their hands, for thither will they all fly,
and from thence will they be always ready to assist our enemies: wherefore it
would be very expedient for your Majesty's service, that a Truce were first
made with the Hollanders, upon condition that they make War upon the Portugal
in the Indies, and have what ever they can conquer, whence will arise this
commodity that they will want the wealth of their Conquests, your Majesty being
disengaged with the Hollander, will sooner conquer them at home, and the
Hollander will only come to receive to day at the hand of your Majesty, what
to morrow the Portugal must deliver up to them: At the same time the Hollanders
and Flemings may scour the Coast of Portugal, and the English may be invited to
a more frequent Navigation in the East Indies and China, whereby the Portugal
Trade may easily be ruined.

The third way is, that the Pope be persuaded to thunder his Excommunications
against the house of Braganza, and against the whole kingdom, as perjured and
perturbators of the public Peace, animating all Christian Princes to assist
in the regaining that kingdom, upon pretense of advancing the Catholic Faith.

Moreover, diffidencies and jealousies between the Duke of Braganza, and other
people, may easily be fomented by means of Merchants, Strangers, and by
Flemings and Burgundians, under the name of French. And to effect these
diffidencies the better, a Treaty may really be begun with the Duke, which
being discovered by the people (though it be before the Duke could know
thereof) they will destroy him and all his Family, and in such case the civil
dissentions will open a way for your Majesty to recover your rights: desperate
evils must have desperate remedies, the kingdom of Portugal is the Canter of
the Spanish Monarchy; therefore,

E^se recidendum: ne pars symera trahatur. Let not your Majesty defer the right
remedy, the greatest rigor is here the greatest Charity; and to have no
Charity, is to have much prudence; to bury this Hydra in its own ashes, will be
triumph enough; to live without this arm, will be better then to have it
employed against ones own head: Let your Majesty never believe, or hope better
of that Nation, then you have seen these 60. years past; never think to keep
that Country, if not planted with other people; the detestation against your
Majesty's Government, is hereditary.

The Interest of the King, Sir, is very ample, and has no bounds against
Rebels, every action is just and honorable that tends to the recovery of the
Kings right.

Moreover, a Truce is to be made with the Catalonians, whereby they being freed
from the tumultuous courses of War, will have time to take notice of the French
insolences, and growing weary of that yoke, will at length ea^ily embrace the
next opportunity to return to their obedience, which once effected, will make
the people of Portugal waver betwixt hopes and fears, and beget variety of
opinions amongst them, which for the Conquering of kingdoms (the Emperor Julian
used to say) was much more advantageous then the force of an Army, as the
Grandfather of your Majesty found in the Succession of Portugal: To this may
be added, that it will be very expedient that your Majesty name Bishops to
dispose of all Governments, and Offices of the Crown, to the most confiding
persons in that kingdom, for this will beget distrust amongst them all, and the
ignorant people not knowing whom to trust, will put all into confusion, whereby
your Majesty's service will be more easily advanced.

This in obedience to your Majesty's commands, I have imparted my weak advice,
wherein if I have erred, your Majesty's goodness will attribute it to my want
of abilities, not of affection: God preserve the Catholic and Royal Person of
your Majesty, as the Christian World, and we your Majesty's Subjects have need.


But notwithstanding all these endeavors, and these proposed Artifices, nothing
prevailed toward the King of Spain's recovery of this kingdom, nor was it
probable that any of these deceits ever should, whilst is considered the
extraordinary love and affection which the whole Nation of the Portugueses bore
to the Family of their present King, and the inveterate hatred which did, and
always have born to the Castilians, which was so exceeding great, that it is
believed they would rather have suffered themselves to be extirpated and routed
out, then again submit their necks to the Spanish yoke.

And that ever the Spaniard should again recover it per force, is incredible,
if we either consider the Union and unanimity of the Portugal Nation, and their
resolutions to undergo the greatest miseries of War can inflict, or the
Interest of all the other Princes of Christendom, who may justly suspect the
encroaching greatness of the Spaniard, and therefore endeavor rather to lop off
more limbs from that great body, then suffer this to be rejoyned.

But it is now high time to return to a review of the actions of the Grand
Assembly of the Estates of Portugal, who next resolved to dispatch Ambassadors
to all States of Christendom, to enter into confederacies, for the better
defense and establishment of the kingdom, and for the glory and reputation of
the King.

In the first place the Father Ignatius Mascarenas a Jesuit, with another
Father of the same Order, was sent into Catalonia, to offer them all assistance
and supplies for their maintenance, and defense against the Catholic King,
for very well did the King of Portugal know that it highly did import his
Interest to correspond with them, that so they might jointly, not only defend,
but also offend the King of Spain, whose Country lying betwixt them both, they
might at pleasure invade, or molest it, either by Sea or Land.

This Embassy of King John's so rejoiced and encouraged the Catalonians, that
the very next day after the Ambassadors had audience, they obtained a most
signal Victory in their own defense against the Spaniards, who had assaulted
them with an Army of twenty five thousand men under the Command of the Marquis
De los Veles.

Shortly after that the Father Ignatius Mascarenas was dispatched to the
Catalonians, D. Francisco de Mello, and Don Antonio Caelle Carravallio (persons
both of excellent and admired abilities, the one for his great experience and
judgment in State Affairs, and the other for his noble Spirit, and eminent
knowledge in the Civil Law) to go on a solemn Embassy to the most Christian
King Lewis the thirteenth of France.

These attended with a Stately and most Magnificent Train, landed soon after at
Rochel, and on the fifteenth of March 1641. made a solemn Entrance into Paris,
being met and conducted in by a great number of Coaches, filled with the
Grandees of the Kingdom, besides numbers of the French Nobility, who came to
attend them on horseback.

Thus accompanied, they were conducted to the Palace appointed for the
Entertainment of the Extraordinary Ambassadors, where they were in a sumptuous
and magnificent manner feasted at the Kings charges.

From thence they were by the Duke of Chevereux, and the Count de Brulon,
conducted in the Kings Coaches unto his Majesty then at St. Germains, to
receive the first Audience; which was performed with extraordinary shows of
love and respect: for upon the entrance of the Ambassadors into the place
appointed for their Audience, the King rose out of his Chair of Estate, and
went forward three steps to receive them, nor would he permit them to deliver
their Embassy with their Hats off, or to descend so low, as to kiss his hands
at their departure, but in stead of that Ceremony, he affectionately embraced
them in his Arms, promising them the greatest Assistance his Power was able to
give.

They were from the Kings presence conducted to a sumptuous Dinner provided for
them, and after that brought to the Queens Lodging, who was set to expect their
coming: at their entrance she likewise rose, and advanced three steps to meet
them, receiving them with a cheerful and courteous countenance, and not
permitting them to be uncovered.

Amongst other Discourses which they had with her, D. Francisco de Mello told
her, That he feared his Embassy might not be acceptable, because the King his
Master had deprived her Brother of one of his kingdoms. Whereunto she readily
replied, That though she was sister to the King of Spain, yet she was wife to
the King of France.

After some Discourse in French, her Majesty began to speak to them in Spanish;
which they observing, desired to know wherefore her Majesty had not vouchsafed
them that favor sooner, it being a Language by them better understood? To which
the Queen jestingly answered, For fear they should be frighted to hear her
speak Spanish; and the Ambassador to improve the jest, replied, Como a tam
Grand Signora si, pero como a Castiliano no, that it was true considering her
Greatness, but not her Country: The Queen smilingly went on, promising them
all assistance possible, and wishing all prosperity to King John and his Queen;
and so they having delivered her Majesty a Letter from the Queen of Portugal,
took their leave.

From her Majesty they went to visit his Eminence the Cardinal Richlieu, who
being advertised of their coming, came forward to the third Chamber to meet
them, where he received them with expressions of great affection, and promises
and proffers of services, and from thence conducted them to his own Chamber.

Being all three sat, the Cardinal (who was the most experienced and greatest
Statesman of his time) discoursed with them of diverse affairs of great
importance, and they endeavored to explain to his Eminence what was before his
sentiment, that it very much imported the two Crowns of France and Portugal to
be united by an indissoluble League, considering that it was the chief and
principal end and aim of the House of Austria, (whose branches were spread over
almost all Europe) not only to be the greatest, but to be the sole and only
Monarch of Christendom: That to effect those ambitious desires, he had never
made scruple to usurp and seize upon Kingdoms and States upon the least
pretenses imaginable, as had appeared in the kingdoms of Naples, Sicily,
Navarre, the Duchy of Millan, and lately several States in Germany, seizing
upon the Valtoline, whereby they had a passage open to lead an Army of Germans
into Italy at pleasure.

That considering the vast power and interest that this Family had, not only
in Europe, but also in America, it could not but be confessed that they had a
large foundation of their imaginary universal Monarchy; but that nothing gave
them so great hopes, as the possession of Portugal.

For by the addition of that Kingdom to the Crown of Castile, they became
absolute Masters not only of all Spain, but of all the East Indies, of all the
Eastern Trade of Ethiopia, Persia, Arabia, China, Iapan, and all that
incredible wealth that was raised out of the Portugal Traffic, whereby the
Austrian Greatness (if not their Monarchy) was principally sustained, that
therefore it concerned all States whatsoever, not only to put a stop to the
raving Tyranny of this devouring Monster, but to suppress and lessen his Power
by all means possible.

That to do this, none was more concerned, or more able, than the Kingdom of
France united with that of Portugal: That this having bin called the Right Arm
(as Catalonia the Left) of that great Austrian Colossus, now both being
separated from it, and united to France, will be able to do greater service
against it, than they were ever forced to do for it, not only by assaulting
the Spaniard within his own doors, but by intercepting the Plate-Fleet; which
in its return from the West Indies, it being necessarily forced to pass by the
Tercera Islands, must run in danger of the Portuguez Fleet, or be forced to be
at the charge of an extraordinary Convoy.

These were the sum of the Ambassadors discourses to the Cardinal: In answer to
which, his Eminence made offer, not only of all the Assistance of the most
Christian King his Master, but that he would disburse himself for the service
of the King of Portugal, promising that he would presently send thither a Fleet
of twenty Sail with his Nephew, Admiral and Ambassador Extraordinary.

This Treatment thus ended, the Ambassadors took their leaves, his Eminence
waiting upon them as far as the Stairs; which when they endeavored to hinder,
he replied, That the Ambassadors of the King of Portugal were to be treated
with as much respect as those of the Emperor or Pope.

Few days after, a Iuncto of the King of France his Council, were appointed to
treat with the Ambassadors in the House of the Lord High Chancellor of the
kingdom, where a Peace was fully concluded between the two Kingdoms of France
and Portugal.

Other Ambassadors were (about the same time that the aforementioned were sent
into France) dispatched into England; for it very much concerned the Kingdom of
Portugal to maintain a good Correspondence with the Crown of England, both in
regard of the Navigation and Commerce of both States, and also the better to
break that Amity and good Understanding which was now held between the Crown of
Spain and that State. Hither therefore were sent Don Antonio D' Almado, and Don
Francisco D' Averado Leilon, both persons of exquisite parts; who,
notwithstanding that the Dunkirkers chased them, arrived safe in England.

And for all the sturdy endeavors of the Spanish Ambassadors, they were
received on shore with abundance of respect; yet His Majesty of England would
not give them Audience, or accept of the Embassage from the King of Portugal,
so tender was He of His Honor and Conscience, till Don Antonio de Sosa their
Secretary, had drawn up a Paper, to satisfy him of the Right and Title of the
Duke of Braganza to the Crown of Portugal. The sum of which was:

Upon the Death of King Henry the Cardinal, without Issue, many pretended
(together with the Infanta Donna Catherina Duchess of Braganza, and
Grandmother to this present King) to the Crown of Portugal; but all their
pretenses wanting foundation, soon fell, except that of Philip the second, King
of Spain, who propt up his with force.

King Henry was Uncle, equally near to both, but with this difference;
Catherine was the Daughter of a Son named Edward, and Philip was the son of a
daughter named Isabella, brother and sister to King Henry.

King Philip pleaded, That he being in equal degree with Catherine, was to be
preferred for his Sex.

Catherine replied, That the constitution of that Kingdom allowing Females to
succeed, and withal the benefit of Representation in all Inheritances, she
representing Edward, must exclude Philip by the very same right that her father
(if he were living) would exclude Philips mother.

This Conclusion is infallible in Jure: whereto Philip answered, That
successiou of Kingdoms descending Jure sanguinis, there was allowed no
Representation.

Catherine destroyed that foundation, alleging, That the Succession by the
death of the last King, was derived Jure haereditatis, and non sanguinis,
because the Succession of Kingdoms was to be regulated by that ancient way,
whereby all things descended by Inheritance; the other way of Succession being
not known until later Ages, nor ever practiced either in Spain or Portugal in
such cases.

Briefly in behalf of Catherine it was urged, (which by the Castilians can
never be denied, or answered) That she was no stranger, but a Native of the
Kingdom, to whom alone (according to the Laws of Lamego) the Crown of Portugal
can appertain.

The King having perused and deliberated upon this Paper, gave immediately
order they should be presently conducted to London, which was done withal
convenient Solemnity, and they logded in a Palace ready prepared for them: soon
after with great ceremony they received audience of His Majesty, in a fair and
stately Hall prepared for that purpose, where his Majesty sat upon a Throne
raised two steps, and at the entrance of the Ambassador pulled off his Hat, nor
would be covered till they were so too.

To the Propositions made in the speech of D. Antonia D' Almoda, concerning a
Peace between Portugal and England, His Majesty replied, That he should be very
glad if an expedient might be found out to renew the ancient Leagues of
friendship between the two Crowns, without the breaking with Spain.

Some few days after, the Ambassadors were conducted to give a Visit to Mary
Queen of England, who sat in a Chair of Estate ready to entertain them: when
they came into the Presence, She rose out of the Chair, and came as far as the
Carpetting, making low reverence as the Ambassadors bowed; when they came near,
Her Majesty made them be covered, but afterward they spoke with their Hats
off. In conclusion the Queen told them, that she much desired to hold
Correspondence with Her Majesty of Portugal.

In fine, on the 13th of June 1641. a Peace was absolutely concluded with the
Portugal, notwithstanding the earnest endeavors of Don Alonzo Cardenas, Leiger
Ambassador for Spain, who by gifts and promises, even as far as the restitution
of the Palatinate, endeavored to hinder it.

The Ambassadors that were sent to the King of Denmark (notwithstanding the
great Traffic and Commerce that had formerly bin held between that Kingdom and
Portugal) were not (by reason of the great interest the House of Austria had
with those Kings) received; yet the King gave all possible respect otherwise to
them. From thence they passed into Sweden, and were magnificently entertained
at the young Queens Court at Stockholm, where a League was soon concluded, and
the Ambassadors dismissed, according to the custom of that Nation, with Gold
Chains, and the Queens Portraicture in a Meddal of Gold.

The Ambassador D. Tristano De Mendoza Hurtada, that was sent to the States of
the United Provinces, was received with the like magnificence and seeming
affection, and a Truce concluded with the Kingdom of Portugal for ten years;
for a Peace the States would not assent to, because they having conquered many
places in Brasile, Angola, etc. which belonged to the Crown and Kingdom of
Portugal, could not make restitution of them; by reason they now belonged to
the West India Company; nor could the King of Portugal allow the Conquest, as
things of right belonging to his Crown, and depending on it.

But now we come to treat of a more solemn Embassy, to wit, that to the Pope:
Long was it debated in the Assembly of Estates, whether an Ambassador should be
sent to Rome immediately, or a more opportune conjuncture of time be expected.
Some were of the opinion that the sending an Ambassador without further delay,
would be a testification of their duty, and incline the Popes Holiness to
acknowledge Don John the lawful Heir, and rightful King of Portugal, which
would extremely further and advance the Affairs of the kingdom.

But others there were who conceived those things rather desirable than
feasible, and were of the opinion they should rather stay till a fitter
opportunity, alleging, that the King of Spain's present power at Rome, might
probably oppose the Reception of their Ambassador: that although the Pope never
was in his heart a Spaniard, yet he would never yield to show himself an enemy
to the Catholic King: That the Spaniards cunningly fomenting the opinion which
all the world had entertained, that his Holiness did in all things favor the
French interest, would from such a Reception, draw as much as ever they could
ask or desire. That for this cause the Pope (that he might not seem their
enemy) had always granted them whatever they desired; That therefore they
thought it convenient first to sound his Holiness, before they run the hazard
of the disgrace and affront which might fall upon His Majesty, and the whole
kingdom; That in case the Pope should decline the reception of the Ambassador,
to whom could they repair or appeal to vindicate the injury done to the Crown?
That many Popes had been s^ fascinated to the interest of their own family,
that the world had very great occasion to believe, that their designs tended
rather to what was best for themselves, then to what was best indeed: That the
Portugal Nation, had as much reason to distrust the Sea of Rome as any, whilst
they had to their cost had examples how they only pursued their own ends. As
particularly Gregory the thirteenth, who at first seemed so affectionate to the
kingdom of Portugal, that he employed the utmost of his power for the interest
of his own family, approved of all that King had done; That there was none who
had more to give, or at least who had more to promise, then the Catholic
King, so that in any business of competition he must necessarily gain the
better.

But notwithstanding all these Arguments to the contrary, upon the promises of
the King of France, to be a Mediator at the Sea of Rome, for the reception of
their Ambassadors, by the suffrage of some few voices, to make the major part,
it was concluded, That Ambassadors should immediately be sent to Rome.

And in pursuance of this Vote, the King immediately made choice of two
reverend and able persons, to wit, Michael De Portogallo, Son to the Count
Vimioso of the blood Royal, Bishop of Lamego, and D. Patableone Rodriguiz,
Bishop of Elvas: No sooner was the news arrived at Rome of their being landed
in Italy, but the Spaniards in Rome mustred themselves together, with
resolution either to oppose their entrance, or at least hinder their reception;
whilst on the other side the French, Portugal, and Catalonians, assembled
themselves together, resolving to hazard their dearest blood in their cause.

His Holiness seeing these preparations on both sides, feared lest his country
should be made the seat of a petty war, and considering that in any case the
dishonor would accrue to him, if whilst under his command and protection, the
person of an Ambassador should be violated, strictly commanded all his Guards
to take special care to prevent the violencies in tended.

The Spaniards by this order hindered from what they purposed, their Ambassadors
openly protested, that if his Holiness did receive the Portugal Ambassador,
they would immediately leave Rome. But notwithstanding these protestations, and
all other opposition they could possibly make, in November 1641. the two
Portugal Ambassadors being met by diverse Cardinals, Princes, and Cavaliers,
well armed, entered into Rome, and were conducted to the Palace of the French
ambassador, who received them with all respect possible, still giving them the
precedence.

Hereupon several Manifesto's are scattered abroad by the two Spanish
Ambassadors, the Marquess De los Veles, and D. John Chiumarrero, laboring to
prove that his Holiness ought not to receive the Ambassadors of the Duke of
Braganza, as they styled him. First because he was a tyrant, and usurper of
that Kingdom, which had been in the quiet possession of the Catholic King
these sixty years. Secondly, because he was a Rebel, and a perjured person
having sworn Allegiance to the Catholic King* Thirdly, that the reception of
these Ambassadors would animate other Subjects of the Catholic King to
Rebellion.

But whilst the Spanish Ambassadors are violently shooting such Paper-Bullets,
the Portugueses used all their endeavors, both by them selves, and the French
Ambassadors, (who had express order from the most Christian King his Master to
that purpose,) to prevail with the Pope, to give them audience, and admit their
Embassy: but his Holiness was so fearful to displease the Spaniard, lest he
should afterward take occasion to revenge himself upon his Nephew's, that he
utterly declined their reception, yet not out of any of the Spaniards
Allegations, but upon pretense that certain of the Church Rites had been
violated in Portugal; the Archbishop of Braga, and other Ecclesiastical
persons, being kept in durance, though it was for very good reasons, as
hereafter shall appear.

Yet the Spaniards were not content with this resolution of his Holiness, but
(whilst the Portugals were endeavoring to prove their cause, by both Political
and Legal Declarations, Allegations, and Arguments,) fearing lest the Pope
might chance to alter his mind, resolved to to make a quick dispatch of the
business, and to that purpose two hundred Banditi, were hired to seize upon the
Bishop of Lamego, and carry him to Naples, as the Prince of Sans had been
before served by them, and there put to death.

But this design, themselves at length could not agree upon, for the Marquess
De Los Velos, thought it would be better and less dangerous to give the
Portugals a public affront in the City, which was concluded to be put in
effect, and to that purpose it was communicated to the rest of the Nation,
(whereof upon several occasions there are always many in Rome) who assembled
together well armed at the Ambassadors Palace: and so great is the power of
Revenge: that to the end they might the better effect their design, and yet not
appear as soldiers, though there were many Gentlemen of quality amongst them,
they condescended to go under the name of Footmen to the Marquess.

The Popes Holiness hearing of the great preparations of the Spaniard, sent to
them to let them know, that he could not but be very much distasted, to see
such disorders attempted in a peaceable City, and therefore desiring them for
his honors sake to desist, and withal sent a Messenger to the Bishop of Lamego,
to assure him that he need not fear any thing, for upon the word of his
Holiness, he should walk the streets undisturbed.

But do the Pope what he could, either by threats, desires, or persuasions, the
Spaniards were resolved to prosecute their de^ign, which they put in execution
to their own cost, on the twenty of August 1642. On which day the Bishop of
Lamego going to visit the French Ambassado^, one of his retinue observed, that
he was dogged by a Spanish spy; whereupon a Counterspy was sent to the
Marquesses to bring intelligence what they were doing there, who brought word
to the French Ambassadors, that there was great preparations of Coaches and
Men: whereupon the French, Portugals, and Catalonians, assembled, and armed
themselves with Pistols and Firelocks, to convoy home the Bishop.

By the way they were met by the Spanish Ambassador, accompanied with about
eight Coaches full of Captains and Officers come from Naples, and guarded with
about sixty Footmen, besides diverse others of that Nation. No sooner came they
in sight of the Bishops Coach, but they cried aloud, Che si fermassero all'
Ambasciatore di Spagna; that they should stop for the Ambassador of Spain: but
the Portugals driving on, answered, Che si fermassero Loro, that they should
stop.

Hereupon both sides with their Swords drawn leapt out of the Coaches, and
making a stand, one Gun was first fired by the Spaniards side, and immediately
seconded with a brave volley on both sides; when they fell into Swords point
the Bishops side soon getting the better of it, yet there was slain a Knight of
Malta, an Italian, and a French and Portugal page, but on the Spanish
Marquesses side, there were eight killed upon the place, and above twenty
wounded, the Marquess leaving his Coach-horses dead, escaped out of the back of
the Coach, which stood upon the place till next day, and got into the next shop
without his hat, and trembling for fear, from whence he was carried to the
Spanish Cardinal Albornoz palace. The Portuguese Ambassador returned first to
the French Palace, and from thence went safely home.

His Holiness the Pope was extremely perplexed at these disturbances, and
therefore to prevent the like for the future, Commanded a guard of Soldiers to
be put upon the houses, both of the Bishop and the Marquess. But shortly after,
when the Bishop of Lamego had again pressed the Pope, by a large memorial of
the reasons why he should be received, and was absolutely refused, he was by
his Master the King of Portugal called home:

Whilst these things were acting abroad, the Castilians begun to make continual
in-roads into the borders of Portugal, which made King John look more narrowly
into the defense of his kingdom, fortify all the Frontiers, and train up his
Subjects to military excerises.

The Spaniards in one in-road which they made into Portugal, laid waste all
before them, sparing neither sex nor age wheresoever they came, which made the
Portugals in revenge, commit the like out rages in, an inroad they made into
Gallicia.

But these were public enmities, and therefore more easice to be opposed; but
there was a private serpent that lay lurking at home, which was so much the
likelyer to do mischief, by how much it was more secretly hidden. Some few
there were who thought themselves so highly obliged to the Catholic King, as
to endeavor the reuniting of the Crown of Portugal to his vast dommions, and
again inslave their country to foreigners.

The principal of these was the Archbishop of Braga, always a great creature
and favorite of the Count Olivares, who had at the beginning of the revolt,
showed himself so opposite to the freedom of his country, that many Gentlemen
were once resolved to make him suffer the same fate with Vasconsello's the
Secretary; Nor had he ceased ever since to show visible signs of his
coffeehouse at the Government.

In this Archbishops head was the whole conspiracy first hatched, and by him
communicated to D. Lewis de Meneses Marquess of Villa Reale, and the Duke of
Comigna his son, two persons sufficiently ambitious, and both discontented, as
not thinking themselves sufficiently rewarded according to their merit: These
the Archbishop tampered with, persuading them, That it was a low and unworthy
thing, much beneath their birth and greatness, to suffer themselves to be
subject to a fellow Subject: That it would be much more Noble and Generous in
them, to return their Allegiance to the King of Spain their ancient Sovereign,
who was able to bestow more upon a person deserving in one day, then the Duke
of Braganza could in a hundred years. These and few other arguments were
sufficient to draw those, who before out of their envy to the house of
Braganza, were inclinable to a change.

These made sure, the Archbishop next draws into this Plot a Gentleman of a
Noble blood, named, D. Augustine Emanuel, a man of excellent parts, but
somewhat necessitated, nor had ever been looked upon, or put into any
employment, which without any other incentives, were motives sufficient to move
a man to any desperate design. Next him was added to this conspiracy, Pietro
Baeza, a lately converted Jew, whom the Portugueses call Upstart Christians; he
was famous for nothing, but his vast riches; being a great Criado of the Count
Olivares, whose favor, he used often to say, would one day advance him to high
honor, or to a high pair of gallows, which last proved very true.

Many private meetings had these, and some few other Conspirators, where they
debated to bring their designs to effect; some were of opinion that before they
could bring it to perfection, more should be acquainted with it, for it was
impossible that so few should ever be able to compass it: But in this course
there arose many fears and doubts, lest too many being acquainted with it, some
should discover it, as had often happened in designs of that high nature: yet
at length it was found necessary to draw more into the Plot, for whilst they
were so few, the business only rested in imagination, but could never be put
in execution.

Having therefore added some more to the number, their next debates were of the
manner how to bring it to effect; some advised that a power of the Catholic
Kings was to be got in a readiness, but they then thought that the King of
Portugal would raise as great a force, and so prevent a sudden invasion: Yet in
answer to that objection, it was by some aledged, That the Spaniard by way of
intelligence might be let in, which again seemed as difficult, the Militia
being in the hands of persons most loyal and trusty to the King: Others
proposed, that the only way to effect it was by a sudden and violent making
away of the King; but this advice was opposed by most, who inclined to a
mediocrity, and would rather have found out a way to make his Majesty renounce
his own Right and Title to the Crown, and retire himself from the dangers which
should be presented unto him.

But whilst they thus wavered in opinions, and inclined to that moderation,
which is the ruin of all designs of this nature, they gave the King time and
occasion to search out their Plots; for his Majesty having always had a
suspicious eye upon the Archbishop of Braga, and the Marquis of Villa Real,
and having received now private notice, that they had had sundry meetings, and
were observed daily to converse with persons as discontented as themselves,
endeavored by all means possible to know the depth of their Counsel, and at
length intercepts some of their Letters to Madrid, which discovered not only
the whole Plot, but even the names of all the Conspirators.

The Act of holding correspondence with the Spaniard was Treason in it self,
sufficient to take away their lives, being contrary to his Majesty's express
command, it is being to this intent, made it but so much the more heinous: His
Majesty therefore not knowing how far it might have proceeded, made no delays,
but presently by the sound of Drum and Trumpet (as the custom is) caused to be
proclaimed, That he intended to go forth of the City; upon which all the Nobles
and Gentry, according to the usual manner, assembled at the Palace, to accompany
his Majesty, who when he saw them all ready, commanded first that a Council of
Estate should be called, which was done, many of the Conspirators being
assistant in it, who being sat, his Majesty without any noise caused them to
be arrested one by one, which without the taking of this course, he could never
have effected; for if the Conspiracy had been detected before their persons had
been seized, they had either been torn in pieces by the fury of the people, or
else had some of them escaped.

It was very strange that of all the Plotters in this conspiracy, not one
should, either by accident, or otherwise, escape, for the persons of these now
taken, were no sooner imprisoned, but his Majesty published a Proclamation,
declaring a Free-Pardon to all the Accomplices in this conspiracy, that should
within four days come and acknowledge their fault, and beg it; but the Kings
diligence had been such before, that there was not one left to accept of this
grace.

Shortly after those who had been taken, were arraigned according to Law, found
guilty of High Treason, and in manner following executed.

On the last day of August, 1641. the Marquis of Villa Reale, the Duke of
Camigna, his son, the Count de Armamac, and D. Augustine Manuele, were led
along a Gallery to a Scaffold erected for the purpose, with two stories, on the
uppermost of which stood two Chaires, on the next one, and on the Scaffold it
self the fourth.

The first that was conducted forth to Execution, was the Marquis of Villa
Reale, who was clothed in a long black Bays Cloak, and his servants attending
him in mourning; being mounted to the uppermost part of the Scaffold, he prayed
for a good space upon his knees, and then rising up, asked, if there were no
hopes of Pardon? which made the people with one voice cry out, No, let him dye,
let him dye for a Traitor.

The next funebrious Ceremony of his Execution, was the Proclamation, which
according to the usual manner was made by the Executioner, in these words; This
is the Justice that the King our Sovereign Lord, commands to be executed upon
the person of Don Lewis de Meneses, sometimes Marquis of Villa Real, that his
throat be cut as a Traitor to his Majesty, Nobility and People of this kingdom,
that for his Crime his goods be confiscated, and his memory banished out of the
World. Whereat all the people cried out, Justice, Justice.

The Marquis thereupon seeing no hopes of any reprieve, with a sober and
becoming gravity demanded Pardon of all the Spectators, desiring them to assist
him with their prayers to God for the Pardon of this, and all his other sins;
then turning to a Father Jesuit his Confessor, he prayed him in his behalf to
present himself at his Ma^esties feet, and beseech him out of his wonted
goodness, to forgive him that heinous offense committed against him and the
whole kingdom.

Having ended this Speech, he very patiently sat down in the Chair, and the
Executioner having tied his arms and legs, to the arms and legs of the chair,
he leaned his neck over the back of the chair, and the Executioner with his
knife cut his throat, covering him afterward with a black Scarf.

In the same manner his son the Duke of Camigna came to the Scaffold, his
servants all attending him in mourning; as he came to his fathers Corpse he
kneeled down, and several times kissed his feet, begging of the people the
suffrage of one Pater nostre for his fathers soul; then after some prayers, and
Proclamation made by the Executioner, he received the same punishment.

Next that suffered was the Count of Armamac, in the Chair seated upon the
lower story; and after him Don Augustine Manuel upon the Scaffold it self; the
Judges would have had all their necks cut behind, but his Majesty would not
consent thereto, as a punishment too ignominious for persons of their quality.

The same day Pietro de Baeza, and Melchior Correa de Franca, were drawn at a
horse tail to an extraordinary high gallows, and there hanged, whilst Diego de
Brito Nabo, and Antonio Valente, were executed upon a lower; the quarters of
these four were set up at the gates of the City, and their heads placed upon
several Frontier Towns.

In the month of September following, for the same offense Antonia Cogamigne,
and Antonio Correa, were likewise executed; the first of which during the whole
time of his imprisonment, was an example of penitence, feeding only upon bread
and water, and whipping himself very often, with continual prayers to God for
Pardon of that, and all his other sins.

As for the Archbishop of Braga, and the Bishops of Martiria and Malacca, and
Friar Emanuel de Macedo, though they were the persons that had the greatest
hand in the conspiracy; yet in regard they were Ecclesiastical persons, they
suffered no^ death, according to their deserts, but were kept in prison, till
the Popes pleasure were known concerning them.

Here must not be forgot a great example of humility and repentance in the
Archbishop of Braga, not only in his life time (when he often writ to the
King, that he might suffer, and others be spared, who were rather drawn in, in
compliance and obedience to him, then out of any ill will to the King and
kingdom) but also at his death (which happened about three years after his
imprisonment) when he gave order that as soon as he was dead, his last Will and
Testament should be carried to the King, wherein he humbly entreated his
Majesty to Pardon the Treason committed against him, and his Native Country,
and that he would permit his body to be buried without the Church of any Parish
of Lisbon, and that without any Inscription or Tombstone, that there might
remain no memory of a man who had been a Traitor to his King and Country.

This exemplary punishment and rigorous execution of Justice upon the
forementioned traiterous Delinquents, established the King in his kingdom,
struck a terror into his enemies, and increased his Subjects love and care of
him more diligently to watch his Royal Families, and the kingdoms safety.

But in the mean time daily incursions were made upon the Frontiers between the
Castilians and Portugueses, with the same violence, cruelty and animosity, as
formerly.

But now come we to relate the most shameful piece of treachery ever yet heard
of, acted upon that most Noble and Gallant Prince the Infant Don Duarte, or
Edward, brother to the King of Portugal, who had served the Emperor in his
Wars, with much gallantry, and no less success, long before his brother Don
John had any thoughts of a Crown; nor did he show any endeavors to desert the
Emperors service, after the news arrived of the Revolt of Portugal, but seemed
resolved to continue there, till he was betrayed by Francisco de Mello a
Portugal, at that time Ambassador to the Catholic King in the Emperial Court.

This Mello notwithstanding he was bound by many strong Obligations to the
House of Braganza, yet like an ungrateful villain, having opportunity offered,
now resolves to build his fortunes upon their ruin, or at least displeasure,
he therefore earnestly sollicites the Emperor to seize upon the person of Don
Duarte, and deliver him up to the King of Spain, alleging of what great
concernment the securing of his person would be to the Catholic King; that it
much behoved his Imperial Majesty to show his affection to his brother the
Catholic King in this particular, which would not only prove of Interest to
Spain, but the whole house of Austria: That this Prince was the only Prop of
the House of Braganza; that this was the only means which God had left in the
hands of the House of Austria to recover the kingdom of Portugal; that it would
be a great error both in prudence and policy to let ship so fair an occasion,
for that if he should escape out of their hands, and get to the assistance of
his brother, both his personal valor and experience in Warlike affairs would
very much infest the Catholic King.

The Emperor was not only not persuaded by this Discourse of Mello's, but
extremely offended at it; returning him in answer, that he did abhor and detest
so great a breach of public faith, and violation of all Laws of hospitality;
that it would be both against the liberty of the Empire, and against his own
honor, to imprison a Prince who had committed no fault to the Empire, but
rather had laid innumerable Obligations both upon it, and himself.

Nor was the detestation of the Arch Duke Leopold to an act so foul and
shameful, less then that of his brothers the Emperor; notwithstanding all
which, Mello was not at all discouraged, but still prosecutes his villainous
design, by corrupting with great sums of money the Count of Tratsmandorf, and
several other Pensioners of the Crown of Spain; but they were soon weary of so
base and shameful and employment; which made Mello think of a more cunning
Artifice, which was to persuade the Emperor to hearken to the allurements of
one Diego di Quiroga, who of a soldier was turned Monk, and was now Confessor
to the Empress: This Father who had often been called to give his judgment in
Affairs of State, endeavored by all means possible to persuade the Emperor that
he might not only with a good conscience secure the Infant, but that
according to the best rules of Interest of State, he ought to do it.

His Imperial Majesty notwithstanding all these persuasions, was very much
unsatisfied in the action, and once fully resolved not to do it; but at length
overcome by Mello's importunities, and the Ghostly persuasions of Quiroga, he
was as it were constrained to alter his resolution, and to give order to Don
Lewis Gonzaga, to go to the Princes quarters at Leipen, and summon him to
Ratisbone.

In the mean time to endeavorto prevent all ^ll impressions, which an action so
hainously wicked, might strike into all bosoms that had either honor or
honesty; it was given out abroad, that the Infant Don Duarte was secretly fled
for some misdemeanor from Leipen, (when he confident of his own innocence, was
in his journey to Ratisbone, according to the summons) and thereupon proposal
made of sixteen thousand Crowns, as a reward to any man could bring him either
dead or alive; so that the Prince being ignorant of any such thing, very hardly
escaped their hands, who out of hopes of the money, had gone in search of him;
but missing them, he came to Ratisbone; where he was no sooner arrived, but
without any reason given, he was cast into a common goal, and all his servants
imprisoned.

Don Francisco de Mello having thus far brought his desires to effect, stops
not here, but afresh sollicites the Emperor, that the Prince might be delivered
into the Spaniards hands, and sent prisoner to Millain: but instead of
assenting to this, he sends a messenger to the Infant, assuring him upon his
word, that he would not deliver him into the hands of the Spaniards, but would
speedily procure his liberty and infranchisement.

Yet notwithstanding these fair promises of the Emperors, Don Duarte's ill
usage in prison daily and hourly increased, not could he by any means possible
get audience of the Emperor, not without any reason, for, no face is more
terrible to the offender then the face offended; which made the Prince make his
protestation, calling God and man to witness of the injury done him by the
Emperor, to whom he was neither subject by Obligation, nor Birth; that when his
brother was made King of Portugal, he was in the Emperors service, and wholly
ignorant of any design of his brothers; that if the King of Spain were
offended, he should revenge himself upon the person offending; that that
business no way concerned the Emperor, etc.

All these Allegations the Emperor confessed to be true, by a messenger sent to
the Infant in prison, again assuring him that he would not deliver him up to
his enemies, but that he could not release him for some reason of State: which
made Don Francisco de Sosa Contigno, Ambassador extraordinary from Portugal to
the King of Sweden, in the name of the King his Master, represent at large to
the Diet at Ratisbone, the whole proceedings, requiring Justice and liberty for
the Infant: But it is in vain to plead against Interest, all the Manifesto's,
Protestations, Petitions, and Intercessions made, produced no other effect then
the removal of the Infant from place to place, that still as he was the
farther off, he might have the harder usage.

But hitherto the Emperor seemed immovable able in his resolution of not
delivering up the Infant into the hands of the Spaniards, till tempted with
what made Judas betray his master, and our blessed Savior to death, Money; he
consented to the breach of his resolve, for upon the promise of forty thousand
Crowns (contrary to the immunities of the Empire, to the Privileges of free
Princes, to the Law of Nations, and to his word and promise so often
reirerated) he consented that that Noble and innocent Prince should be sent
whither the Catholic King should think fit; so away he was hurried toward
the Castle of Millain, there to remain a prisoner.

By the way as he entered into the Spanish Territories, he was received by the
Count de Sirnela Governor of that Dukedom, where the Emperors Commissary took
leave to return, to whom D. Duarte openly said, Tell thy Master that I am more
sorry I have served so unworthy a Prince, then to see my self sold a Prisoner
into the hands of my enemies; but the just judge of the world will one day
suffer the like dealing toward his children, who are no more privileged for
being of the house of Austria, then my self that am of the blood Royal of
Portugal, and posterity will judge of him and me.

The Emperor had given instruction to those that convoyed the Infanta, that in
case their prisoner made an attempt to escape, they should kill him upon the
place: being arrived in Millain he was clapped in the Common gate with all the
Rogues and Banditty, having a guard lodged with him in his Chamber, so rude
that they would scarce admit him to take his rest.

Thus was this generous, but unfortunate Prince rewarded, for having left his
Country, kindred, friends, interest; for having at his own proper cost and
charges, served the Empire eight years, for having always, and upon all
occasions ventured his life with the most daring, and yet expecting no other
pay but thanks, nor other recompense but honor.

King John was extremely perplexed at this inhumane barbarism used to his
Brother, which he vowed fully to revenge with Arms; but he could for the
present do it no otherwise, then defensively, by reason of the continual
inroades the Castilians made into Portugal.

About the beginning of the year 1642. (notwithstanding the Truce that had been
concluded between Portugal and Holland, and that a great Fleet of Hollanders
had been sent to assist the Portugal against the Spaniard) there passed very
high Acts of Hostility between the two Nations in Africa and America, beyond
the Line; for the Hollanders seeing the disunion of Portugal from Castile, made
all speed possible to perfect the Conquest of those parts before a perfect
Peace should be concluded with Portugal, that so in the Treaty they might
pretend reason, that all things should continue in the state they were then
found.

To this purpose, that is, the expediting their Conquest, the Hollanders
treacherously (whilst there was all quiet and peaceable Commerce held between
the two Nations in the kingdom of Angola) surprised the Portugals that were
Governors of the place, killed diverse, and robbed all of the great wealth they
there found; of which perfidiousness, as also of the barbarous usage of the
prisoners there taken, complaints were made to the States General at the Hague,
but no redress granted; nor was the King of Portugal of ability to force it.

In the mean time the affairs in Portugal were a little discomposed by the
general discontent and distaste taken at the Secretary of State Don Francisco de
Lucena: This man had lived a long time in the Court of Spain, till he was by
Olivarez made under-Secretary to Vasconsellos, his readiness to Proclaim King
John, and his abilities in the place, made the King continue him in it,
reposing in him so great a confidence, that though some had advertized his
Majesty that he kept correspondence with the Court at Madrid, yet the King
would not suspect him, nor permit him to be brought to a Trial.

But about the middle of the year 1643. the urgent affairs of the kingdom
requiring a Convention of the three Estates, they openly refused all Acts that
should pass the hands of Secretary Lucena, positively telling his Majesty, that
until he were brought to Trial, no Acts should pass in the Assembly of Estates,
nor any farther proceedings be made.

His Majesty was very much grieved hereat, yet prudently resolved to give his
Subjects satisfaction, by delivering up his Secretary to Justice; yet resolving
he should have a fair Trial, and ^o that purpose sitting himself to hear the
Witnesses examined. Whilst Process was framed against the Secretary, some
secret advice came to his Majesty, which caused the imprisonment of the
brother, and three servants of the Secretary, together with an English Monck,
and a Cavalier of the habit: not long after the Secretary was arraigned and
condemned for betraying his truth, in holding correspondence with the enemy,
and in neglecting timely to advertise the Infanta Edward to retire out of
Germany, etc. and according to his sentence executed in a public place in
Lisbon, where at his death he protested his innocence touching any treachery
toward His Majesty.

The death of the Secretray both pleased the people, and satisfied the Assembly
of Estates, who now according to His Majesty's command met on September 18.
1643 and being all sat, and His Majesty sea^ed in his Throne, D. Emanuel D'
Acugna Dean of His Majesty's Chapel, rose up and after reverence made to the
King, spoke to the effect following.

THat in the space of sixty years that that Kingdom was under the power of the
Kings of Castile, there had bin but two Assemblies of States, the first to
inslave, the next to abuse them. But that since they were under the present
King, within the space of two years, they had two Assemblies, the former to
settle their liberties, the present to beget a right understanding between the
King and his people, wherein they had all freedom to demand whatever was
necessary, that the world might see they are now no longer slaves but children,
no longer strangers but natives, and that they are under rather a loving
father, then a severe Sovereign.

In the former Assembly, said he, his Majesty took all the Customs, and left
the defense of the Kingdom to your hands, you ordered what seemed good unto
your selves, you made choice of a General Assistance by way of contribution,
but in the leaving thereof, the first payment was found ineffectual, the second
unequal, the third insufficient; whence arose some complaints, some imagining
that the fault proceeded from the unequal division of the contribution, others
from the change of value in money and commodities, and others from the disorderly
gathering and disbursing the whole: I may easily say, that if there were any
error committed, yet it might be excusable for that. Never had any weighty
affair it is conception and perfection at once: Then shall errors cease to be
in Government when men shall cease to be in the world. These things are to be
endured with the same patience that droughts, dearths, inundations, and such
other disorders in nature, for the wit of man cannot hold forth a remedy for
all diseases. But certainly they will be no ground of reprehension, (though
much of admiration) to him that shall consider how His Majesty entered upon a
Kingdom, exhausted by the Castilians of money and other necessaries, for offense
or defense, and yet how in less then a year and a half, we should want neither
Shipping, nor Artillery, nor Horse, nor Arms, nor Fortification, nor Armies
upon the Frontiers, three powerful Fleets put to Sea, diverse honorable, and
extraordinary Ambassages, besides many secret (yet necessary expenses) all
which will astonish any understanding man. Now to the end that the people may
have full satisfaction, His Majesty has commanded, that (before further
proceeding) it be made appear particularly how all the money received has been
laid out, and then it is expected, and the present state of affairs requires
that we all contribute liberally, considering that these charges are but for a
time, but our liberties are for ever: That we shall never have a better
opportunity to destroy our enemy. That nature teaches to hazard an arm, to
save the whole body: The Merchants at Sea cast away some part of their goods
sometimes, to save the rest; we are now on shipboard in a storm, our Goods, our
Lives, our Liberties, our Honor, our Country, are all in danger.

Moreover the barbarous usage of the King of Castile toward the Infanta Don
Duarte, calls upon this Assembly for revenge, that we spend not only our money,
but our blood in affection to him, and that we make our enemies spend theirs in
satisfaction for him, etc.

This speech of the Deans was spoken with so much affection, that it stirred up
and encouraged the States readily to give all assistance imaginable both for
redressing of greivances, and for the levying Arms, so that within a small time
after, the King was in the head of twenty thousand Foot, and three thousand
Horse, marching toward the Frontiers of Castile.

Whilst these great preparations for Hostility were made, the Queen brought
forth into the world a second Son to His Majesty, but first child after he
came to the Crown, which added to the magnificence of his christning, he was
named Alfonso, and his brother Theodosio dying before his Father, succeeded in
the Kingdom, and is at present King of Portugal.

Many Skirmishes had passed between the Castilians and Portugueses, many town
had been surprised, many lands wasted, but never happened a set-battel between
them till in the year 1644. when both Armies met upon the border of Portugal in
a field called Campo Major. The Spanish Army which for the most part consisted
of strangers, was under the Command of the Marquess of Forrecusa, and the
Portugal Army consisting of natives, and some few Hollanders, were commanded by
Macchias de Albuquerque. This fight was maintained with all possible courage
and resolution on both sides; but the Spaniards being more numerous, especially
in horse, at length put the whole Portuguese Army in disorder, seized on their
whole Artillery, and baggage, and slew Albuquerques horse under him, took many
prisoners, and assured themselves of an absolute victory. But fortune which had
thus favorably smiled upon them in the beginning of the day, frowned as
harshly upon them in the conclusion; for Albuquerque being remounted, rallied
again his scattered forces, recharged the pursuing Spaniards, put them to a
total rout, and pursued the chase for above 3 miles.

In this battle the Castilians lost 1600 men upon the place, amongst which were
the Lieutenant General, the General of the horse, the General of the Artillery,
the Count de Montixo, five Camp-masters, two Adjutants of horse, three Sergeant
Majors, three and twenty Cornets, together with many Knights of the order of
St. James Calatrava and Alcantara: there were taken about four thousand Arms,
and a thousand horse.

On the Portuguese side there were not above three hundred slain, among which
were two Camp-masters, one Sergeant Major, a Captain of horse, and eight of
foot, but many Noblemen, Commanders, and Officers taken prisoners in the first
encounter, were carried away by the Spaniards in their flight.

It was not long after this Battle, that the Marquess De Montalban, D. George
Mascaneras Lord Treasurer, President of the Council of the Indies, and
Councellor of Estate, with some others, were imprisoned upon suspicion of a
Conspiracy against the King of Portugal: but it being upon Examination found
that the suspicion was by the Spaniards cunningly raised, to deprive King John
of his most able Ministers, and to make the world believe the Portuguese
Nobility were discontented with their King; they were set at liberty, and their
Honors fully repaired by a Proclamation of the Kings.

For the Spaniards ceased not by all means and devices, which the will and
policy of the most wicked Statesmen could invent, not only to weaken the
Portuguese Nation within it self, by breeding discontents (if possible) between
the King and the three Estates, but likewise to undervalue them, and make their
credit be slighted and disregarded by other Kingdoms and States, their
Confederates and Allies.

Yet besides these subtle Ambages, the King of Castile did not desist the
endeavoring to oppress this kingdom by force of Arms; but not only the
resolved and immutable unity of the Portuguese Nation, was a strong Tower and
invincible Fortress against the Spanish Power, but so extremely was the House
of Austria involved in wars and disasters on every side, tha^ that vast Body
was rather in a condition to crave help and assistance from others, then indeed
to oppress them. For besides the Wars in Catalonia, which had put it self under
the protection of the most poten^ King of France, in the Low Countries, which
had proved so tedious and so chargeable a war to Spain; in Italy, in this
Kingdom, and in Germany, there happened several Commotions and popular Tumults
in some of the King of Spains Dominions, which not only robbed that King of a
present supply of Treasure, but were otherwise retardments to the prosecution
of his Wars in other places.

The first of these Commotions began in the Island of Sicily, where the people
gathering together in a tumultuous manner, forced the Viceroy to take off all
new Imposts and Taxes which the Kings present necessities had enforced him to
lay upon them. This encouraged their neighbors on the adjacent Continent, the
Inhabitants of the famous City of Naples, in hopes to rid themselves of their
oppressions, to rise in like manner in Arms; which they did encouraged and
commanded by one Thomas Aniello, or vulgarly Masaniello, who though of so mean
and obscure a birth as a poor Fisher-boy, yet to the wonder of the world for
ten days commanded this mighty City, and freed it from all Gabels, so that
ever since these two kingdoms of Naples and Sicily have rather been a great
charge, than any benefit to the Spanish Monarchy.

These Troubles, and the Austrian Families being every where encompassed and
embroiled in Wars, together with the earnest desire of the King of Castile to
prosecute a vigorous War against Catalonia, and Portugal were I suppose the
motives which persuaded the Catholic King to end those Wars, which had lasted
in the low Countries for above ninety years, by owning now at last (what he had
so long refused) the united Provinces free States, so an absolute peace was
concluded on, and proclaimed at all the chief towns in the Netherlands, on the
5. of June 1648. a Peace no less advantageous to the Spaniards, then
disadvantagious to the Portugals, by reason of the pretenses the Dutch had to
Brazile, and other places in the West Indies. King John of Portugal about the
beginning of the year 1649. thought his Son the Prince Theodosio arrived at an
age fitting to keep a Court of himself, Lodgings were therefore appointed for
him, divided from the Royal Palace, and Officers of his household nominated and
appointed by the King, amongst whom the Earls of Villa nova, of Miranda, of
Valdereis and Fernando, Tellez de Menezez, (who had formerly been governor of
the City of Port,) were entrusted as the principal Gentlemen of his Chamber.

The King likewise thought fit to add a third to the two former
Superintendents of his Revenue, whom he nominated to be D. Rey de Moure Tellez,
whose former Office of Steward to the Queen, was at the same time conferred on
D. Antonio de Silva Lord of Billas.

Notwithstanding the Truce, the Hollanders still continued their outrages on
the other side the Line, but principally in Brazile, where they seized upon
many of the Portugal forts, impeded the Traffic, abused and murdered the
Subjects, which made His Majesty resolve to call the Earl of Castle Melhor from
his charge of being General of the Portugal Forces upon the Frontiers of
Gallicia, and committing that to the young Viscount de Villanova de Servera,
that the Earl might be employed as Viceroy to Brazile, to curb the Flemings
insolences, and to secure the Portuguese Merchants Ships from their pyracies,
the King appointed a Fleet of forty Ships of War, and six thousand Men to
attend that service as Convoys.

His Holiness the Popes anger as yet continued toward the Kingdom of Portugal,
for he had not only hitherto refused to receive Ambassadors from thence but to
supply those Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Offices of
the Kingdom, which by the death of the former possessors were vacant: this the
King found a great inconveniency in, and therefore thought fit once more to
attempt his Holiness; and to present him the names of such of his own Subjects,
whose piety, learning, or other sufficiencies he thought might make them capaof
such dignities; as first for the Archbishopric of Braga, (formerly
acknowledged to be the primacy of all Spain, notwithstanding the pretensions of
Toledo) he nominated Don Pedro de Lancastro, president of the Justice of the
Palace of the house of Ameiro, and descended from John the second King of
Portugal. For the Archbishopric of Evora, His Majesty nominated D. Francisco
Barrez Bishop of the Algarez, Bishopric he bestowed upon the Father Denis Des
Anges an Augustine Monk, and Confessor to His Majesty: for the Bishopric of
Guarda was appointed D Antonio Pobo, great Prior of the military order of St.
James: for the Bishopric of Lamego D. Antonio de Mendosa Commissary of the
Bula de la Croisaida: for the Bishopric of Lerida, D. Deigo de Souza
Inquifitor of the holy Office: for that of Conimbria, Don Sebastian Casar de
Menerez, who was before nominated for the Bishopric of Porto, but that was
given by his Majesty to D. Pedro de Menerez, once named Bishop of Miranda, of
which last place D. Pedro de Porros tutor of the Prince D. Theodosio was now
named Bishop. These choices of his Majesty, the Pope after sometime confirmed
D. Francisco de Souza, who was sent as extraordinary Ambassador,
notwithstanding the opposition of the Spaniards received, not unlikely out of a
fear that they would officiate without his confirmation, and so in a manner
renounce the power of the Sea of Rome.

But in the midst of this settling of Ecclesiastical affairs, Arms were not
silent; for upon the borders there happened askirmish between the Castilians
and Portuguese about the latter end of April 1649. Lord of Themer Court,
Lieutenant General of the Portuguese horse, and Monsieur Du Quesne the
Commissary General gained a victory over a small Army of the Spaniards,
defeating seven hundred of the Spaniards, and taking diverse prisoners, amongst
whom was the Nephew of the Marquess of Melinguen Lieutenant General of the
Castilian Army at Badajox, who was after exchanged for the Count Fiesque
Lauagna, who for some years past had been prisoner in Castile: in this conflict
the Portuguese lost but twenty five men, the chief of which was Sieur de la
Touch, a French Captain who had behaved himself most valorously.

The commotions of the Parisians against the King of France, had given the
Spaniard great hopes of better success then they had many years had, but the
middle of the year 1649. happily concluding them, the news of their
pacification, and that of a great victory gained by the Portugueses against the
Hollanders in Brazile, caused a general joy over all Portugal; for the King
appointed public thanks to be given, and Te Deum to be sung in all Churches.

Hopes to revenge the late defeat given by the Lord Therimicourt, and desire to
do some valiant act before he departed from his Government, made the Marquess
of Leganez governor of the Spanish forces at Estramadura, give an Alarm to
the Portuguese Frontiers, and enter into the Country with two thousand horse,
and 6000 foot, but the valiant Count of St. Laurence assaulting him, forced him
to retire with shame, and excuse himself that he marched out only to meet the
Marquess of Mortare, who was appointed to succeed him in the Government.

Yet this small and worthless Alarm, made the King of Portugal, who knew that
too much care could not be had of the safety of his Kingdom, to send Orders to
the Governors to look more exactly to the countries committed to their charges
then formerly, and strictly to give charge to Don Iuan de Menezez Governor of
Porto. The Viscount Ponte de Lima Governor of the countries between Douro and
Mimbo, to the Count of Arogna Governor of Trasmontes, and Don Roderigo de
Castro Governor of Beira, to repair with all expedition to their several
Commands.

Nor was his Majesty less careful of his dominions abroad then of those near
home, which made him dispatch the Baron of Alviro to be Governor of Tanger,
and D. Franciso De Norogna to Mazagan, both strong Forts in Africa; the last of
which had been near surprised by the Moors of Barbary, but the Commander of
that party which assaulted it, being slain by a valorous Frenchman, they were
beaten off with loss, for which service the King bestowed upon the Frenchman a
pension of six hundred Crowns per annum.

And whilst His Majesty was distributing his bounties, he could not forget the
Lady Dona Maria Manuel, widow to the some-time before deceased D. Antonio
Coello, D. Caravallio, who had ever since His Majesty's coming to the Crown,
been one of His Privy-Councellors, and was one of the chief persons that went
Ambassadors into France, to renew the Alliance, and conclude a firm League
between the King of Portugal, and Lewis the thirteenth King of France; His
Majesty therefore in consideration of his services, bestowed a valuable pension
on his aforesaid widow.

There was almost daily inroads made upon the Frontiers in some places or
other, amongst the rest the Baron of Themericourt entered with a strong party
into the Spanish Territories, surprised the Suburbs of the City of Albuquerque,
and brought away a very rich booty without the loss of so much as one soldier
upon the place, and not above twenty wounded.

The succor of the distressed Subjects of the more distressed King of England,
about the year 1650. gave occasion to the King of Portugal to manifest his
affection to the English Nation, which he did by giving assistance to the
gallant Prince Rupert, who being by His Majesty of England made Admiral of
those few ships which in the year 1648. returned to their Allegiance, had ever
since been pursued by the more po^ent Fleets of the English Rebels, and was now
by them driven to seek the protection of his Portugal Majesty, who
notwithstanding that the Fleet of the Rebels with threatening Bravado's,
demanded the said Kings leave, either to assault them in his port, or to force
them to come out bravely, protected them under his Castles.

In revenge of which the Rebels of England, who styled themselves a Parliment,
proclaimed an open War with the Portugal Nation, which His Majesty
notwithstanding his great engagement at that present, both against the
Spaniards at home, and the Hollanders on the other side the Line, resolved to
endure, rather then deliver up the faithful Subjects of England into the hands
of Murder, Tyranny, and Treason, and therefore in part to cry quittance with
the English, who had taken Prize several Ships belonging to this Nation, he
made seizure of all the English Ships and goods within his whole dominions, but
only those he had before protected.

But at length Prince Rupert finding a clear passage from out his ports, where
he had for many months been blocked up, the King by reason of his other large
expenses in defense of his Kingdom finding himself unable to maintain a War
against the English, and nature dictating us to the preservation of our selves,
resolved, more moved out of necessity then inclination, to send an Agent into
England to conclude a peace.

The person deputed to go on this unpleasant employment, (viz, to court Rebels)
was D. Suarez de Gimeraines, who had for his assistance and interpreter, Mr.
Miles and English Merchant, these two embarked upon a Hamburger hired for that
purpose by the King of Portugal, arrived in England in January 1650. About the
beginning of Feburary, D. Suarez had audience, before a Committee of the
pretended Parliament, to whom he made a Speech in Latin to this effect.

THe Serenissimo King of Portugal my Master, sends me hither to the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England that on his behalf, and in his name, having
first most friendly saluted you, (as I now do with the greatest affection of my
heart that I am able) I may jointly tender and make known to you, the Royal
desire which my Master feels within himself, to conserve and more and more to
knit the knot of that Amity which uninterrupted has ever been between the
Serenissimo Kings of Portugals their Ancestors, and this renowned English
Nation.

It being my part to endeavor what lies in me, to remove all obstacles that may
hinder the most vigorous effect of this hearty union, and conjunction of minds,
so to preserve inviolably the ancient peace between us.

This I come to continue, hoping and wishing all happy success therein; this I
come to intimate and offer unto the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
with that sincere and pristine affection, which hitherto the experience of many
ages has made manifest.

Nor shall you need to scruple the sincerity of my intention and purpose, by
reason of the diverse past attempts (not to say fights) between your power and
ours, since they have not been such as have broken or dissolved our amity, nor
have had their rise or approbation from the King my Master, nor as we believe
from the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, but more probably carried
on either by the impulse of their own private affections, or by the defect of
that circumspection which in such cases is ever necessary.

But as I hope particularly and fully to prove (indeed to demonstrate) this
truth unto the Parliament of the Republique of England, so I am assured they
will not only rest satisfied therein, but shall also have accruing to them a
newer force, and sense of mutual friendship between us, since the jarrs that
happen amongst friends, are oftentimes justly accounted as certain
redintigrations of love.

And I do admire our enemies have not made this reflection, whilst fed with
vain hope, they have thought it in their power to sow and foment discords
between us, upon presumption of this trivial innovation.

The King my Master sends me to continue and preserve our common and ancient
peace, whereof I am to make a render unto the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England in His Majesty's behalf, as proceeding from a perfect sincerity in his
Royal breast, and whereunto he is chiefly drawn by the motive of his singular
esteem and love, he bears unto this English Nation.

And this, as the main point I shall recommend unto you, both in regard of your
greater good and ours, and as a thing of highest concernment, that we reflect
how little it can be pleasing to Almighty God, and how derogatory it must needs
be to our reputation on both sides, to give the least beginning of discord
between two Christian Nations, so well affected to one another as we are.

It is manifest unto the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and to all
Europe besides, in how wonderful a manner (such as was only possible to God,
the King my Master was restored to his Kingdoms, and how the divine Majesty
(whose handiwork this was) does by his especial care and grace defend and
continue this restoration.

Which as it does daily more appear by the victories we have over our enemies
at home, so again it is seen in our remotest and most distantial dominions in
the East Indies, where even at a huge distance (His Majesty possessing the
hearts of his people, enjoyes that greatest peace in the world, and is secure
in Africa, relying thereupon his prosperous and happy powers.

To conclude, the King my Master, lest any thing should be wanting to render
him completely happy, has (according to the wish of an ancient Christian
Author, for securing the prosperity of the Roman Empire, a faithful Senate,
puissant Armies, and a most obedient people, Fortifications in the judgment of
wisest politicians, conducing and necessary both to defend and increase Empires
and Kingdoms.

Now in this good condition of not only gaining and conserving friends, but
also of vanquishing our enemies, the King my Master loves and embraces peace,
as the chiefest good amongst humane things, holding it forth to all Kingdoms
and Commonwealths, but especially to this of England, with that exceeding good
will which he has hither to born, and shall ever bear unto the same, standing
thereunto obliged by such bonds of love and good offices, as shall never be
forgotten by His Majesty.

For the people of this Nation are the most worthy successors of those their
Heriock Ancestors, who by their just power and Arms came freely to vindicate
our Crowns from the Mahumetan oppressions. And are, if not the same persons, at
least their children, who inflamed with a fervor and zeal of defending the
Crown of Portugal, justly did disdain to see it in the unjust possession of a
foreign Prince.

They are, I say, those who with so mature deliberation and resolution,
endeavored to snatch away this undue possession from the said Usurper, maugre
the concurrence of some ill affected Portugals with our enemies; and that they
might archieve this end glorious to themselves, and to us emolumental, they are
those who covered these as with their Squadrons and Fleets of Ships, ever
formidable to their most potent enemies by a new example of an unheard of
valor (had our unfortunate Stars then given us leave to be happy) come up to
the very walls of Lisbon.

And this having formerly been between us and them most powerful Englishmen,
and our most loving brethren, now that the Crown of Portugal (for which you
have fought so valiantly, when it was unlawfully detained, is happily restored
to the possession of the natural, and lawful King to whom of right it
appertains) who would not admire to see you bend your equal power, (upon no
occasion given) against the true and rightful King of Portugal by joining with,
and favoring the same Usurper (beaten by us, from whom your selves did
heretofore by force of your own Arms in our behalfs endeavor to snatch and
wrest away that Crown he had unjustly seized upon, and whom indeed you have
hitherto both in desire and effect opposed.

It would to all the world seem a thing much removed from the innate generosity
and gallantry of this your Nation, and very ill suiting with your Christian
justice and equality, as also it would be a very unworthy requital of us (who
have deserved better at your hands, and of that benevolence and affection
wherewith the whole kingdom of Portugal is passionately c^rrying on toward
you, wishing unto you the same happiness that we our selves desire to enjoy.

Let therefore these imaginary Clouds of discord vanish, and be quite blown
over from our thoughts, as serving only to Eclipse with darkness, the clear
light of our ancient amity, which (with what intention God Almighty knows,) the
importune sagacity of our Common enemy would fain deprive us of.

Let all obstactles be removed, and thrown quite away, wherewith the true
serving politicians by their inbred ambition of an universal Monarchy do
conspire the ruin of us both; aiming at nothing more then to set us together
by the ears, that overthrowing each other with our own Wars, we may have breasts
open, (when our powers are exhausted) to their swords and wounds, with greater
advantage against our selves, and less hazard unto them.

This new Republique is built upon strong and sure foundations, as also our
ancient and restored Kingdoms, let us therefore cast our eyes unto the common
interest of our cause, joining hands, and mutual benevolence to such effect, as
may render both parties security, the greater forbearing, and bewaring above
all things, all provocations, or irruptions of War, whereby (besides the
inconveniences, and losses which they ever draw after them,) all our own
affairs and safety may be hazarded extremely, while their councels and
endeavors will be promoted, who by hidden and wicked arts, strive to extend
their own power, by the common waste they would make in ours.

The King of Portugal my Master, has sent me hither furnished with a firm
ample plenipotentiary power, that discussing, and screwing all the just and
convenient means, I may confer about the conservation of Peace, and (removing
all emergent obstacles and scruples) resolve, and establish with the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, whatsoever shall be necessary for composing of
our present affairs, and maturely to provide with the greatest security that
may be possible, for their future well being.

I therefore beseech the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, that
weighing and considering these things which I have exhibited, they would please
to decree whatsoever shall seem to them most convenient and just.

To this large Speech of forced and known flattery, if we respect it in
relation to the persons it was spoke to, (though most true in those particulars
relating to the English Nation whilst monarchical) was answered by the Rebels,
with a large Harange of the injuries they supposed done them by the protection
of Prince Ruperts Fleet, and seizure of the English Merchants Ships and Goods,
concluding that they must have reparation made for the public damage of the
Commonwealth, which they would be willing to accept of in any honorable manner,
and were willing to that purpose, if the Ambassador had sufficient power to
treat with him to that effect.

In sum, after sometime the Count Del Sa Lord Chamberlain of the Kingdom of
Portugal arrived in England, in the quality of an Ambassador extraordinary, who
after many Conferences Addresses and large Offers made, obtained a Peace, upon
condition to repay great Sums of monyes toward the satisfaction of the losses
of the English Merchants.

During the stay of this Ambassador, his brother D. Pantaleon Sa, Knight of
Malta, led by I know not what frantic madness, made a great uproar upon the
New Exchange in London, where some English were by him and his followers
murdered; for which several of his retinve were hanged, and himself,
notwithstanding the earnest solicitations of his brother, afterward beheaded
upon Tower Hill, when the government of England was changed from a strange
kind of Commonwealth, to a stranger kind of Monarchy, under a Protector.

But to return back again to the affairs of the Kingdom of Portugal. The Earl
of Castle Melhor who had been sent Viceroy into Brazile, had so good success,
that with the assistance of those Portugueses before in the Kingdom, he
expulsed the Hollanders out of all their Garrisons there, except the strong
Fortress of Recif, which was built upon a Rock wholly environed by the Sea.
This animated the United States of the Netherlands, to endeavor a revenge and
recovery of that country, and to that end and purpose, a Potent Fleet was set
out, and notwithstanding the very earnest endeavors, and large offers of the
Portuguese Ambassador at the Hagne, set sail to reconquer that Kingdom, but not
with that success which was expected, for the expedition proved wholly
fruitless, and after so great an expense, the States were so highly
discontented, that the Admiral Wittison was arrested at the Hague, to answer
such things as should be objected against him concerning that voyage.

It much concerns that King who has to deal with enemies too potent for him,
to strengthen himself with such Alliance, as may most advantage him, and
endammage his foe; This consideration made King John of Portugal, about the
year 1652. send an Ambassador to the young Duke of Savoy, (who by reason of the
situation of his Country, had good and frequent opportunites to annoy the
Catholic King,) and divert him from turning his whole Force upon this
Kingdom) offering reciprocal Marriage between that Duke and his Daughter, and
the young Prince Theodosio and Savoy's Sister. But this his intention, was I
suppose diverted, if not wholly hindered by the great power of Cardinal Mazarine
in France, who designed one of his Nieces as a fit match for Eugenius young
Duke of Savoy.

It Is not at all safe nor fit for a Subject to grow too rich, at least not to
exceed his Sovereign in Treasure, for he thereby lays himself open to the envy
and suspicion of his Prince, nor is it possible that any who has managed a
public employment, can be so without faults, as that somewhat cannot be laid
to his charge to render him at a Kings mercy.

Sufficient example of this we have in D. Phillip de Mascarendas Viceroy of
Goa, in the East Indies, who having for many years officiated in that high
employment, had gathered up an infinite Mass of Riches, and now being called
home, thought in peace and quiet to enjoy what with a penurious and industrious
hand he had been many years storing up: but the King being informed that he had
indeed such a vaste treasure in Gold, Diamonds, Pearls and other Jewels, as he
could not with his own honor or safety permit a Subject to enjoy, easily found
out them who were ready to form complaints against him, which were as readily
listened to by the Kings Council, who presently drawing up a charge against him,
for having used an arbitrary power, oppressed, and abused the Subjects, and
Merchants trading thither, etc. caused the Ship wherein he came, with all the
riches laden on it, to be seized on for the Kings use, and himself for sometime
imprisoned, nor had it been a wonder if he had made a forfeiture of his life,
as well as of the greatest part of his Estate.

The strength of the Hollanders at Sea, had been the greatest obstacle to the
Portuguese, not wholly regaining there ancient possession in Brazile, but the
Wars wherein the Hollanders had involved themselves with England, proving so
powerful a diversion, the Portuguese took the advantage to reduce Recif, which
with several Forts that encompassed it, and some few other, were the only
places that held out against them.

Against this therefore with a sufficient Landforce, came Don Francisco Barreto
governor of Pernambuco, (whilst the Portuguese Navy consisting of 65 Sail
blocked it up by Sea,) and first by storm took the Fort of Salines, and thence
coming before that of Burracco, found it already abandoned, and blown up be the
defendants: he next proceeded to the new Fortress, the next and strongest Fort
to that of Recif, and well manned and munitioned. Thus having made a sturdy
resistance, was at length forced by the Portugal, which so amazed the
Hollanders, that though they had fifteen hundred men, and six months provisions
in Recif, yet they agreed to yield it upon honorable terms on the 26 of
January 1654. being twenty four years after they had taken it from the
Portugals.

THe conditions upon which this strong fortess was surrendered up, were to this
effect. 1. That D. Francisco Bareto should forget all Acts of Hostility made by
the Hollanders against the Portugals by Sea and Land. 2. That all persons
whatsoever, even the Jews in Recif, and Maurice town, though Rebels against
the King of Portugals, should be pardoned. 3. That all Hollanders should be
free to carry away those goods they actually possessed. 4. That they should
have sufficient numbers of Ships, able to pass the Equinectial Line, with
Iron-guns for their transportation. 5. That the Hollanders married with
Portugal Woman or Natives there, should be dealt so withal, as if they had
married Dutch Women, and should with the consent of the women, have power to
carry them away with them. 6. That those who would stay there under the
obedience of the Portugals, should be used as well as if they were native
Portugals, and as to their Religion, should live as other strangers do in
Portugal. 7. That all forts about Recif and Maurice-town, viz. the port of St.
Bastions, Boa, Vista, St. Austines, Convent, the Castle of Maurice-town, that
of the three Bastions, the Brum, with it is Redoubt, the Castle of St. George,
and all others should be surrended to the aforesaid D. Francisco Barreto
governor of Pernambucco, with all the Ordnance and Ammunition presently after
the signing of these Articles. 8. That the Hollanders should be free to remain
in Recif and Maurice-town for three months, they surrendering their Arms, which
should be restored to them when they took shipping, and in the mean while they
should have power to buy them necessary provisions of the Portugals for the
voyage. 9. All Negotiations and Alienations should be made during the said
three months, according to the present Articles. 10. That the Governor should
quarter his Forces where he pleased, and that the Hollanders should be
protected during those three months, and having liberty to end their private
differences before their own Judges. 11. That they should carry away all their
Papers whatsoever.

12. That if they could not sell their goods in the said three months time,
they should leave them with whom they pleased under the obedience of the
Portugals, to be disposed of according to their own order. 13. That they should
have all the victuals in the store houses of Recif, and the other Forts for
their voyage. 14. That as to their pretensions against the Portugals, they
might sue them at the King of Portugals Court. 15. That all their Vessels
should be restored unto them, which they might fit for their voyage. 16. That
they might have liberty to advise all their Ships upon the Coast, to come and
laid their goods at Recif: And in the last article it was expressed that upon
the demand of the Hollanders, that this might not prejudice any former treaty
between the King of Portugal, and the States General, D. Francisco Barreto
would not assent thereunto.

There were other articles likewise granted to the military Forces, the sum of
which were, that all offenses and hostages might be forgotten, that all
soldiers should go out of Recif with their Arms, Match lighted, Bullet in
mouth, Flying-colours; but coming near the Portugal Army, should put out the
Match, and lay their Arms in those Magazines appointed by the governor of
Pernambucco, to be restored to them at their departure, provided they went to
Nants, Rochel, or to some place in in the United Provinces and not to any
belonging to the King of Portugal; for security whereof they should give three
hostages, and all Officers and Soldiers should be shipped together with General
Sigismond Schop, after the delivery of the Forts of Riogrando, Paraiba, and
Tamarica. That the General should have twenty pieces of brass ordinance; from
four Pound-Ballet to eighteen, withal their furnitures, besides all necessary
Iron-guns, for the defense of the Ships that should be afforded them for their
transportation, with convenient supplies of ammunition and provision, according
to the thirteenth Article before recited: That General Sigismond, and all his
Officers of War, should have liberty to carry away or sell all his or their
goods or slaves. That sick or wounded persons should have liberty to stay till
they recovered, but the Governor would not condescend to release those
Hollanders which were prisoners before this surrendry: A general pardon was
granted to all rebels, chiefly to Amboyna, Mendaz, and all other Indians and
Negroes, but they were not to have the honor to march out with their Arms. In
sum, the supreme Council at Recif, did oblige themselves for the surrendering of
these places, upon the signing of these Articles, and for the delivering up the
Island of Farnam, Viaca, Noroga, Riogrand, Paraiba, and Tamarica, upon the same
conditions for the inhabitants, as had been granted to those of Recif.

These Articles were signed and delivered on both sides, at the Camp at
Taborda, on the 18 of January 1653. and Conditions on both sides punctually
observed. Thus did the Hollanders loose all their Acquists in Brazile, which so
exasperated those high and mighty States, that at the coming into Holland of
mine Here Sigismondo Schop, who had there been General of their Militia, they
caused him to be imprisoned, and tried for his life by a Council of War, but
notwithstanding endeavors of his enemies, he was acquitted.

Nor were the Portugals at home less fortunate against their neighbor enemy the
Spaniards, for to omit many petty skirmishes, inroades made by them withal
success desirable in the summer 1654. D. Antonio D' Albuquerque General of the
Portuguese horse, taking an advantage upon a party of Castilians, which lay
upon the Borders near Aronches, under the command of Count D' Amaranthe, set
upon them, slew their General Amaranthe, and took six hundred horse; and
farther animated with this success, and the knowledge he had that a vigorous
prosecution is the only mother of a true victory, pursued them with a Army of
3000 Foot and 1500 Horse, eight leagues into their own Country, as far as the
old and strong Castle of D' Oluce, while encouraging his Soldiers, (made
valorous by their former good fortune) he resolved to attacque, and with
continued batteries, and storms so wearied out the enemy, that after four days
siege they yielded upon composition, and Albuquerque looking upon it as a place
considerable, both for the countenancing of incursions into the enemies
country, and keeping in awe the town of Xeres, which is hard by, having
repaired it and placed in it a strong Garrison, returned.

About the beginning of the year 1655. D. Franciso De Ferrara Rabella arrived
in England, with Commission from the king of Portugal as Agent, to Oliver
Cromwell, who then swayed here under the title of Protector, to make a mo^e firm
confirmation of the Peace with England, and to advise, I suppose, about
carrying on the War with Spain; which when Cromwell had given some reasons to
make the world believe he would commence against that Catholic Monarch, and
how much such a War was for the interest of Portugal, none will doubt who have
read the foregoing story, which made King John court that English Usurper, with
more submisness and complacency, by both harboring his Fleets, and sending
presents to his Generals, then otherwise his Genius would have permitted him to
have done, any way in prejudice of Englands lawful KING. In the mean time the
death of Pope Innocentius the Tenth, made D. Francisco de Souza* Ambassador at
Rome for the King of Portugal, make new addresses to Alexander the seventh his
Successor, for confirmation of the Church Officers in that Kingdom, for he had
never had any full grant from Innocent; but now the Spanish Ambassadors opposed
themselves more then ever, and by means of the Queen of Sweden, who wholly
employed her in^erest for the benefit of that Nations endeavored to frustrate
even the Portugueses hopes, nay so desperate was the Spaniards malice, that
they laid several designs to murder the Portugal Ambassador, but all proved
ineffectual. In sum, after D. Francisco de Souza, had spent some years in the
Court of Rome to very little purpose, he was upon the death of King John the
fourth, called home to be Governor of the young King Alfonso.

The proffered interchangeable Match with Savoy, not taking effect, father Du
Rozaire, a Domincan and Archbishop of Goa, was sent Agent to France, to treat
about a Marriage between that King, and the Infanta Donna Catharina, with
Proposals of three Millions of Gold for Her Portion, and that the King of
Portugal would for seven Years maintain eighteen Men of War at Sea, for the
defense and service of the French Crown.

Long was this business in negotiation, and by many thought would have taken
effect, the Agent being very highly carressed both by the King and Queen mother
of France, but whether by reason of Cardinal Mazarine's dislike of it, or other
reasons of State, it was prolonged by continual demurs, till after the King of
Portugals death, and then wholly broken off.

For King John being now arrived to about fifty years of Age, in the sixteenth
year of his Reign, and in the year of our Lord 1656. on the 6. of November, S.
N. paid his last debt to nature, having a long time been troubled with an
obstruction in the kidneys, occasioned by the stone and gravel, which was so
sharp all the time of his sickness, that he seldom urined, and when he did it,
was in so little quantity that it did scarce at all ease him, this violent pain
put him into a Burning-feaver, which in ten days overpressed his vitals.

Before his death, he appointed Donna Lucia his Queen, to be Regent of the
Kingdom during the minority of D. Alphonso her son, recom^e^ding to her
for-Assistants in the management of so great burden as a Crown, the reverend D
Emanuel Archbishop of Lisbon, Don Runlio Marquess of Nisa, the Earl of
Canvandake, and some others whose abilities, love and fidelity, he had
experience of.

He had by his Queen Donna Lucia Daughter to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, four
Children; only two of which survived him, to wit, Alfonso who succeeded him in
the Kingdom, and is at present King of Portugal; and the Infanta Catharina, who
was born the year before her Father came to the Crown, a Princess in whom all
virtues seem to flow, that can make her the worthy Daughter of such renowned
Parents: her beauteous body being amply repleate with her generous Mothers
spirit, whose magnanimity and prudence, all the world have admired: his other
two children were the Prince Theodosio, who was so unfortunate as to die some
time before his Father, and a Daughter who died young.

He was a person of a very comely presence, his countenance pleasant, but
inclinning to swarthiness, his body about a middle stature, yet comely and well
proportioned, nor were the lineaments of his mind less becoming then those of
his body, though if ye believe common fame, he was none of the wisest Kings
that ever Portugal could boast of: the reason that he left so much of the reins
of the Government to his wife, a woman of a masculine and politic spirit, from
whence perhaps that jesting Spaniard might take occasion to say; That it was
not the Portugal force, but the Spanish policy, that kept that kingdom from the
Catholic King, alluding to the Queens being a Spaniard.

He was buried in the great Church of St. Vincenza del Foro, with all
accustomed and becoming ceremonies, lamented by those Kings who had been his
Allies, especially be the King of France, who honored his memory with a most
magnificent Funeral solemnity, himself (attended by most of the Nobles and
Parliament of France,) gracing it with his presence at the Church of Nostre
Dame, where after the singing of Mass, the Bishop of Vance pronounced a Funeral
Oration, suitable to so Royal a subject and occasion.

ALFONSO the VI. The Two and twentieth KING of PORTVGAL.
KIng John the fourth being thus deceased, his only surviving Son Alphonso the
6th of that name succeeded, being about the Age of fourteen years, his Mother
during his minority administering the affairs of the Kingdom, and causing him to
be Crowned on the 14 of November, eight days after the death of his Father.

The whole Kingdom of Portugal was in a kind of amaze at the so sudden death of
King John, especially considering the youth of their present King, fearing lest
their common enemies should now take advantage of them: but the prudent
management of the most important business of State by the Queen Regen^, soon
banished all those fancied fears.

The Queen being sensible, that upon this occasion of the Kings death, she
should have most occasion to use the Soldiery, by the advice of her Council,
ordered all the Infantry of the Kingdom should have half a years pay, the
better to encourage them, who were of themselves ready enough to fight against
their common and inveterate enemy, the Castilians.

And because she knew that the King of Spain would loose no opportunity to
oppress the Kingdom of Portugal, she thought it imprudence to let any slip
where any advantage might be gained upon him, and therefore all the Spanish
Forces being drawn out of Andaluzia to oppose the English, in case they should
attempt to land at Cadiz, (for they then blocked up that Port with a Potent
Fleet, she commanded four thousand Horse to make an inroad into that country,
who plundered, and laid waste all before them, bringing away between forty and
fifty thousand head of Cattle, and leaving the whole soil in a manner desolate:

This so exasperated the Spaniards, that draining most of the Garrisons of his
Kingdom he raised a potent Army, and with ten thousand Foot, and five thousand
Horse entered Portugal, and laid Siege to the strong City of Olivenza, which at
length they reduced to that necessity that the defendants were willing to
capitulate, and sounded a parley, but when they came to treat, the Spaniards
would not admit the King of Portugal any other title then that of Duke of
Braganza, which made the Portugals renounce any farther treating.

But at length the Spaniards condescending to treat, the Town was delivered
upon Articles: but so much did the Queen Regent and Council of Portugal resent
it, that they immediately gave order to arrest the person of Don Mandiol de
Saldagna the Governor, who (with several of his chief Officers,) was by the
Count de St. Lorenze, General of the Portuguese Forces in those parts, sent
prisoner to Lisbon, there to answer their ill defending of that town, it
appearing that at the surrendering of it, there marched our two thousand two
hundred well Armed Foot, and one hundred Horse; nor were they reduced to that
necessity that was pretended, there remaining in the stores of Ammunition and
provision, sufficient to have defended the town a great while longer.

The loss of this place was a great blow to the Portugueses, it being a strong
Frontier town, and giving the Spaniard absolute command a great way into the
Country: but this the King of Spain resolved should be but a beginning of his
conquest (if possible) of this Kingdom, for he still made all preparations he
could to assault it with a greater force, and not only endeavored this with
might and main to oppress it himself, but by his Ambassadors solicited the
States General of the United Provinces to send their Vice Admiral Opdam with
the Fleet he then had before Dantzick, into Portugal, to demand satisfaction
for the damage the Portugals had done to their West India company in Brazile,
and in case the King of Portugal should deny to comply with their desires, to
force them to a composition.

The High and Mighty States easily listened to this council, and Vice Admiral
Opdam with a potent Fleet was sent to Lisbon, carrying with him some
Commissioners from the States to make their demands, which the Queen Regent and
Council thought so unreasonable, that they could not return any satisfactory
answer to them, whereupon the Commissioners departed. But Opdam still stayed
with his Fleet to wait an opportunity of catching the Brazile Fleet in their
return home, many of which notwithstanding the care and endeavors of the
Portugueses to prevent it, he made prize of, and sent into Holland.

By this means was the War which for many years, had been maintained between
the Hollanders and Portugals on the other side the line, transferred to this
side, which the King of France endeavored by all means possible, before it is
eruption to prevent, and afterward to compose by his Ambassadors Monsieur de
Thou in Holland, and the Sieur de Comings in Portugal, but to no effect.

Thus assaulted by two potent Nations, both by Sea and by Land were the
Portugueses, which yet made them not at all falter in their courage and
resolution, the generous Queen Regent causing all possible Leavyes to be made
to oppose the Castilian, sending into Barbary to buy horses, and by Leagues
abroad endeavoring to strengthen the interest of the Kingdom, an Ambassador was
sent to that purpose into England, to renew and confirm the Amity before
concluded on, and many conferences there were between the Archbishop of Goa,
who had before been Ambassador in France, and the Sieur de Comings, so that
many were in hopes that the Match between the King of France and the Infanta
would have gone forward, and an indissoluble League both defensive and
offensive, been concluded between the two Nations.

And to join force to policy, a gallant Army of about sixteen thousand Foot,
and three thousand Horse, a^l Portuguese^, took the field, and in revenge for
the loss of Olivenza, laid siege to Mouron, which in three or four days they
took by storm, putting 1500 Spaniards to the Sword, and resolved to proceed to
the regaining of Badayox, and Olivenza; and to that purpose marching without
opposition by Caya, (which they left fortified) they came to the Fort of St.
Christopher, the strongest hold of the City of Badayox, which they several days
battered, and thrice stormed, but were beaten off, yet at the length they took
it, and so securely entrenched themselves about the whole City.

The Duke of Ossima General of the Castilian horse, having notice of this
straight siege of the City, endeavored with sixteen hundred Horse to cut off
their convoys and provisions; but the Count del Prado governor of Elvas,
receiving advice of his design, sallied out of the City with three companies of
Horse, and all the Foot he had to prevent him, by which means Ossima was
encompassed on both sides, for at the same time that he was on the other part
charged by Don Andrea D' Albuquerque General of the Portuguese horse, and that
with so much gallantry that they presently discomfited their enemies, slew four
hundred upon the place, took three hundred prisoners, and forced the Duke of
Ossima to save himself by swinning.

This happy success encouraged them to return with more alacrity to the siege,
which they prosecuted with all vigor possible, and on the three and twentieth
of June, stormed and took a Redoubt which was palisadosed, but at length when
they had spent much time, blood, and treasure, they were enforced by the
powerful Army of Don Lewis de Haro to raise their Siege.

For the King of Spain exsperated with the loss of Mouron, and fearing likewise
to loose Badayox, had rallyed a great Army, which he committed to the care of
his favorite Don Lewis de Haro, who not only with it raised the siege from
before Badayox, but likewise so straightly besieged Elvas, one of the
Portugueses strongest Frontier-towns, the taking of which might have endangered
the whole Kingdom, and reduced it to such necessity, that it was even upon the
point of yielding.

But the Portugals who knew of how much importance it was to them, had ever
been anxious for its relief, and therefore having at length bravely recruited
their Army, they advanced with full resolution to drive the Spaniards out of
their Trenches, nor did they effect it less bravely then they had resolved it,
for they totally routed their General, Don Lewis de Haro very hardly escaping;
but in this battle the Portuguez lost the worthy Albuquerque General of the
horse.

And to counterpoise this victory, the strong Fortress of Mounson upon the
borders of Gallicia, was surrendered to the Spaniards; and a Party of the
Portugals, not having advice that it was already possessed by the Castilians,
going to relieve it, were surprised and forced shamefully to retreat, with the
loss of some hundreds, and this Success encouraged the Spaniards under the
command of the Marquis of Viana, to besiege the only City the Portugals were
possessed of on the River Minho, but it was relieved by the Portugals. The
Spaniards likewise gained a signal Victory over a Party of Portugal Horse nigh
Alcantara; for advice being brought to the Governor of that Town, that the
Portuguez with a party of four hundred Horse were entering upon the Frontiers in
two Bodies, he taking five hundred Horse, and a select Party of Foot went to
meet them, and so handsomely managed his business, that he surprised one whole
Body, scarce a man escaping (...) Commissary General, five Captains, and
several other Officers being taken Prisoners.

But these things were inconsiderable disadvantages to the interest of
Portugal, in respect of what it was like to feel by the Peace which was
treating of between those two mighty Monarchs of France and Spain, which the
Queen Regent and Council were sensible of; and therefore dispatched Don John D'
Acosta Ambassador Extraordinary to the French Court, to represent unto his Most
Christian Majesty the state of the Kingdom of Portugal, and to insist that
there might be a due Consideration had of the Interest of his Master in the
concluding of the Peace with Spain, seeing he had formerly approved himself so
good an Ally to the Crown of France. But this Embassy could produce no other
effect, than a promise to endeavor a Mediation for them with the King of Spain,
and procure them good terms upon Submission, which by the magnanimous
Portugueses was rejected with indignation.

Nor were they at all daunted with the great power of the Spaniard which he
intended to employ against them, but manfully resolved to endure all hazards,
yet would they willingly have concluded a Peace with the Hollanders, and to
that purpose Don Fernando Tellez de Faro, Duke of Alvero, was sent Ambassador
to the States General, but he like a treacherous villain, revolted from them to
the King of Spain, carrying along with him the papers of his Embassy; for
which, according to his desert, his Effigies was executed at Lisbon as a
Traitors; his Goods confiscated, his house razed to the ground, and his
Children banished and degraded of nobility. His brother Don Deigo de Syl^a, who
had served the King of Portugal in the quality of General at Sea, was likewise
upon this occasion commanded to retire to one of his houses, and deprived of
all public employment.

After him was sent Don Henry de Susa Count of Miranda, to negotiate an
Accommodation with the Netherland States, yet he prevailed little, for the
pertinacious Hollanders were still resolute in their unreasonable demands,
computing their losses in Brazile (where they had no right to be) to amount to
no less then thirty millions.

The Spaniards in the mean time were forced to give the Portugals some respite
in the summer 1659. but preparations were made to assault them, with the whole
power of that Monarchy in the Spring 1660. Don John D' Austria being called out
of Flanders to be Generalissimo of the Spanish Forces, and having Orders given
him in April 1660. to march directly to Merida, on the Frontiers of Portugal,
though he went not that Summer.

But the Portugueses resolved not to be behind-hand with their Enemies, and
therefore made several in-roads into the Spanish Territories, depopulating all
before them, which made the Spaniards to be revenged, resolve to do the like to
them; Order was therefore given to fall into the Kingdom on all sides, the
Marquess of Viana Governor of Gallicia, marching in that way with eight
thousand Foot, and eight hundred Horse, and the Governor of Camara invading
that part which was adjacent to his government.

In this condition was the Kingdom of Portugal when His Majesty Charles the
Second, King of England was restored to his Crowns and Kingdoms, welcomed by
his Subjects with all gratulatory and submissive Obedience; the News of which
was no sooner by advice from D. Francisco de Melo, Ambassador for the King of
Portugal in England, conveyed to the ears of his Master, but he caused all the
Guns of the Town, Castle, and Ships in the Road, to be fired, and for three
days and nights kept solemn and magnificent Rejoycings; the Portuguese Nation
as well as by this their joy at the Restoration of King Charles the Second, as
by their sorrow and general mourning at the Death of King Charles the first,
expressing their great affection for the English Nation.

But because their joy should be somewhat for their own, as well as our sakes,
there at the same time arrived News at Lisbon, that Don Alfonso Turtudo General
of the Horse, on the Frontiers of Alentejo, meeting with a Brigade of the
Enemies Horse nigh to Badajox, had fought and defeated them, killed and took
four hundred of them, amongst whom were four Captains of Horse prisoners.

The Spaniards still continued their Leavies against Portugal, being resolved
to employ an Army of four thousand Horse and twelve thousand Foot constantly
recruited, about the Frontiers of Estramadura, and another of three thousand
Horse, and ten thousand Foot about Gallicia, and a third of twelve thousand
men, to serve as a Reserve to the two former. In this manner were they resolved
to assault them by Land, while the Prince of Montesarchio with ten Men of War,
was appointed to coast up and down before their Ports, and do them what
mischief he could by Sea.

Thus have we deduced a Compendious Chronicle of the Kingdom of Portugal, from
its first original under Alfonso the First, to the fourth year of the Reign of
the present King Alfonso the Sixth, Anno 1660. and are forced now to leave her
struggling with Spain for her liberty, which great Monarch, by the prudent
Management of Affairs by that Sage and Illustrious Queen Regent, she has
hitherto been able to resist, and will without doubt still be able to defend
her self against him, especially if the Match with England take effect, as
without doubt it will; our Nation being like to prove a better Bulwark than the
fickle French, who were seldom or never constant to their Friends, witness
their deserting Queen Elizabeth when she waged War with the Spaniards, as they
did now the Portugals.

FINIS:
A BRIEF Cosmographical Description Of all the Dominions of PORTVGAL.
THat part of the Dominions of the King of Portugal, which are upon the
Continent of Europe, contain first the kingdom of Portugal, and secondly the
kingdom of Algarve, or Regnum Algarbiorum. The kingdom of Portugal is bounded
on the North, with the Rivers Minio and Avia, which part it from Gallicia; on
the South, with the kingdom of Algarve; on the West, with the Atlantic Ocean;
and on the East, with the two Castiles and Estramadura, from which it is
deduced by a Line drawn from Ribadonia, standing on the Avia to Badayox, on the
Anas or Guadiana, it extends on the Seacoast from North to South, four
hundred miles; the breadth of it in the broadest place is one hundred miles, in
the narrowest, eighty; the whole circumference is about eight hundred seventy
nine miles; in which compass it contains fourteen hundred and sixty Parishes.

It was first called Lusitania, from the Lusitans its chief Inhabitants, and
had the name of Portugal either from the Port of Cale, now called Caia,
sometimes a rich Empory or Mart-town, or more likely from the Haven of Porto, a
town standing on the mouth of the River Dueries, where the Golls (or French)
used to land their merchandise, and so was called Portus Galliorum, and by
contraction Portugal. This Town was given in Dower to Henry Duke of Lorain,
with Teresa base Daughter to Alphonso the sixth, King of Castile, with the
Title of Earl of Portugal, whose Successors coming to be Kings, called all
those Countries they gained from the Moors, by the same name.

The Air of the Country is healthy, the Country hilly and bare of Corn, with
which it is supplied from France, and other Northern parts; yet that which they
have is as good, if not better, than any Europe affords. The soil and people
are in all parts not rich alike, for where the soil is richest, the people are
poorest, not benefited by the Trade of the too-far distant Lisbon; and where
the soil is poorest, the people are richest, helped by Traffic and
Manufactures, the chief of which are making Salt and Silk, which they export in
great abundance; and where there is want of Corn, that defect is supplied with
abundance of Honey, Wine, Oil, Alume, Fruits, Fish, Salt, white Marble, and
some Mines of Silver, etc.

The people are of a more plain, simple behavior than the rest of Spain, and
(if we may believe the Spanish Proverb) neither numerous, nor wise, but they
have found them both. They have a kind of natural Animosity, if not Antipathy
against the Castilians, for depriving them of their native Government and
Liberties, although they have now recovered both. They were always accounted
good Seafaring men, and fortunate in discovery of foreign Countries.

It abounds with Rivers of all sorts, having near two hundred great and
small. The chief are, 1. Minius, full of red Lead, and thence called Minium by
the Latins, navigable with small Vessels near a hundred miles. 2. Lethes, now
Lavada. 3. Muliadas, now Mundego. 4. Tagus. 5. Duerus. and 6. Anas. These three
last, common to all the rest of Spain; Anas or Guadiana passing by Portugal
only for seven leagues, Tagus for eighteen, and Duero for eighty: None of
these navigable for any long space, by Ships of any great burden; all the
Rivers of Spain being generally swift of course, restrained within narrow
Channels between sharp Rocks, and therefore incommodious for navigation: but
that want is supplied by three excellent Havens, 1. That of Lisbon upon Tagus.
2. Porto upon Duero to the north of Lisbon. 3. That of Setaval south of Lisbon,
situate on a Goll, twenty miles in length, and three in breadth, a place of
great importance.

The principal Cities of this Country are, 1. Lisbon, seated upon Tagus, a
City famous for Commerce, called by the Latins Olisippo, or Ulisippo, and as
some have fabulously imagined, built by Ulysses in his ten years travel. It is
in compass seven miles, and contains upwards of thirty Parishes, in which are
at least 20000 houses, neat and comely Fabrics: There are on the Walls seventy
six Turrets and Towers and twentwo Gates to the Seaside. Toward the Continent
it is situate upon five small Hills, betwixt which is a valley which runs down
to the River. On the highest Hill stands an ancient Castle, not strong, but by
reason of its vicinity to the Palace, serving now only for a Prison for great
men. The Entrance of the River is defended by the Castle of Cascais, and nearer
the City by the Fort of St. Iulians, and the Rock of Belem, muni^ioned by
twenty Pieces of Ordnance: This is the Chamber of the Kings of Portugal, the
Sea of an Archbishop, the Staple of Commodities for all the kingdom, and
thought more worth than all the Realm besides.

2. The second City of note is Santaren, seated on the Tagus, so called from
Sancta Irene, a Nun of Tomar (a Monastery wherein the old Kings of Portugal
used to be crowned) martyred he^e by the Moors: this City is called by Ptolomy
Scavaliscus, then a Roman Colony. 3. Sintr^ upon the main Atlantic, at the end
of high mountains, called Montes Lunae: hither by reason of the cool
refreshings of the Sea, and pleasure of the Woods adjoining, the Kings of
Portugal use to retire in the heat of Summer.

4. Corimbra, seated on both sides the River Mondego, a pleasant Situation
among the Vineyards, and Woods of Olives, a Bishops Sea, an University, and
sometime the Residence of the Kings. 5 On the north side of the River Duero,
betwixt that and Minio, is placed the City of Braga, once the Royal Seat of the
Swevian Kings, now the Sea of an Archbishop, con^ending for the supremacy with
Ioledo. 6. Porto, the Haven of the Galls beforementioned, standing at the
mouth of Duero, now vulgarly called Portuport. 7. Miranda, a Bishops Sea,
seated also on the Duero. 8. Bragance, the Dukes whereof now Kings of Portugal,
were accounted so great Princes, that it was thought one third part of Portugal
were their Vassals, and lived on their Lands: they are originally descended
from Alphonso natural son to John the First, who was first by his Father
created Earl of Borcellos, and after Duke of Bragance, they after came to have
right to the Crown by marriage of Katherine, Daughter to Emanuel. 9. On the
south of Tagus, and betwixt it and Algarve, is seated in the midst of a large
and spacious Plain, the City of Eubora, the Sea of an Archbishop, and an
University, the last founded by King Henry the Cardinal. 10. Is Portolegre, a
Bishops Sea. 11. Olivenza on the Guadiana. 12. Beja, called by Pliny anciently
Pax Iulia, now Mean, not very well inhabited, but anciently a Roman Colony, and
one of the three Juridicial Resorts of Lusitania.

The Kingdom of Algarve.
THe kingdom of Algarve lies South of Portugal, from which it is divided by a
Line drawn from Aschorin, on the Western Sea to Odochere, a Castle on the
Guadiana, on the East bounded by Andalusia, on the West and South by the main A
lantick; more wild and barren it is then the kingdom of Portugal, peopled with
few Towns, and those not very populous; hilly and mountanous, but by the
benefit of the Sea, yielding a great Trade of fishing, specially of Tunny, of
which there is abundance caught.

It took its name from its Western situation, for so Algarve signifies in the
Arabic; the utmost end of it was anciently called Promontorium Sacrum, now
Cape St. Vincent, because the bones of St. Vincent, religiously preserved by
the Christians, were here burnt, and scattered by the Moors, but now vulgarly
by Mariners called the Southern Cape: the Places of most importance in this
kingdom, are 1. Niebla, the seat of Abed Mefad, once King of this Country. 2.
Sylvia, an inland City, the seat of a Bishop. 3. Villa Maona, situate beyond
the Cape. 4. Tavila. 5. Faro. 6. Lagos, all Haven Towns.

This Country conquered by the Moors, with the rest of Spain, in the
distractions of their power, was for a time under the Soveraignity and command
of the Kings of Sevil, recovered from the Moors of Sevil, by the Kings of
Morocco: It became subject unto them till they left this Country, and was after
parcelled among many Kings, one of which was Aben Mefad, reigning in Niebla,
and the parts adjoining being dispossessed of his Estate by Alfonso the wise,
most of the other Towns and Princes submitted unto him, and became his Vassals:
Anno 1257. more absolutely subdued, and made subject to the Crown of Portugal
by Alfonso the third, Anno 1260. to whom the said Alfonso the renth of that
Name in Leon, and seventh in Castile, had given the same in Dowry with Beatrix
his daughter.

The Azores, or Tenera Islands,
THe Azores, or Tenera Islands, are certain Islands belonging to the Crown of
Portugal, seated in the Atlantic Ocean, directly opposite to Lisbon, and
distant from it 250 leagues, first found out and subdued by the Portugals,
under the Conduct of Prince Henry, son of John the first, situate between 38.
and 40. degrees of the Latitude, and one of them in the first Longitude, which
is commonly reckoned from these Islands, being the most Western parts of the
world, before the discovery of America.

They were called Azores, from the multitude of Gossehawk, at first found there
(Azor in the Spanish Tongue, signifying a Gossehawk) though at this time there
are few or none found; they were called also the Flemish Islands, because first
discovered by them, and in the Isle of Faial, one of the chief, there are some
families still resemble Flemings, both in complexion and habit, and not far
from their abode is a Torrent, called by the Portugals, Riberados Flemingos, or
the River of Flemings; they were also called Tercera's, from Tercera the chief
of them.

The Air here is healthful, subject to few diseases; they all abound with
flesh; fish, and other necessaries, except Salt and Oil, supplied from
Portugal, Wines they have for their own use, but not to be transported, by
reason of their weakness; of like nature is their Wheat and other Fruits, which
hold not good above a Twelve-moneth; they are subject to Earthquakes, their
chief commodities for transportation are Canary birds, Wood for Dyers,
Joyners-wo^k, and Beeves for such ships as come there to be Victualled.

The Inhabitants are generally laborious, excellent husbands of their grounds,
insomuch, that they make Vines grow out of the Rocks, much given to
Joynery-work, making pretty Knacks; in Customs they conform to the Portugals,
having some smattering of the Flemings, which Nation they seem to affect, the
Islands are nine in number, having their several names, viz.

1. Tercera, the chief of all the rest, 18 Miles in compass, well stored with
Peaches, Apples, Lemons, and Orenges; and for the Kitchen, Turnips, Cabbages,
plenty of Pot-hearbs, and the best Potato roots (the Inhabitants greatest food)
in the World: they have great quantity of the best Woad (called hence Island
Woad) used by dyers; they have Fowl for the use of man but no birds of prey;
the whole Island is begirt with sharp Rocks; the Places of most importance, are
1. Pray, on the Seaside, well walled, but not very populous. 2. Sta. Barbara.
3. St. Sebastian. 4. Glalue* and 5. Villa Nuova: All Buroughs of good note. 6.
Angra, the chief, not only of this Island, but o^ all the nine; the residence
of the Governor, and an Archbishops Sea, who has in it his Cathedral; it is
fo^tified with two Castles, the Town likewise well Walled, the only Port Town
of the Island, and made safe rather by Art then Nature.

2. St. Mary's, so called from the Saint (as St. Georges, and St. Michaels are)
unto which it is dedicated, the most Southern of the Isles, and next to Spain*
twelve Miles in circuit, inhabited only by Spaniards, and those much given to
making Earthen Ware, so naturally hemmed in with Rocks, that it needs no other
defense; the chief Town is likewise called St. Mary's, giving to, or taking
name from the Island.

3. St. Michaels, directly North from St. Mary's, and little distant, the
biggest of the pack, being 20. Miles in length, but the breadth not answerable,
much subject to Earthquakes, and fiery vapors; of most note among our mode^n
Geographers, who have removed hither the first Meridian (by which they divide
the World into East and West) from the Canaries, or Fortunate Islands, where it
was fixed in the time of Ptolomy, and other ancient writers: The chief Town
hereof, besides many Boroughs and lesser Hamlets, is called Punta del Gada,
seated upon a dangerous Sea, and without any Port, yet more frequented by
strangers then the Port of Angra, because here they may go in and out as they
please, but not so in the other.

4. Fayal, seventeen or eighteen Miles in length, provided with all things
necessary for the use of man, and well furnished with wood, for which
commodity, much frequented by the Merchants of England: The chief Town of it is
Dorta, defended with a Castle, both Town and Island, taken by Sir Walter
Rawleigh, anno 1597. in the famous action called the Island-Voyage.

5. Gratiosa, not above five or six Leagues in compass, but so well furnished
with fruits, that they send much yearly to Tercera, inhabited by Portugals
only, but so poor, that they are not able to bear the charge of a Garrison:
the chief Town is called la Plaia.

6. St. Georges, twelve Miles long, about three in breadth, Mountainous and full
of Forests, but those Forests well stored with Cedars, they use them many times
for shipping, and sometimes for fuel, the chief Town is St. Georges, as the
Island.

7. Puo, lies on the South of the Isle St. George, and took this name from a
high Hill, in the form of a Pyramide, which the Portugals generally call a
Pike, or Pico, replenished with fruits, some Cedars, and a tree called Teixo,
of great bulk, and much beauty, the wood thereof exceeding hardened within, and
much waved, so admirably beautiful, that it is allowed only to the Kings
Officers, the other subjects being interdicted the use of it (but upon special
license) by a public Edict; in bigness it is second only unto that of St.
Michael, if not equal to it, hardly so much in length, but of greater breadth:
the chief Towns of it, 1. St. Sebastians. 2. Callota de Nesquin, both upon the
Sea, and in the East parts of the Islands.

8. Flores, directly East from Fayal, so called from its abundance of Flowers
(as Gratiosa for the like flourishing verdure of it) is in compass not above
eight Miles, but plentifully furnished with Cattle, and good grounds to feed
them: the chief Town is Sta. Cruz.

9. Corvo, the least of the nine, not above half so big as Flores, from which
it is situate to the North, and but a little distant, called thus of its
abundance of Crows, both very unsafe and miserably poor, by reason of the many
Pirates which lie betwixt them, to intercept such ships as Trade to America:
These Islands were the last of the Portugal Dominions which held out for D.
Antonio, the Bastard, against Phillip the second, King of Spain; against whom
the Island of Tercera was for a while gallantly defended by Emanuel Desylva,
with the help of the French, but taken at last by the Marquis of Sta. Cruz, and
the French, after promise of life, cruelly murdered in cold blood.

The Portugals Possessions in Asia.
SO many are the Forts and Places possessed by the Portugueses in Asia, but
especially in India, that to give a description of them all, would be
impossible, it shall be sufficient to mention so few of the chiefest; and 1.
Diu a Peninsula, in the Province of Guzurate, in the kingdom of Cambaia,
looking toward Persia, but on the East side thereof near the mouth of Indus;
here the Portugals built an Impregnable Citadel, by the leave and consent of
King Bacurines, thereby to buy their aid against Mahomed the Mogul, who had
newly vanquished him: A matter of such consequence to the Crown of Portugal,
that John Bottelines confined to India for some crimes by him committed,
undertook, in hope by the merit of that service to obtain his Pardon, to carry
the first news of it in a small Vessel not above 18 foot long, and but six foot
broad (the best which for the present could be provided) which with great
courage he performed, and through that large, wide, and ^empestuous Ocean, came
in safety with his news to Lisbon, to the great joy of the King, but greater
admiration of all sorts of people; Scarce was it settled in their new
possession, when besieged by Solomon Bassa, Admiral to Solomon the Magnificent,
with a Fleet of eighty Ships and Galleys, Anno 1537. offended with the
Portugals for aiding the King of Persia, but rather for diverting the
Spice-trade from Alexandria; in which he had such ill success, that having
assaulted it in vain with his Landforces, he was fain to raise his Siege in
such haste and tumult, that he left his great Ordnance behind him.

2. Over against Diu upon the Seaside they are possessed of Damau, a beautiful
and pleasant Town* fortified with a strong Castle at the north end of it, of
white chalky stone, well planted with Ordnance, opposite whereunto on the
south side of the Town, is a goodly Church edged on the top with white, which
with the houses for the most part of the same color also, afford a pleasant
prospect to the Sailors by.

3. The next place of Consequence which they possess, and indeed the chief of
all their possessions in India, is the City of Goa in the kingdom of Decan, a
Sea-town, situate in a little, but most pleasant Island, called Tickvarinum,
fifteen miles in compass, opposite to the Mouth or Outlet of the River Mundavo,
a noted Empory, and one of the Keys which unlock the Indies, for number of
inhabitants, pleasantness of situation, and magnificent building, the chiefest
of the Country; here the Portugals have their Arsenals and Harbor for their
Indian Fleet, by which they do command these Seas, so strongly fortified, that
though beleaguered by the great Idalian with 35000 Horse, 6000 Elephants, and
250 piece of Ordnance, yet he could not force it; made in regard of the
convenient situation and strength of it, the ordinary Residence of the
Portugal Viceroy, who has here his Council, Chancellor, and other Officers,
for the Government of such parts of India as belong to that Crown. It is also
the Seat of the Archbishop or Primate of the Indian Church, planted by that
Nation, who is hence called the Archbishop of Goa.

4. To this we may add Chiaul a Sea -- town, in the hands of the Portugals
also, and by them well fortified, insomuch as a Nisamalocco assaulting it at
the same time with a very great Army was fain to leave it as he found it.

5. Solsette with a Peninsula about 20 miles in compass, possessed likewise by
the Portugals about nine miles distant from Goa, the whole Peninsula containing
30 villages and 80000 Inhabitants, this stands in the Province of Canara.

6. We may add the Citadel the Portuguese have by consent of the King, built
and fortified, nigh the great City of Connonor, with many other Fortresses and
places: amongst the rest, the City of Macoa in China deserves mention, a famous
and known Empory.

The Portugals Possessions in Africa.
THe Portugals had large Possessions in the kingdoms of Congo and Angola in
Africa, which were first discovered under the Conduct of Diego Can in the year
1486. and had fortified themselves in the kingdom of Angola, from whence and
Congo they used yearly to transport 28000 Slaves into Brazile, till by the
treachery of the Hollanders they were Anno 1641. or thereabout, dispossessed
thereof; for the Portugals having cast off the Spanish yoke, a Cessation from
Hostility with them, was proclaimed in Holland, and not long after a firm Peace
made between the two Nations. In the Articles whereof it was conditioned, That
this Peace should not begin in the East Indies till the end of a year, nor in
Brazile till the end of half a year from the making thereof; which being
observed, they gave Order to their Fleets and Forces which were abroad, to make
themselves Masters of any thing belonging to the Portugals, which they could
lay hold of; who following the Instructions, and anchoring near the Fort of
Angola, were by the Portugals received with joy into their Castle, as their
special friends; which presently they possessed themselves of, turning the poor
Portugals in a weak Barque to seek new Adventures; nor were they less kind to
them in the Island of St. Thomas, and Princes Island. The Islands of Capo Verde
are still possessed by the Portugals, so called, because situate just opposite
to Promontorium Capites Viridis, in the Land of Negroes; they are nine in
number, to wit, 1 St. Anthony. 2 St. Vincent. 3 Buena Vista. 4 St. Luci^^. 5
Insula Salis, or The Isle of Salt. 6 Del Fogo, or The Isle of Fire. 7 St.
Nicholas. 8 Maggio, o. Majo. 9 St. Iago. some have added a tenth called Brava.
Of these only three are inhabited, to wit, Majo, Del Fogo, and St. Iago; of
which the last is the chief, yet but seven miles long, rocky and mountainous,
but full of very pleasant valleys* and well peopled; the chief town of it
called Riblero, or Ribiera la grande, a Colony of Portugals, situate on a fine
river, and a beautiful H^ven, taken and sacked by Sir Francis Drake in the year
1585. and after by Sir Anthony Shirly, Anno 1596. The Portugals likewise
possess the town of Tanger, a pretty Fortification on the coast of Mauritania,
situate about the middle of the straits of Gibraltar.

Brazile.
BRazile is bounded on the East with Mare del Noort, or the Main Atlantic; on
the West with some undiscovered countries, lying betwixt it and the Audes; on
the North with Guiana, from which parted by the great river Maragnon; on the
South with Paroguay, or the province of Riodeo la Plata. The reason of the name
I find not, unless it come from the abundance of the Wood called Brazile wood,
which was found amongst them, as the famous Isle of Cyprus from its plenty of
Cypresses

It reaches from the 29th to the 39th degree of Southern latitude, or measuring
it by miles. It is said to be fifteen hundred miles from North to South, and
five hundred miles breadth from the Sea to the Audes, which must be understood,
with reference to the whole extent of it; for otherwise all that which is
possessed by the Portugals, is so short of taking up all the breadth thereof,
that they possess nothing but the Sea Coasts, and some few leagues
comparitively within the Land; the greatest part of it being conquered, that it
has not hitherto been discovered.

The Country is full of Mountains, Rivers, and Forests, diversified into
hills and plains, always pleasant and green. The Air for the most part sound
and wholesome, by reason of the fresh Winds which reign amongst them, yet in
regard of its moisture, it is held more agreeable to old men, then young. The
soil excessive fruitful, were it not cloyed with too much Rain, however it
produces Sugarcanes in such libe^al quantities, that they yearly bring out of
Brazile to Portugal, 150000 Acrobes of Sugar, every Arrobe containing twenty
five Bushels of our English measure. There is also infinite quantities of that
Red-wood used for Dying, called Brazile wood; the Trees whereof are of that
incredible greatness, that whole Families live on an Arm of them, every Tree
being as populous, as the most of our villages.

The people are endowed with a pretty natur^l understanding, yet generally
barbarous, the men and women go stark naked, and on high festival days, hang
Jewels in their lips Those festival days are when a company of good neighbors
come together to be merry over the roasted body of a fat man, which they cut in
Collops, called Boucon, and eat with greediness and delectation. They have two
vile qualities, as being mindful of injuries, and forgetful of benefits. They
cannot pronounce the letters L. F* R, the reason of which one being demanded,
made answer, because they had amongst them neither Law, Faith nor Reason.

The Country is not divided into Provinces or Counties, as in other places, but
into Prefectures, or Captain-ships, as the Portugueses call them; of which
there are 13 in all, from the Province Rio della Plata, to that of Guiana, to
wit;

1. The Captainship of St. Vincent, bordering on Rio della Plata, inhabited by
the most civil people of all Brazil; the chief Towns of which are, 1. Sancto at
the bottom of an arm of the Sea, capable of good ships of burden, but distant
from the Main three Leagues, a (...) of no more then 120. houses, yet the best
of this prefecture beautified with a Parish Church, and two Convents of Friars,
taken and held two months by Sir Thomas Cavendish Anno 1591. since that
environed with a Wall, and fortified with two Castles. 2. St. Vincents, better
built, but not so well fitted with an haven, of about 70. houses, and one
hundred inhabitants. 3. Isange. 4. Canavea, two open Buroughs, but capable of
lesser Vessels. 5. St. Paul, upon a little Mountain, at the foot whereof run
two pleasant Rivers, which fall not far off into the River Iniambis, a Town of
about a hundred houses, one Church, two Convents, and a College of Jesuits,
neighbored by Mines of gold, found in the Mountains called Pernabiacaba. 6. St.
Phillips, a small Town on the banks of Iniambis, which there begins to enlarge
it self, and passing thence, falls at last into the River Parana, one of the
greatest tributaries to Rio de la Plata.

2. Of Rio de Ianeiro, or the River of January, so called because entered into
that month by John Diaz de Solis, Anno 1515. neglected of the Portugals, it was
seized on by the French, under the conduct of Villagag^one, employed herein by
Admiral Chastillon, a great friend of the Hugon^tes, to whom it was intended as
a place of refuge (as New- England afterward for the like) but within three
years after their first coming thither (Anno 1558) regained by the Portugals,
and the French p^t to the sword. The Places of most consideration in it, are 1.
Colignia, the Fo^t and Colony of the French, so named, in honor of Gasper
Colligni (commonly called Chastillon) by whose encouragement it was founded,
situate on the Bay of the River Ia^iero, which the French called Ganabara. 2.
Sr. Sebastians, built at the mouth of the same Bay by the Portugals, after they
had expelled the French, and fortified with four strong Bulwarks. 3. Angra des
Reyes, distant twelve Leagues Westward from the mouth of the Bay, not long
since made a Portugal Colonie; beside these, there are two great Buroughs of
the natural Brazilians, in which are said to be two thousand Inhabitants.

3. Of the Holy Ghost (del Spiritu Sancto) one of the most fertile Provinces of
all Brazil, well stored with Cotton, Wool, and watered with the River Parayba,
large and full of fish; the only Town of note in it, is Spiritu Sancto,
inhabited by about 200 Portugals, the chief building of it a Church, dedicated
to St. Francis, a Monastery of Benedictines, a College of Jesuits, the chief
convenience a safe and commodious Haven, capable of the greatest Vessels.

4. Of Porto Seguro, the secure Haven, so called by Capralis, who first
discovered it, when being tossed at sea by a terrible tempest, he had here
refreshed himself: the chief Towns hereof, 1. Porto Seguro, built on the top of
a white Cliff which commands the Haven, of more Antiquity then fame, of more
fame then bigness, as not containing fully two hundred families. 2. Santa Cruz,
three Leagues from the other, a poor Town, with as poor an harbor: the
Patrimony and inheritance of the Dukes of Avero, in the Realm of Portugal. 3.
Santo Amaro. or St. Omers, once of great note for making Sugars, for which use
here were five Ingenios, or Sugar Engines, deserted by the Portugals for fear
of the Savages, against whom they had not power enough to make good the place,
and the Sugars destroyed of purpose, that they might not come into the hands of
the barbarous people.

5. Of Des Iieos, or the Isles so named from certain Islands lying against the
Bay, on which the principle Town is sea^ed, called also Ilheos, or the Isle,
the Town consisting of about 150 or 200 families, neighbored by a great lake of
12 leagues in compass, out of which that River does arise, full of great, but
wholesome fish, which they call Monatos, some of which are affirmed to weigh
twenty eight pounds: This Colony much endangered by the Guaymuri, a race of
savages, more savage then any of their fellows, who being driven out of their
own Country, fell into this prefecture, and had utterly destroyed it, if some
of St. Georges Relics (as the Jesuits say) sent by their General from Rome,
Anno 1581. had not stayed their fury, and given the Portugals the better.

6. Of Todos los Sanctos, or all Saints, so called from a large Bay of that
name, upon which it has in breadth two leagues and an half, eighteen fathom
deep, and full of many little Islands, but flourishing and pleasant, and well
stored with Cotton wool: The chief Towns hereof are, 1. San Salvador, built on
a little hill on the North side of the Bay by Thomas de Souza, adorned with
many Churches, and fortified, besides the Wall, with three strong Castles, the
one called St. Anthony, the other St. Phillip, and the third Tapesippe. 2.
Paripe more within the land, four leagues from S. Saviors. 3. Seregippe del
Rey, a small Town, and seated on as small a River, but amongst many rich
Pastures, and some veins of silver.

7. Of Pernambucco, one of the richest Prefectures for Tobacco, Sugar, and the
great quantity of Brazile wood, which is brought hence yearly for the dyers in
all this Country, but destitute of Corn, and most other necessaries, with which
it is supplied from Portugal; chief Towns hereof, 1. Olinda, the largest and
best peopled of all Brazile, containing above two thousand persons, not
reckoning Churchmen, nor taking the great number of slaves, which they keep
for their Sugar-works in this account; there are in it eight Parochial
Churches, five Religious houses, and some Hospitals situate near the Sea, but
on so uneven a piece of ground, as makes it not capable of a regular
Fortification, the Haven being little, and not very commodio^s, but defended at
the entrance by a well built Castle, and that well planted with brass pieces.
2. Amatta di Brazile, ten miles from Olinda, the Inhabitants whereof live by
selling Brazile wood. 3. San Lorenzo, a well frequented Village, but as yet
unwalled. 4. Pomair, upon a River so named. 5. Antonio de Cabo, near the Cape
of St. Anthony, both of good note for the great quantity of Sugars, which are
made in each. 6. Garasu, about 5 miles from Olinda, inhabited for the most part
by poor and mechanical people.

8. Of Tamaraca, ^o called from an I^l^nd of that name, distance about 5 miles
from Olinda, of no great note, but for the Haven, and an impregnable Castle on
the top of the hill for defense thereof: This is the least p^efecture in
Brazile, but with all the ancientest, extends three leagues only in length,
and but two in breadth.

9. Of Paraiba, so called from a River of that name, on whose bancks stands
Paraiba the chief Town, inhabited by about 500. Portugals, beside slaves and
Negroes, not walled, but secured by a strong Castle, on the promontory called
Capo Delo, which the Hollanders often in vain attempted.

10. Of Riogrande, so called likewise of a River, but lately made a Prefecture
to exclude first the French, and after the Savages from possessing it, it now
enjoys an impregnable Castle.

11. Of Siarra, so called from the Haven of Siarra adjoining, of no great note,
being also but lately made a Prefecture, the Portugueses enjoying no more here
but a Castle, and about a dozen houses.

12. Of Maragnon, an Island lying in the mouth of the River so called, a
prefecture not yielding to any in Brazil, if it were well manured, the so^l
being very fruitful, and well inhabited both by Natives and Portugueses.

13. Of Para, the most Northern Prefecture of Brazile, toward Guiana, so
called from the River of Para, supposed a branch of the River of Amazons, which
runs through it, the River at the mouth of it two miles in breadth, and in
the middle of the channel fifteen fathoms deep; on the banks thereof, but on an
higher ground then the rest the Portugals have built the Castle of Para, in
form Quadrangular, and well walled, except toward the River; the Coun^ry
thereabouts inhabited by three hundred Por^ugueses, besides the Garrison.

Thus much for the particular Governments of this Country, for it self in
general it has suffered the same fortune with Countries of more ancient
discovery, viz. to have many Masters, the Spanish, Dutch and Portuguez, all
claiming right to it, but the last however worried by the other two, has
hitherto kept the surest foot in it, and is still like to do so. Thus much for
a Cosmographical Description of the Portugal Dominions.

FINIS.
Books Printed and sold by H. Marsh, at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet street.
Folio.
THe Sovereign's Prerogative, and the Subjects Privilege, comprised in several
Speeches, Cases, and Arguments of Law, discussed between the Kings most Sacred
Majesty, and the most eminent Persons of both Houses of Parliament: Collected
by T. Fuller, B. D.

Leonards Reports --

A Complete History of the Wars of the Greeks; written by the learning
Polibius, and Translated by Ed. Grimston, Esquire. Sergeant at Arms to his late
Majesty.

The true Portraiture of Dona Catherina, Sister to Alfonso present King of
Portugal, as it was presented to Don Francisco de Mello, Ambassador of Portugal
in London.

Poems of Mr. I. Crouch Gent.

Quarto.
The History of Independency complete, being the 1. 2. 3. 4 and last part;
which may be had single by such as have bough the others.

A Comical History of these late Times: by Montelion.

Richard Hanam's Exploits.

The Fai^hful Lapidary, being a History of all precious Stones, very useful for
Gentlemen, Merchants and others

Blood washed away by the Tears of Repentance, or the Relation of Butler's
murdering of Knight in Milk-street.

Rumps Looking-Glass, or a Collection of such pieces of Drollery, as was
prepared by several Wits to purge the Rump.

A New discovery of the Highway Thieves; by a Gentleman lately Converted.

A short View of the Life and Actions of the Ilustrious James Duke of York,
together with his Character.

In large Octavo.
Blood for blood, or Murders Revenged, lively set forth in 35 Tragical
Histories, some whereof have been the product of our late Times, published by
T. N. Esquire.

Rebels no Saints.

The English Lovers: a Romance written originally in the English tongue, by
John Dauncey in 8.

A Compendious Chronicle of the Kingdom of Portugal, from Alfonsus the first
King, to Alfonsus the sixth now reigning, with a Cosmographycal description of
that Country, by John Dauncey in 8.

Venus undrest: or the Practical part of Love, extracted out of the Extravagant
and Lascivious Life of a fair, but subtle Female.

Letters of Monsieur de Bulza^, 1. 2. 3. and 4. parts, translated out of French
into English by sir Richard Baker Knight, and others.

Twelve Treatises of Mr. I. Howel Esquire.

Royal History completed in the life of his Sacred Majesty Charles the 2d*
James Duke of York, and Henry D. of Gloucester, with their Restoration, happily
concluded by his Excellency the Lord Monck, now D. of Albemarle.

That useful Book for Gentlemen and Travelers, being an exact Description of
the several Counties and Shires in England: by Ed. Leigh, Esquire

The Rogue, or the life of Gusman De Alfarach, the Witty Spaniard, the Fifth
and Last Edition.

Fuller's Treple Reconciler.

Small Octavo.
The Fanatic in his Colors: or the rise, height, and fall of Faction and
Rebellion from 1648. unto 1661. with an Apendix concerning Allegiance,
Government, and Order, by T. F.

The Ra^i^yes of Turkey, gathered by one that was sold seven times a slave in
the Turkish Empire, and now made public for the benefit of his Country.

Summum Bonum: or, A Plain Pathway to Happiness, conducting the Soul to its
Haven of Rest, through the Stormy passages of worldly troubles; to which is
added a short Dialogue of that excellent virtue of the Submission of Man's will
to the will of God.

The Rudiments of Grammar, the rules composed in English verse, for the greater
Benefit and Delight of young beginners, by James Sherley Gent.

A short view of the Life of the Illustrious Prince Hen. D. of Gloucester, and
Mary Princess of Orange, Brother and Sister to His Majesty of great Britain,
lately Deceased, by T. M. Esquire.

Modern Policy completed: or the public Actions and Councels, civil and
military of his excellency the Lord General Monck, under all Revolutions since
1640. to 1660. with the principles moral and political, upon which ^hey were
grounded; Illustrated out of the best masters of policy, ancient and modern.

The complete Attorney, the fifth and last Edition.

The History of the Affairs of Scotland, under the conduct of the illustrious
and truly valiant James Marquess of Montrose.

Advice to Baalam's Ass, or Momus Catechized in answer to a certain scribler
called J. Heydon Author of Advice to a Daughter.

The Royal Buckler; or Salmasius in English.

The Devils Cabinet-councel discovered, or the plots and contrivances of O.
Cromwell and the Long Parliament, in Order to the taking away the Life of his
Sacred Majesty of blessed memory.

The crafty Whores; or the mystery and iniquity of Bawdy-Houses, with
Dehortations from Lust: published for the good of Young men, by R. H. Esquire.

The Rump, or a Collection of such Songs and Ballad^ as were made upon them who
would be a Parliament, and were but the Rump of an House of Commons, five times
Dissolved; Collected by I. B. Esquire.

Cleavland's Poems. --

Montelion's Comical Almanacks for 1660, and 1661.

The Baptized Turk; or the Conversion of a Native Turk to the Christian
Religion: by Dr. Warmestrey, Dr. Gunning, etc.

Dr. Griffith's Sermon.

Ascent to bliss, by 3 steps, Philosophy, History, Theology, discovering man's
true Felicity, whereunto is added that excellent Dialogue of D. Thaulerus with
a Poor Beggar.

Shimeies Curses on King David lighting on himself; or a Parallel between the
Sufferings of King David, and his late Majesty.

Quarles last Poems.

An exact History of the Life and Actions of Hugh Peter's, as also his Diary now
in the Press.

Montelion's Introduction to Astrology; a thing long expected, in the Press now
printing.

Large Twelves.
News from the Pulpit, for the present age and Posterity, by I. Jones D. D.

Overbury revived: or a Satirical description of the vices of our present
Times, in Essays and Characters.

Natures chief Rarities: or the secret Mysteries of Man's Procreation revealed
and made known, together with the exact rules of Physiognomy, on every part of
man's body from head to foot, by Michael Scotus, Translated by R. C.

Fathers Blessing, or a Legacy to his Son, fitting him to carry himself through
the various incounters of this world.

Whites Peripatetical Institutions in the way of Sir Kenelm Digby.

Hook's Fatal Doom to the Reprobate, or an excellent Comment on the 1 of Cor.
16. 22. Modern Policy.

Small Twelves.
Reynold's Word of Caution, to the Atheists and Errorrists of our Times.

The Christian Diary; containing the whole Duty of man; by N. Causin.

A Physical Discourse of the Cure of Diseases by Signature; by R. Bunworth.

Man in Paradise, a Philosophical Discourse.

A New Discovery of the French disease and running of the Reins, their causes,
signs, with plain and easy Directions for perfect curing the same; by R.
Bunworth, Doctor of Physic, now in the Press, the 2d Edition.

In Twenty fours.
Lucius Florus.

Salust. --

Lessius Of Health, with Cornaroes Treatise of Temperance.

Dr. Warmestry on the Sacrament.

Plays.
A Cure for a Cuckold; a Comedy, written by John Webster and William Rowley in
4.

The Thracian Wonder; a Comical History, written by John Webster and William
Rowley in 4.

Gammer Gurtons Needle, a Comedy, written by Mr* S. Master of Art in 4.

The two merry Milk-maids; a Comedy written by I. C. in 4.

Tom Tyler and his wife; a Comedy in 4.

The Presbyterian Lash; or Noctroft's maid whipped, a Tragi-comedy, in 4.

The merry conceited humors of Botom the Weaver, in 4.

Hells higher Court of Justice; or the Trial of the three Politic Ghosts of
Oliver Cromwell, the King of Sweeden, and Cardinal Mazarine in 4.

A merry dialogue between Band, Cuffe, and Ruff, done by an excellent wit, in
4.

Troaydes. a Tragedy, Translated out of Seneca, by Sam. Pordage. Gent. 4.


