December, 12. 1667.
IT is Ordered by the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, That none shall
Re-print, or Import this Book, Entitled, Clavis Cantici, for the space of
nintine Years, without License of the Printers hereof.

P. W.

Clavis Cantici: OR, AN EXPOSITION OF THE SONG of SOLOMON.

BY JAMES DVRHAM, Late Minister of the Gospel in Glasgow.

Col. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. Ephesians. 5. 2. And walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us -- 1 Cor. 13. 13 And now abides faith, hope, love,
these three, but the greatest of these is love. EDINBVRGH, Printed by George
Swintoun and James Glen, and are to be sold at their Shops in the
Parliament-Yard, Anno DOM. 1668.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
GOD being the immortal souls chief good, it must needs follow, that what
unites the soul unto God, must be the souls chief Ornament and Grace: And such
is Love, that Principium uniens, or principle uniting the soul unto God: Whence
it is, that even in good, spiritual and elevated reason, the Apostle prefers
Love among the souls three cardinal virtues, 1 Cor* 13. 13. And now abides
faith, hope and love, and the greatest of these is Love. Indeed Faith, going
out from the sinner to rest upon Jesus Christ the Justifier of the ungodly, And
there is no sinner nor unclean thing in Heaven; and Hope, looking unto, and
after, a Country that we are not yet possessors of; and Love, yea, love alone
filling Heaven unto all eternity, it is certain that Love is the souls most
adorning Ornament, its most Heavenly frame.

Now of all Books in Holy Scripture, it has pleased the Holy Ghost to entitle
the Song of Solomon, or His Book of Loves, thus, (...), the Song of Songs: All
Songs, all Loves, all outgoings of the soul being invaluable to this
Souls-Song, and Love, uniting Christ and the soul.

This Posthume work then, of the precious Author Mr. Durham, is commendable to
the Churches (if there be need of ^^y additional commendation beyond the naming
of his Name to it) upon more accounts than one: First, It Is done upon the
highest, sweetest, deepest subject Love, between the soul and it is chiefest
good, even God in Christ. Secondly, It Is done spiritually, yet plainly upon a
most spiritual, yet Mysterious portion of Holy Scripture. And, Thirdly, the
Churches of Christ are oblidged to God in this, That they have had from this
bright Candle amongst the Lord's Candlesticks, a light shining upon, and
discovering those two Mysterious Books of Scripture, Canticles and Revelation.
Fourthly, If a word fitly spoken is as Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver,
Prove. 25. 11. Sure then, it was highly commending of Gods goodness to the
Author, That he was led on this work of Preaching, Lecturing, and Writing on
this Song of Loves, Those sweet concords and begun Music of Heaven between
Christ and souls, and that in time of sad discords and very Immusical Jarrings
in the Church; An argument of an excellent Soul-frame in a very evil time: A
demonstration whereof, and of his healing disposition, O, how apparent is it in
that rare piece of his, upon Scandal!

I shall not trouble thee any further, save that I cordially wish the Lord may
be pleased so to bless thy perusal of this present Treatise, as it may tend
not only to the present, but also to the everlasting welbeing of thy soul. And
so I bid thee farewell.

Clavis Cantici: OR, A KEY of the SONG, Useful for opening up thereof.
THis is a place of Scripture, the Exposition whereof, many in all Ages have
sh^^ned to adventure upon; and truly I have looked upon it of a long time, as
not convenient to be treated upon before all Auditories, nor easy by many to
be understood; especially because of the height of spiritual expressions, and
mysterious rapts of Divine Love, and the sublime and excellent expressions of
the Bridegroom therein contained, which would require much liveliness of
frame, and acquaintance in experience with the things here spoken of, and
nearness in walking with God, as being necessary for finding out the mind and
meaning o^ the Spirit of God therein: Yet we are now brought by help of his
Grace, to essay the Interpretation of it, upon these following considerations,

First, Because it is acknowledged by all, not only to be authentic Scripture,
but an excellent Piece thereof; and therefore is to be made use of by the
Church, and not to ly hid, nor to be laid aside, as if the meaning thereof were
not to be searched into, because it seems dark and obscure.

2. Because the Subject and Matter of it is so Divine, carrying along with it
many various cases, both of particular Souls, as also, of the Church, both
visible and invisible, with many excellent commendations of Christ the
Bridegroom, which ought to be the Subject of his Friends Meditations, and
cannot but be profitable, if he bless them; there being here Maps, almost for
all conditions.

3. Because the style and composition is so Divine and excellent, carrying
affections along with it, and captivating them in the very reading; so that
few can read this Song, but they must fall in love with it, we would therefore
see what is within it, if at least we may get a taste of that which does so
sweetly relish.

4. It seems the Holy Ghost, by putting it into such a mould, intended to
commend it: and if it be true that all the Poetical pieces of Scripture, ought
especially to be learned and taken notice of; so should this, it being so
commended to us in that frame.

5. The strain and subject of it is so very spiritual, that it necessitats the
Students thereof, to aim at some nearness with God; and ordinarily it leaves
some stamp upon their affections, which is not the least cause, nor the
smallest encouragement to me in this undertaking.

We shall not stand to prove the authority of it: It carries a Divine style in
its bosom; nor is there need to inquire who was the Penman of it, it being
clear that Solomon, who was furnished with wisdom and understanding, as never a
King before or since was, is honored to be the Amanuensis of the Holy Ghost,
in putting this Song upon record. Whether after, or before his backsliding, it
is not much to us; though it be most probable that it was after, in the
warmness of a spirit sensible of this so great a deliverance: For here we may,
as it were, see him making use of that experience of the vanity of all things
he had found, coming to the fear of God as the conclusion of the whole matter;
whereof this Song of Love is not a little evidence, and which looks like his
own saying, Eccles. 12. 13.

The means which are necessary for our more perspicuous handling, and your more
profitable hearing, of this profound Scripture will be,

First, Some acquaintance with the whole Word of God, but mainly the Book of
the Psalms, and other Songs recorded in the Word; as also, with the Gospel, and
such places as have most likeness to it.

2. Acquaintance with the cases of others, either by reading or mutual
fellowship; but most of all it is requisite, that one have some experimental
knowledge of the way of God toward his own heart: He who is so wise as to
observe these things, even he shall understand this loving kindness of the
Lord: Such kind of experience is one of the best Commentaries upon this Text.

3. Watchfulness over our selves, keeping our heart with all keeping, and
studying a tender frame of spirit, that we may have a Conscience always void
of offense toward God: Loosnesse all the Week will not be a frame for the
Canticles. It is not the simple being of Grace, but the lively operation and
exercise thereof, which prompts and disposes either to speak to purpose, or to
hear of this with profit; He would grow in Grace who would grow in Knowledge
here: Neither have others ground to expect that this secret of the Lord shall
be with them, or that they shall be of a quick understanding, who fear him not:
One may have Grace, and not a lively frame for this, except Grace be acting,
and in exercise.

4. Much conversing with the Bridegroom, especially by Prayer, that he who
causes the dull to understand Doctrine, may manifest himself, and open our eyes
to behold these wondrous things, and that he may bless us in the knowledge of
his will in this we undertake, which so especially concerns Him and us; for,
this Scripture may be dark to these who speaks on it, if this be not, and a
sealed Book to you who hear it, if these things be wanting: Whereas, if these
be in us and abound, we shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge
of this piece of Sacred Scripture.

Now, that we may have the more clear access to speak profitably of the matter
of this Song, and that our way of opening and applying of it (which may
possibly in some things be different from others) may be the better cleared, We
shall, 1. premit some Propositions concerning it. 2. Draw some Conclusions from
these; both which we shall endeavor shortly to clear and confirm, as useful to
be taken along in our proceeding.

The first Proposition then is this, This Song is a piece of Divine Scripture,
and a most excellent part thereof (which we shall speak to more fully on the
Title) and so of equal authority with other Scriptures (wherein holy Men spoke,
as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost) and tends to the edifying of the
Church, and making of the man of God perfect, even as they do. For,

First, This Song has ever been received into the Canon, and accounted (as
they speak) for Canonick, as the rest of the Scriptures were. It was never
questioned by the Jews (as Mercer. praefat. ad Cant. clears) but was still
received by them, and transmitted to the Gentile Churches, who received the
Scriptures of the Old Testament from them, who had the Oracles of God in
keeping: And that the same has been universally received by Christians, may
appear by the Records of the Councils, and Writings of the Fathers, where the
Catalogue of the Books of the Holy Scripture is set down.

2. It carries the Authority of the Holy Ghost engraven upon it, as evidently
as any piece of Scripture, not only as to its Matter, manner of Expression,
Divine Style; but mostly in that Divine power and efficacy it has on hearts
and spirits (especially of the more discerning, who best know Christ's voice, as
his Sheep) whereby it relishes so sweetly, and elevats them to such an holy
ravishment, that it obtains the testimony from all, that there is something
Divine in it, and more then can be in Humane Writings, even though they cannot
particularly tell the meaning of it; That holding true here, which one said of
a Book which was something obscure, That which I understand (said he) is
excellent: therefore I judge, that which I understand not to be so also, though
it exceed my reach. And that its Christ who speaks, and that it is the
Language of the Holy Ghost, and can be applied to no other, is by a Divine
conviction extorted from the Reader, and Hearer of it; so that confessedly and
deservedly, it bears this Title, A Song of Songs.

This Song must either be attributed to the Spirit, as the chief Author of it
(though Solomon was the Penman) or we must say, it was not only Penned, but
Indyted merely by some Man, ( Solomon, or whoever he be) led by his own spirit,
or some other spirit, without the Spirit of God: But none of these last can be
said. What other spirit can so speak of Christ and the Church? What other Song
(even of the most holy Men) can be compared to this? Was it ever equalled? Or
can it be equalled? And if it cannot be the fruit of the spirit of a mere man
(though in the most holy frame) then it must be inspired by the Spirit, in
wonderful wisdom, and a most Divine style, compacting the mysteries of
Communion with God in Christ, in this short Song: Wherefore we say, it is
justly called A Song of Songs, whereby it is preferred not only to all Humane
Songs, but even to other Scriptural Songs, which were blasphemous to do, were
it not of a Divine rise and authority.

There are two Objections, which sometimes have been started by some; but they
will not be of weight to infringe this truth. The first is, that there is no
Passage of this Song cited in the New Testament: But citation of Scriptures in
the New Testament does not give authority to them. They are cited as having
authority, and not to get it; And therefore there are many Scriptures in the
Old Testament, which were never cited in the New: Although it may be said,
there are many near resemblances (at least) in the New Testament, to diverse
Passages in this Song; as the often styling the Church a Vineyard, Matthew. 20.
and comparing the Churches union with Christ to Marriage, Matthew. 22. etc. That
Christ stands at the door and knocks, Rev. 3. 20. taken as it were from
Song 5. 2. The Virgins falling on sleep, Matthew. 25. The efficacy of grace,
called drawing, John 6. 44. taken from Chap. 1. 4. etc. Christ in the Parables
called a King, or the King (which by way of eminency is applied to him, Psalm.
45. 1, 2.) Neither is the second objection of greater weight, to wit, that no
proper Name of God is to be sound in this Song: For, 1. Its so also in other
Scriptures, as in the Book of Esther; The Scriptures authority does not depend
on naming the Name of God, but on having his warrant and authority. 2. This
Song being Allegorical and Figurative, its not so meet nor consistent with its
style, to have God named under proper names, as in other Scriptures: Yet, 3.
There are titles and descriptions here given to an excellent Person, which can
agree to none other, but Christ, the eternal Son of God; as the King, O thou
whom my soul loves, the chief of ten thousand, the Rose of Sharon, and the
like, whereby his eminency is singularly set out above all others in the World.

In sum, there are none of the Characters, usually condescended on as necessary
for evidencing the Authority of holy Scripture, wanting here; this Song being a
Divine Subject, received into the Canon, bearing a Divine stamp, having much
Majesty in it is style, agreeing with it self and other Scriptures fully;
impartially speaking out the blots and adversities of the Bride, as well as her
beauty and prosperity, and written by a Prophet and Penman of holy Writ, to
wit, Solomon.

The 2. Proposition is, That this Song is not to be taken properly, (and (...))
or literally, that is, as the words do at first sound; but it is to be taken
and understood spiritually, figuratively and allegorically, as having some
spiritual meaning contained under these figurative expressions, made use of
throughout this Song: My meaning is, that when it speaks of a Marriage,
Spouse, Sister, Beloved, Daughters of Jerusalem, etc. these expressions are not
to be understood properly of such, but as holding forth something of a
spiritual nature under these.

I grant it has a literal meaning, but I say, that literal meaning is not
immediate, and that which first looks out, as in Historical Scriptures, or
others which are not figurative, but that which is spiritually and especially
meant by these Allegorick and Figurative speeches, is the Literal meaning of
this Song: So that it is Literal sense is mediat, representing the meaning, not
immediately from the Words, but mediatly from the Scope, that is, the intention
of the Spirit, which is couched under the Figures and Allegories, here made use
of: For, a Literal sense (as it is defined by Rivet out of the Schoolmen) is
that which flows from such a place of Scripture as intended by the Spirit in
the words, whether properly or figuratively used, and is to be gathered from
the whole complex expression together, applied thereunto, as in the Exposition
of Parables, Allegories and Figurative Scriptures is clear; And it were as
improper and absurd to deny a Figurative Sense (though Literal) to these, as it
were to fix Figurative Expositions upon plain Scriptures, which are properly to
be taken.

For there is a twofold Literal sense of Scripture. 1. Proper and immediate, as
where its said, Solomon married Pharaohs Daughter. The second is figurative and
mediate, as when it is said, Matthew. 22. 2. A certain King made a Marriage to
his Son, etc. both have a literal meaning. The first immediate, fulfilled in
Solomon: The second is mediat, setting out God's calling Jews and Gentiles,
unto fellowship with his Son: and so that Parable is to be understood in a
spiritual sense. Now we say, this Song (if we would take up it is true sense and
meaning) is not to be understood the first way, properly and immediately, but
the second way, figuratively and mediatly, as holding forth some spiritual
thing under borrowed expressions, which will further appear from these things,

First, There can be no edification in setting out Humane Love (amongst parties
properly understood) so largely and lively; and yet edification must be the end
of this Song, being a part of Scripture; it must have therefore an higher
meaning then the words at first will seem to bear.

2. There can be no parties mentioned, beside Christ and his Bride, to whom
this Song can agree; nor can any proper meaning thereof be assigned, which can
make it applicable to these parties: and therefore it cannot be understood
properly, but figuratively, and that not of any other, but of Christ and
Believers: To Solomon it cannot agree in its application, nor to his Queen,
yea, to no man, if it be taken in a proper sense: For, 1. These commendations
given to the Bridegroom, Chap. 5. to the Bride, Chap. 4. 6, 7. If properly
understood, would be monstrous, blasphemous, and ridiculous; such as to have
teeth like a flock of sheep, an head like Carmel, etc. and so in many other
things. 2. Some things are attributed to this Solomon, who is the subject of
this Song, that were not within Solomon's reach, as that, his presence at the
Table, ( Chap. 1. 12.) makes her Spicknard to smell, which influence cannot
proceed from one man more then another, and Chap. 3. v. 11. where it is said,
He made a Chariot, and paved it with Love, which is no material thing, and so
could be no Pavement in Solomon's Chariot. 3. That Solomon being the Penman of
this Song, yet speaks of Solomon in the second Person, Thou, O Solomon, Chap.
8. 12. makes it appear that some other was designed then himself; and many such
like expressions that fill up the matter of this Song, (such as Spices,
Gardens, etc.) cannot be understood properly of these very things themselves,
but of some other thing veiled under them: And so also, when she is called
terrible as an army with Banners, it cannot be understood of Solomon's Queen,
and applying it to the Church, we cannot understand it of any carnal terror,
which the external aspect of the Church does beget in beholders.

3. The style and expressions will bear out more then any Humane Love, or any
Humane Object, upon which men set their love: We are sure, no such love would
be proponed to Believers as a warranted pattern for their imitation, as if it
would be commendable in them to be so much ravished and taken up, even with the
most lovely creature.

4. Many things here are inconsistent with Humane Love, and that modesty that
is required in it (as the Hebrews themselves, apud Mercer. observe) as to
propone him to others, to excite them to Love him, others undertaking to follow
after him, her speaking to him in her sleep, Chap. 5. 2. running in the night
through the Streets, and slighting him at the Door; which by no means can admit
a proper, literal, immediate sense, but must needs aim at something figurative.
Beside, what reason can there be to plead a proper sense here, more then in
other figurative Scriptures of the same sort, as of these that speak of the
Souls union with Christ, under the similitude of a Marriage, and particularly
that of Psalm. 45. which is (as it were) a compend of this Song, and is looked
upon by all as figurative?

If it be enquired in what sense we call this Song figurative, whether as
Typical or Allegorical? The answering and clearing of this Question will
further us in the Interpretation of this excellent Scripture. We shall
therefore show, 1. How Allegorical properly so called, differs from Typical.
And 2. Why we call this Song Allegorical, and not Typical.

Allegorical Scriptures, or Allegories (we take Allegory here as Divines do,
who take it not as Grammarians or Rhetoricians, for a continued discourse of
many figures together) properly and strictly taken (for sometimes Allegory may
be taken largely, and so may comprehend whatever is figurative, whether
Typical, Tropological, Analogical, etc. As the Apostle takes it, Gal. 4.
speaking of Abraham's two Sons, which is yet properly a Type) differs from
Types, or Typical Scriptures, thus,

First, Types suppose still the verity of some History, as Jonas casting in the
Sea, and being in the Fishes belly three days and three nights, when it is
applied to Christ in the New Testament, it supposes such a thing once to have
been: Allegories again, have no such necessary supposition, but are as Parables
proponed for some mystical end. Thus, while it^ said, Mat. 22. 2. A certain
King made a Marriage, planted a Vineyard, etc. That place supposes it not
necessary as to the being of the Allegory, that ever such a thing was, it may
be an Allegory without that; but a Type cannot be without reality in the thing
or fact, which is made a Type.

2. Types look only to matters of Fact; and compare one Fact with another (as
Christ's lying in the Grave for such a time, to that of Jonas, who did ly so
long in the Whale's belly) but Allegories take in Words, Sentences, Doctrines
both of Faith and manners, as in the former Examples is clear.

3. Types compare Persons, and Facts under the Old Testament, with Persons, and
Facts under the New, and is made up of something that is present, prefiguring
another to come: Allegories look especially to matters in hand, and intend the
putting of some hid spiritual sense upon words, which at first they seem not to
bear; whether the Allegory be only in the Old Testament, or only in the New,
or in both, it looks to the sense, and meaning, being so considered in it is
self, as the words may best serve the scope, and teach or manifest the thing
the Spirit intends, without any comparison betwixt this, and that of the Old
Testament and New: Yea, an Allegory may be in precepts, as Muzle not the mouth
of the Ox, and cut off the right hand, etc. which have an Allegorick sense in
them.

4. Types are only Historical as such, and the truth of Fact agreeing in the
Antitype, make them up, it being clear in Scripture that such things are
Types; for we must not forge Types without Scripture-warrant: But Allegories
are principally Doctrinal, and in their scope intend not to clear, or compare
Facts, but to hold forth and explain Doctrines, or by such similitudes to make
them the better understood, and to move, and affect the more, or the more
forcibly to convince, as Nathan made use of a Parable, when he was about to
convince David, 2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, etc.

5. Types in the Old Testament respect only some things, persons and events; as
Christ, the Gospel, and it is Spreading, etc. and cannot be extended beyond
these: But Allegories take in every thing, that belong either to Doctrine, or
Instruction in Faith, or to practice for ordering ones life.

Hence we may see, that Allegories are much more extensive, and comprehensive
in their meaning and application, then Types (which cannot be extended further
then some one thing) and so are much more Doctrinal, and concern both the faith
and manners of Gods People much more, and may for that, more warrantably be
applied, and made use of for these ends.

2. We say, that this Song is not Typical, as being made up of two Histories,
to wit, Solomon's Marriage, and Christ's, nor does it any way intend the
comparing of these two together in the events, as to their facts or deeds: But
it is Allegorick, not respecting Solomon, or his Marriage, but aiming to set
out spiritual Mysteries in figurative expressions, in such a manner as may most
effectuat that end, for inlightning the judgment, and moving of the
affections, without any respect to that Story, or Fact of Solomon's: For,

First, The strain and series of it, is clearly Allegorick, as the reading and
considering of it will clear. 2. There can be no History to which it can
relate, unto which the things spoken in this Song can be properly applied, as
is said. 3. Solomon's Marriage was at least twenty years before this Song was
written; See on Song 7. concerning the Tower of Lebanon, and compare it with 1
King. 7. 1, 2. and Chap. 6. ult. Therefore it cannot be thought so much as to
be Penned on that occasion, as an Epithalamium which was to be sung that night
on which he was Married, (and although occasion of penning of it, were taken
from that, yet would it not prove it Typical, and to respect that as it is
Type.) And 4. What more is this Allegory of a Marriage, to be accounted
Typical, then other places of Scripture, where this same manner of expression
is used? 5. If it be partly Typical, how is this Type to be made up? for
Christ's love unto, and Marriage with, his Church, is not only set out here as
peculiar to the New Testament, but is applicable to Believers under the Old:
There can therefore be here no comparing of Facts of the Old Testament, with
any thing answering to them in the New. If it be said, Solomon's Marriage
Typified Christ's Marrying of the Gentiles. I answer, beside that there is no
Scripture for this conjecture (and it is hard to coin Types without Scripture
authority, otherwise we might make Solomon a Type in his many Wives, possibly,
and in many other such things; also that of his marrying Pharaoh's Daughter was
against a Law as well as this) it cannot be said that this Song sets out
only Christ's love to the Gentiles; or the believing Gentiles, their carriage
and love to him: for, was it not fulfilled (in that which they would make it is
Antitype) before Christ came in the flesh, in the believing Jews? yea, before
ever that Marriage was: and therefore, there can be no typical respect had to
that Marriage here. Beside, it would much darken the Spiritualnesse and
Divinnesse of this Song, to make it in such a way typical, as having any proper
fulfilling or meaning, that were possibly verified in the deed of any man. We
conclude then, that this Song is simply Allegorick.

We come now to a third Proposition, which is this: The Divine Mystery
intended, and set forth here, is the mutual Love, and spiritual Union, and
Communion that is betwixt Christ and his Church, and their mutual carriage
toward one another, in several conditions and dispensations. The comprehensive
sum of this, is contained in this Song, and compended by the Spirit, for the
comfort and edification of the Church, under these figurative expressions:
This, we say, is the scope and subject matter of this Song: For,

First, If the intent of this Song be to set out the spiritual carriage,
amongst spiritual Parties, and the spiritual love which each has to other,
then it must set out Christ's love to his Church, and Here Is to Him: The reason
is, because there are no other spiritual Marriage-parties known, but Christ and
His Church; There is no other spiritual Marriage, or spiritual Marriage-love
but this: But this Song in it is scope is to set out a spiritual Marriage, of
spiritual Parties, and their spiritual Love, Therefore it must set out this.

2. The scope of this Song must be agreeable to the matter contained in it. Now
the matter contained in it, can agree to no other parties, and be approven in
no other love; Therefore these descriptions given to the Bridegroom, can be
given to no other but Christ; and these given to the Bride by him, can be given
to no other but the Church, and must speak out no less love, then that love of
Christ's, the expressions being far beyond the love of all others: This will
more fully appear in the opening up of the Song:

3. What is the scope of these Allegories, in other Scriptures, as that of
Psalm. 45. that of planting a Vineyard, Matthew. 21. that of Marriage, Matthew. 22.
(which none can deny) is meant of espousing spiritually. (See this same
Allegory of Marriage, Ier. 3. Hos. 2. 3. Ezekiel. 16. Matthew. 22. Luke 14. 2 Cor.
11. 1. Rev. 19. 8.) that must be the scope of this also. For, 1. There cannot
be two spiritual Marriages, to which these Scriptures and this can be applied.
2. Scripture must agree with Scripture, and one more obscure place, must be
expounded by others more clear; and therefore seeing this scope is clear in
other Scriptures of this nature, we may conclude it is the scope here also: that
Psalm. 45. does agree with the expressions and strain of this Song, is clear, by
comparing them; and that it speaks of that spiritual Marriage betwixt Christ
and his Church, is clear by the Citations drawn from it, and applied to that
and by the Apostle, Heb. 1. 8, 9.

4. Either this must be it is scope, or it must have some other scope, or none
at all. To say none at all, is blasphemous: If it be said an other scope then
this, then it must either be such a scope as agrees with these other
Scriptures, or which differs from them; But not such as differs from them,
that cannot be said, therefore it must be the same: And so it sets out
Christ's way with his Church, and here is with Him, drawing them, as it were, in
a Mapp together.

Object. If any would argue, that it might better be Prophetically applied, as
foretelling events in the Church, as some do: For answer, We suppose, it would
be hard to make that out to be the scope and intention of the Spirit.

2. It would be more hard to get help from other Scriptures, in the application
of it to such events, and such times; and so this would leave it wholly to
uncertainty, or men's pleasure, as their invention, and groundless conjectures,
would lead them to apply it: (as we fear some good men have taken too much
liberty, without any ground but mere conjectures, to wrest the scope of this
Song) and beside, such an Interpretation would exceedingly spoil Believers of
that instruction and consolation, which the true scope gives them; for then
they were not to apply it to themselves, or to the Church, but at such a Time,
and in such an Age: because, if it shall be once fulfilled in others, or, if it
be not applicable to them, because they live not in such a time, it will
certainly mar their confidence in making any comfortable application of it to
themselves.

Beside, these considerations may clear, that, in it is scope, it cannot be
properly Prophetical of such, and such times, and events, but Dogmatical and
Practical, for believers use, in all times and events.

First, If the scope and matter of this Song will agree to any one time, or if
all of it will agree to Believers at any time, then it cannot be Prophetical;
for, Prophecy supponeth a diversity of time, for diverse events, and cannot be
said at any one time alike to be fulfilled; but all the subject of this Song
may be fulfilled in one Believer or other, at any one time; there are still
some enjoying Christ, some deserted, some praying, some suffering, etc. and so
of what ever part of it we can think upon, it may be said of one time, as well
as of another, that it has its accomplishment in one Believer or other; and
therefore, it is not properly Prophetical.

2. If all of it may now be applied to Believers, yea, and at any time before
the end of the world, may be as well applied as being then fulfilled, as well
as when it was written, then it is not Prophetical, seeing Prophesies have
their* particular accomplishments; but all parts of this Song, even the first
parts, may now be applied, and will still agree to Believers, as properly as it
did in Solomon's time. Therefore, etc.

3. If all the parts of it were in the same way applicable to, and true, in the
cases of Believers, then when it was written, even as now, or will be before
the end, then it was not intended to be Prophetical, but Doctrinal, Narrative,
and Consolatory: but the first is true; was there any Believer in Solomon's
days, but these Commendations, Properties, Promises, Practices, etc. did agree
to them, as they do to us? and was not Christ's way such to them also, as it is
to us?

4. Consider further, if the scope of it be to set out Christ's way to his
Church, and here is to Him, as is said; and if according to this scope, it should
be made use of by a Believer in any time, then it is not Prophetical, but
Doctrinal, as has been said: But the former is true, as is cleared. Therefore,
etc.

5. If it be applicable to Believers, according to their several cases, and if
it be the case agreeing with any part of this Song, which grounds the
application of it to any party, and not the time when that case is not; then it
is not Prophetical, deducing cases by times, but Doctrinal, etc. applying
directions, warnings, and comforts to Believers cases, in whatsoever time.

6. The matter of it is the ordinary cases which are incident to Believers in
all times, and what may make it look Prophetical-like, may be considered in the
Exposition.

7. If it is scope be one and the same with other Allegories of this kind, then
it is not Prophetical, but Doctrinal: But the former is true: Therefore, etc.
The truth of both which, may appear by what is said, and will further appear in
that which follows.

We leave this then, and come again to the Proposition, to wit, that the great
scope of this Song is to set out that mutual Love and Carriage, that is between
Christ and his Church: That this Proposition, which is a main one, may be the
more clear, we shall take it in five distinct Branches.

First, It holds out (we say) the Churches case, and Christ's care of her, in
all her several Conditions, and under all Dispensations; Such as, 1. Her sinful
infirmities, and failings in duties, Chap. 1. 6. Chap. 5. 2, and 3. and also,
under liveliness in duties, Chap. 1. 2, 3, 4. and 5. 5. and almost throughout.
(2.) Under Crosses, Chap. 1. 6. as being a Lilly among Thorns, and hated of
the World, Chap. 2. 2. and also in Prosperity, wherein she is commended as
terrible, Chap. 6. 10. (3.) As deserted and sick of Love, Chap. 3. 1, 2. and 5.
4, 5. and again, as enjoying her Beloved, Chap. 1. 4. Chap. 3. 4. 5. (4.) As
under faithful Shepherds, and lively Ordinances, Chap. 1. 4. Chap. 3. 4, 5. and
also, as under carnal Watchmen, Chap. 5. 7. And in all these, her various
conditions, in all Ages, are painted forth, before Christ's Incarnation, as well
as now, without respect to any particular Time or Age; for, ceremonial things
are not here meddled with, but what was spiritual: Beside, the Church then and
now is one, as in the next consideration will be cleared. (5.) As in private,
dealing with Christ, and longing after him, and praying for him, Chap. 4. 16.
Chap. 8. 1. etc. almost throughout, and also what she was in public duties,
going to the Watchmen, Chap. 5. 7. and Chap. 3, 3. and what she was in
fellowship with others, Chap. 5. 8, 9. Chap. 6. 1, 2. (6.) It sets out
Believers as more strong, and furnished with a greater measure of Grace, and
Knowledge, and also, as more weak in Gifts, and Grace. (7.) And Lastly, It
holds forth the same Believers, as more and less lively in their conditions.

This Book in it is matter, is a comprehensive sum of all these particulars
formed in a Song, put together, and drawn as on a Broad, for the Believers
edification; to show, 1. What should be, and will be their carriage when it is
right with them, as to their frame. 2. What are their infirmities, and what
they use often to fall into, even they who are Believers, that they may be the
more watchful. 3. To show what they may meet with, that they may make for
sufferings, and not stumble at them when they come. 4. That the care and love
of Christ to them, in reference to all these, may appear, that they may know
upon what grounds to comfort themselves in every condition, and may have this
Song, as a little Magazine, for direction, and consolation in every condition.

Therefore this Song is not to be astricted to any particular Case or Time, and
is (even by Bernard, Sermon. 1.) therefore observed to differ from other
spiritual Songs, in three things: 1. That it is penned upon no particular
occasion, as others are, such as that of Moses, Exodus 15. and Judges 5. etc. 2.
That it is composed by way of conference, between several Parties. 3. That
there are in this conference, more Parties than two; Christ, the Bride,
Watchmen, Daughters of Jerusalem, etc. all which do show, it is extensivenesse,
and comprehensivenesse, in respect of it is Subject and Use.

2. This Song holds forth the Churches, or Brides Conditions, under all her
several considerations: We may consider the Bride, or Church, four ways, all
of which we will find here. 1. As visible, and visibly professing Christ, and
worshipping him in Ordinances: in this respect there are Watchmen spoken of, a
Mothers house, Gardens of many Believers together, and a Vineyard let out to
Keepers, and a Mother having Children, (called also Daughters of Jerusalem) who
are professing Believers, and such like, which agree only to the Church, as
visible.

2. Consider her as invisible, having true Faith in Christ, spiritual Union
with him, Love to him, and real exercise of Graces, etc. Thus Christ is here is,
and she his; she is drawn by him, and brought into the Chambers of lively Sense
and Communion: thus she is near him, or absent from him, and such like, which
only agree to the Church or Saints, as Members of the invisible Church, having
real (and not only professed) Union with Christ; and thus she is distinguished
from the Mothers Children, which are outward Professors of the visible Church;
and thus the most of the Commendations she gets throughout this Song, agree
unto her as invisible: Neither can it be thought strange that both these
considerations take place in one and the same Song: For, 1. That distinction of
the Church in visible and invisible, is not a distribution of a whole into
distinct parts, as, suppose one would divide a heap of Chaff and Corn, into
Corn and Chaff; But this is a distinct uptaking of the same whole, (to wit, the
Church) under two distinct Considerations; as, suppose one would consider the
foresaid heap, as it is a heap, comprehending both Corn and Chaff, or, as it is
only comprehensive of Corn; so the Church thus distinguished, is but one,
considered in whole, as having both renewed and unrenewed in it, and as having
renewed only; Yet so, as the renewed are a part of the whole, under one
consideration, to wit, as they are visible Professors; and also, are the
invisible Church, being distinctly considered, as they have more than a visible
Profession: Therefore, the sibnesse being so great and near, it is no marvel
they be frequently conjoined in this Song, so as they must be distinguished in
respect of these distinct considerations, seeing the visible Church in it is
consideration as such, comprehends the invisible militant Church under it, but
not contrarily. 2. It Is ordinary upon this ground, thus to conjoyn them in
other Scriptures, as when an Epistle is written to a Church, somethings are
said of it, and to it, as visible, somethings again are peculiarly applicable
to Believers, who are Members of the invisible Church in it; as by looking to
these Epistles, Rev. 2. and 3. is clear, all are comprehended in every Epistle,
yet is the matter diversely to be applied, and these who have ears to hear (that
is, are real Members of the invisible Church also) are particularly spoken
unto, although indefinitly: And why then may not the Church in both these
considerations, be spoken of here in this Song?

3. If we consider either the visible or invisible Church, as whole or
Catholic, something is spoken to her under that Consideration, namely as
Catholic; so she is said to be one, Chap. 6. 9. made up of many, the Mother
having many Daughters, a Vineyard, entrusted to all the Keepers, having some
Children beloved, others hated, etc. which must be applicable to her, as so
considered.

4. If we look to particular Members, either, 1. As Professors of the visible
Church, such as the Daughters of Jerusalem, seeking the Beloved with the Bride,
and one of them are distinct from another, and from the Watchmen; such are the
threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubins, as distinct from the Church,
considered as one. Or, 2. As Members in particular of the invisible Church; so
the Bride is distinguished from other Professors, and Believers; she speaks to
them and they to her, Chap. 2. So is one Queen and Concubine, distinguished
from another; Thus also is the Church considered in general, and in
individuals, in their carriage; yea, it serves much to the scope of edifying
Believers, that the Church in these respects, be thus distinctly considered and
looked upon: Neither will this be thought strange, if we consider, that the
Church however understood, and the particular and individual members thereof
(especially of this invisible Church) are of an homogeneous nature; so that
what may be said of the whole, may be said of all it is parts, and what may be
predicated concerning the whole essentially, may be predicated of every part,
etc. As when we consider the whole Element of water, it is water; so when we
consider a drop, it is also water: and what essential properties do agree to the
whole, as such, agrees to every drop of the whole; so is it in the Church; All
Saints, Members of the invisible Church, have the same Spirit, Faith, and
Privileges, the same Covenant, Husband, etc. and what thus essentially agrees
to one, agrees to all, and what may be said of all, may be said of one: I say
in Essentials, because, though there may be many circumstantial, and gradual
differences, as one Believer may be stronger than another, etc. yet that will
not mar this oneness, and agreement in Essentials.

Yet, 3. We say, every thing in this Song, is not to be applied to all within
the Church, or to the Church, under every consideration, in the same manner;
what agrees to the Church as visible, will not, at least, in the same manner
agree to her, considered as invisible, and contra; nor will every thing which
agrees to a Believer in one case, agree to all; nay, not to that same Believer
always. Therefore, there is great need of warrinesse in application, that the
word may be rightly divided, and the diverse cases of the Church and particular
Believers would be rightly taken up for that end: Every place is not to be
applied to all (though sometimes a place may be taken up under diverse
considerations, as from other Scriptures, and the formerly cited Epistles, is
clear) but what agrees to every one, would be so applied, and sol^ly upon that
consideration, and under that notion, as it agrees unto such a person, or such
a case.

For helping us in this distinct application, it is necessary that we lay down
these following Rules:

First, We must weigh the particular scope of such a place of Scripture, if it
speak something concerning a Believer in particular, or the Church in general;
if it set out some outward, or some inward thing concerning them.

2. We would consider the matter spoken to, and see how it agrees, whether to
the Church under one consideration, or under another; and if the matter
predicated of her, or attributed to her, will agree to her as visible, or as
invisible only, for so it is to be applied; if to the whole Church, or if also
to all it is Members, and every particular Believer; for so it is to be
understood.

3. We would see, how the same matter is applied in other Songs and Scriptures,
and it will be safe for us to follow the same way of application here.

4. We would consider, what the particular circumstances, that may be observed
in such a particular Scripture, will help in finding out the Sense; as who
speaks, to whom, in what frame, on what occasion, etc.

Yet fourthly, we say, that this Song does most generally agree, and is
especially applicable to the cases of particular Believers: Because,

First, The scope is not so much to speak to all collectively, as
Distributively to hold forth the several cases, that all of them, at all times
are subject unto; for although every place do not point out the case of the
Church in general, or her duty, yet we conceive it is still in every part,
pertinent to some one Believer, or other: Such places must therefore be
understood distributively.

2. The nature and strain of the most of those things mentioned in this Song,
generally will agree best (if not only) to particular Believers; As to love
Christ, to seek him, to be commended so by him, to be out of one case into
another, pursuing after him from one duty to another: which indeed shows the
way of the Church in general, but so as considered in the exercises of her
individual Members, and in the intercourse of Communion, which uses to be
betwixt Christ and them, and so agrees to the church, only in respect of
particular Believers.

3. There is a plurality of Parties speaking, differenced not only from carnal
Professors, but from one another, who are commending the Bride, and so loving
her and Christ also; which says that the several parts of this Song must
especially be distributively considered of Believers severally.

4. There is no time, we can conceive all Believers to be in the like case, so
that one case or word will not suit them all; as to be sick of love, to have
his right hand under her head, etc. Something then must agree to one, something
to another, and both also at different times to the same person: And therefore
we must consider this Song, as speaking distributively the Churches condition,
to be applied according to the several cases of the Saints, and according to
their several conditions; something as spoken to one, and something to another.

5. The putting of these exercises in a Song, as it were to be learned and sung
by particular Believers (as a little compend, both of what concerns their Faith
and Manners) was certainly for helping their Memories, and furthering their
Consolation; which would be much impaired, if in singing of it, particular
Believers might not suck their own consolation in particular from Christ's words
unto them: And what can hinder, but a Believer may say, I am his, and he is
mine, and that th^se and other places applicable to them, may not be so
applied, seeing their comfort and edification is the scope of this Song?

5. The last Branch of the Proposition is, That this Song holds forth the
same love, and care in Christ to his Church, and the same exercises and duties
of Believers, under figurative terms, which are plainly, and properly holden
forth in other Scriptures, which are not figurative, such as are in the Gospel,
in the Psalms, etc. There are no new, strange, or uncouth cases here; but
Believers ordinary cases, there is no uncouth way of Christ's here, but what he
uses to his Church: It Is often the folly and vanity of men's minds, that when
expressions of Scripture look somewhat strange like, they suppose still some
uncouth, and strange thing to be there, and therefore loathes that which is
plain. It Is true, the cases mentioned here, are most spiritual, having Love
often drawn in it is most bright and lively colors, yet, for substance, the
exercises are the same, which in other plain Scriptures are otherwise
expressed; for, it must express the same cases, or, we must say, it expresses
something different from them, not incident ordinarily to Believers, and not
mentioned any where in Scripture, which to affirm, were both dangerous and
absurd: Beside, Christ being still the same in his way with Believers, and they
having still the same spirit, and being still under the same covenant, etc. we
can conceive no other thing here, but what he has expressed concerning himself
and them, other-where in Scripture. And certainly, the scope of this Song, is
rather in a sweet way, to compact together the ordinary cases of Believers, and
their consolations, for their edification, than to pitch on strange things, or
make new cases, which would not be so profitable unto them, and would wrong,
and enervat the great intent of this Song.

We proceed now, and shall draw some Conclusions from these Propositions.
First Conclusion. We may then warantably read, and expone this Song; it being
Scripture, it must be edifying, and ought to be made use of. It Is true, this,
and some other Scriptures, were of old restrained by the Jews, from the younger
sort, that none should read them, but these who were at thirty years of age:
Origin marks four pieces of holy Scripture, thus restrained by them: The
history of the Creation, Genes. 1. The description of Gods appearance, Ezekiel. 1.
and of his Temple, Chap. 40. etc. And especially this Song, because, the
matters in them were so sublime, that there needed more than ordinary humility
and experience in those who should meddle with them: This indeed, says men
ought to be sober, and with holy fear search these Scriptures: but that
restraint (if peremptory) was unwarrantable, seeing the Lord has put none such
on his people, as to any portion of sacred Scripture. And though this Song be
obscurer than many other Scriptures; yet, generally the reading of it, and
hearing of it, will affect; and as to the composing of the spirit, edify as
much, as other more plain Scriptures: which says, it is to be inquired into,
that the meaning being found out, the profit reaped thereby, may be the more
distinct and apparent.

2. Conclus. We gather from what has been said, that seeing this Song may be
expounded, Then Doctrines for grounding our says, and directing our Practice,
may warrantably be drawn from it, for the edification of God's people, seeing it
is Scripture; and although it be Allegorick, it is in a special way useful for
edification, and may as bread be broken to the children: It Is not only
consistent with the nature of plain Scriptures, but also of Allegories, that
they be thus extended in their use. We shall clear this Conclusion, in these
three,

First, There may be Doctrines drawn from this Song, in reference to all cases
that are incident to a Believer. As, 1. In reference to the case of the Church,
in all it is considerations, visible, or invisible, Catholic or particular.
And, 2. In reference to the more private and personal cases of Believers,
Doctrines instructing them both in faith and manners, etc. For the Doctrines
must rise as extensively, as there scope and matter; and these are of a great
reach and extent, as formerly has been said: Such Doctrines then, when handled
in this Song, would not be thought strange, nor unsuitable to it; but the
broader they arise, the Spirit's wisdom and contrivance in this Song, will be
the more wonderful and evident.

2. These Doctrines, must not be taken from the words properly, but
Allegorically understood, according to the intention of the Spirit in them,
even as from Parables, and other clearer Allegories and figures in Scripture,
it uses to be done.

3. These Doctrines so drawn, when rightly concluded from the Text and scope,
are solid and sure, useful for faith and manners, as Doctrines drawn from
other places of Scripture are: For, 1. It Is certain, that many Scriptures are
Allegorically set down, and is their authority therefore any way less than
that of other Scriptures? And if their authority be such in themselves, as is
the authority of other Scriptures; Then their Exposition and Doctrines drawn
from them, must be solid and useful, as these that are drawn from other
Scriptures: Or, 2. We must say, there is no use of such Scriptures, which were
blasphemous; and if they be useful, there may be solid uses drawn from them,
as from other Scriptures. 3. Our Lord uses Parables and Allegories often in
the Gospel, and that in things relating both to faith and manners; which
says, the use of them is solid and safe, when they are rightly understood
and applied.

All the difficulty is in the right understanding of them, and because
Allegories are frequent in Scripture, and this Song is wholly made up of
Allegories: Therefore, both for removing prejudices, and facilitating our way,
I shall speak something to these three. 1. We shall show what an Allegorick
Exposition, or rather the Exposition of an Allegory is. 2. When it is necessary
to understand a Scripture Allegorically. 3. How to walk in attaining the solid
meaning or how to know if such a thing be the meaning, of an Allegorick
Scripture.

For the First, There is a great difference betwixt an Allegorick Exposition of
Scripture, and an Exposition of Allegorick Scripture: The first is that, which
many Fathers, and Schoolmen fail in, that is, when they Allegorize plain
Scriptures and Histories, seeking to draw out some secret meaning, other than
appears in the words; and so will fasten many sense upon one Scripture. This
is indeed unsafe, and is justly reprovable; for, this makes clear Scripture
dark, and obtrudeth meanings on the words, never intended by the Spirit; As,
suppose one speaking of Goliah's combat and David's, should pass by the
letter, and expound Goliath to be the Flesh, or the Devil, and David to be the
Spirit, or Christ: Such Expositions, may have some pleasantness, but often
little solidity; and such, who most commonly thus interpret Scripture, often
fall in errors. As guilty of this fault, Origin is generally complained of,
though more also be guilty, as might be cleared by many instances.

2. An Exposition of an Allegorick Scripture, is, the opening and expounding of
some dark Scripture (wherein the mind of the Spirit is couched and hid under
Figures and Allegories) making it plain and edifying, by bringing out the sense
according to the meaning of the Spirit in the place, though at first, it seemed
to bear out no such thing: So, Matthew. 13. Christ expounds that Parable or
Allegory (for, though Rhetoricians make a difference between Similitudes, or
Parables, and Allegories; yet, in Divinity, there is none, but that Allegories
are more large and continued) calling the Seed, the Word; the Sower, the Son of
man, etc. This way of expounding such dark Scriptures, is both useful and
necessary, and was often used as edifying by our Lord to his Disciples: Now,
it is this we speak of, which teaches how to draw plain Doctrines out of
Allegories, and not to draw Allegories out of plain Histories, or Doctrines.

2. It may be asked then, When are we to account a place of Scripture
Allegorick, and are we to seek out some other meaning, than what at first
appears? Ans.

First, When the literal proper meaning looks absurd like, or is empty, and
nothing to edification; as when it is said, we must eat Christ's flesh, whereby
believing is expressed: And so, these Scriptures that do command to pluck out
the right eye, cut off the right hand, take up our cross, etc. All which, if
literally understood, were absurd and ridiculous; and therefore, the mistaking
such Scriptures, has occasioned many errors, as that of the Anthropomorphits,
attributing members, to wit, head, hands, feet, etc. to God; and passions, yea,
infirmities, as anger, repenting, etc. because the Scripture speaking of God,
after the manner of men, does Allegorically attribute to him, eyes, hands,
wrath, etc.

2. These places of Scripture are to be accounted Allegorick, which reach not
the scope of edification, intended by them if literally understood; as when
Christ has spoken of sowing, the Disciples thought, that some more was
intended than at first appeared; for, his aim could not be to discourse of
Husbandry to them: So gathers the Apostle an Allegory from these words, Thou
shall not muzle the mouth of the ox, that treads out the corn. And so also,
that and the like precepts, discharging the Jews, the sowing their fields with
diverse grains, etc. Which though they be not wholly Allegorick, but have in
the letter their own truth, yet, somewhat in these beyond what appears, was
aimed at by the Spirit; for, says the Apostle, does God care for oxen? that
is, that precept has a further scope. 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10.

3. When a literal sense would obtrude some falsitie on the Scripture, then
such a Scripture is to be understood Allegorically; as when Christ said,
Destroy this Temple, and I will build it up in three days; it is not to be
understood of the material house, or Jewish Temple, because then Christ's word
would not have had it is accomplishment; But Allegorically of his body: So, when
Christ says, Except a man eat his flesh, he shall not live, John, 6. 53. It
cannot be understood literally, seeing all who have obtained life, did never eat
his flesh in a carnal bodily way.

4. Any Scripture is to be accounted Allegorical, when the literal sense
agrees not with other Scriptures, and is not repugnant to the analogy of
Faith, or rules of right manners: As, when we are commanded to heap coals of
fire upon the head of our enemy. Now, it were against the command of not
avenging our selves, if literally and properly understood: It must therefore
signify some other thing.

5. When a literal sense answers not the present scope of the speaker, and
the speaker would be thought impertinent, if his words were properly taken,
then it would seem necessary to expound it as an Allegory; So Matthew. 3. 10.
when John is pressing repentance, he says, The axe is laid to the root of the
tree, etc. And that Parable of Christ's, Luke 13. 7. speaking of the husbandman
that spared his tree three years. If these places were only properly
understood, they would not enforce repentance, which is aimed at; they must
therefore be expounded, as having something more in them, of a deeper reach,
which may conduce to that scope.

And seeing, according to these rules, all the absurdities mentioned would
follow, if this Song were literally and properly expounded, it must therefore
be taken Allegorically, and ^he Doctrines must be drawn from it is inside, or
scope, when the (...) of the Allegory is laid by.

But, 3. Because it is dangerous, to leave men to coin what Expositions they
please of such Scriptures, therefore as upon the one hand; it is absurd to cast
all Doctrines from them, as unsolide; so upon the other hand, we would see,
what may fix us in a solid exposition, and sowhat may be esteemed a well
grounded Doctrine, drawn from such an Allegory.

I shall, in order to our help in this, name five rules, whereof the last is
safest.

First, Some Allegories at the first view seem plain, and imprint their meaning
on these that have the least capacity, that it may be known, at least, what in
general they aim at; And therefore, such are left frequently in Scripture
unexpounded, and are used to press most obvious truths, such is that of John,
Matthew. 3. 10. The axe is laid to the root of the tree; and he has his fan in
his hand, etc. The meaning whereof, is at first obvious to be a peremptory
certification pressing present repentance: So is the Parable of of the
marriage, Matthew. 22. 1. which at first view, appears to be understood of
espousing Believers to Christ as their husband: And so Christ's command to take
up the cross, etc. These, as to their meaning, are obvious; and we think such
is this Song in it is general series; the very reading of it seems to imprint,
that Christ and his people must be taken up as the parties, and the love here
spoken of, must be such, as is betwixt them; and though particular expressions
be dark, thus far it is obvious.

2. The meaning of an Allegory, may be gathered from the common use of such
phrases and expressions, in our common use, so kissing and embracing, etc.
signify love, and are expressions of mutual affection. In an Allegory then,
these, and such like, are to express analogically some spiritual thing,
answerable in our spiritual life to such things in our bodily life: Thus they
express spiritual love, and the sense of it. Thus eyes, hands, feet, etc.
applied to God, denote some singular property in him: If Allegorically applied
to Believers, they denote some qualification of the new man, that has some
analogy, and resemblance to these, as knowledge, activitie, patience, etc.
because, by our eye we see, by our hand we work, and by our feet we walk, and
travel, etc. Thus are they transferred, to hold out some other thing than
appears at first from the words, and the work of the Interpreter is to bring
out the scope and matter in plain expressions, that it may look like the thing
it is, and which is aimed at as the scope.

3. It Is helpful in expounding of Allegories, to know how such phrases are
expounded in other places; as when some things are spoken of David, that cannot
literally agree to David, then see who is meant, in other places of Scripture,
by him. If it cannot be known what is meant by a marriage-tye here, seeing it
can be no humane thing, see what other spiritual marriage is spoken of in any
other place of Scripture, and who are the parties, and this is to be expounded
by that.

4. Being to interpret any Allegorical place of Scripture, we would see, not
only to the scope of all Scripture, and the analogy of Faith in general; but to
the scope of the Spirit in that place: As for example, If we would understand
what is intended by the Parable of the Prodigal, we would first consider the
scope, which is to show God's ready welcoming of a sinner, and then lavel the
exposition, as serving to illustrat that scope. So we would consider what is
the Brides scope, Chap. 5. 10. and it is to discribe Christ: And Chap. 7. 1. we
would consider what is the Bridegroom's scope; and it is to discribe her. So
then it agrees with the scope, to open these places, and apply them to what is
commendable in him, and her: And thus the Exposition, and Doctrines from it, do
not only suit with the analogy of Faith, and are not contrare to found
Doctrine; but also suit with the intention of the Spirit there, and are
agreeable to it: For the Holy Ghost under general commendations, may include
all particulars, which may serve to make out the general; and so when the scope
is to hold Christ out, as all desires, then what ever makes him appear
desirable, and stands with the analogy of the expression, may well stand with
that scope: This is sure, especially when negatively it is inferred; that is,
when such a scope necessarily infers such a Doctrine, and when that scope
could not be attained, if such a Doctrine were not supposed: As when in
general, Christ and his Church are holden out to stand in a near relation
together, and so to carry one toward each other, as being under such a
relation; this will necessarily infer a covenant, and an union by says upon
the grounds of it, and some evidencing of the proofs of Christ's love, etc.
because without these, that relation could never have been, nor can it without
them be understood by us.

5. The last rule, which we call most sure, is this: Then we may safely
conclude, that we have reached the true meaning of an Allegorical Scripture,
when from the Scripture in the same, or other places, agreeing with the scope
of the present Allegory, we gather in plain expressions what is meant thereby,
or what was intended by the spirit in such an Allegorical expression; as when
Christ clears the Parable of the Sower, he calls the seed the word, etc.
which makes the meaning clear, and above question; Or, when a plain expression
is mixed-in with the Allegory. So that expression, Chap. 1. 1. Let him kiss
me, etc. in the words following is expounded by a more plain expression, to
wit, thy loves are better, etc. Hence we solidly gather that by kisses are
meant love: and this Doctrine is sure, Christ's love is vehemently desired by
the Bride. These ways for finding out what is the sense of such Scriptures,
are safe; and therefore, that saying, Symbolick Scriptures are not
Argumentative, is to be understood with a limitation, to wit, except in so far
as the scope and meaning of the spirit is known, and in so far as the Allegory,
or the several parts thereof agrees with, and conduces to the clearing and
making up of the known scope.

All these ways going together, and taken along with us, we may through God's
blessing, undertake the opening of this Song, and draw Doctrines from it so
expounded; not only agreeable to other Scriptures, and the analogy of faith,
but also as agreeable to the Scope of this Song; yea, even the scope of such a
portion of it, though possibly every expression in it is meaning, be not so
fully reached; which is not the thing we dare promise, but humbly to essay the
making of it in some measure clear, relishing, amiable, and comfortable to
God's people. And so we leave this Conclusion.

The 3. Conclus. and last is, That the Doctrines which this Song yields for
all conditions, and which for Believers use are to be drawn from it, are the
same plain, solid, spritual truths which are drawn from other Scriptures,
wherein Christ's love to his Church, and people, and their exercises, are set
down: And if in it is exposition, it resolve in the same meaning with other
Scriptures, then must also the Doctrines be the same; And therefore such
Doctrines concerning faith and manners, for Believers direction in all cases,
as arises from the Gospel, and other plain Scriptures, Psalms, and Histories,
may be solidly drawn from this Song: And such when they are drawn are solid
(being according to the foresaid general rules) and weight is to be laid on
them, in a Christian walk. We shall therefore endeavor to make this out, that
when the Doctrine of faith, repentance, diligence, etc. and such other
Doctrines as are in the Gospel, concerning the Covenant, or Christ, are spoken
of, ye may not think it strange, nor unsuitable to this Song. And therefore we
say,

First, If the Doctrines be suitabe to the scope, and matter contained in this
Song, then they are sure and solid, and weight is to be laid upon them: But the
Doctrines concerning Christ's love to, and care of, his Church, and concerning
her exercising of faith, repentance, etc. are suitable to the scope, and
agreeable to the matter of it. Or thus, If the scope and matter of this Song,
do agree with the Gospel (I call the Gospel what in the New Testament is more
fully holden forth and more clearly) in the scope and matter of it; Then must
the Doctrines which arise from it, be the same with these that rise from the
Gospel: but the first is true, as is formerly cleared, therefore must this last
be so also. And what is the scope of the Gospel, but to set forth Christ's love
to his Church? to show her duty, etc. and is not that same the scope here also?
Only what is preceptively, or doctrinally delivered there, is here as it were
acted in a sort of Comedy, and compiled in a Song, but still for the same end.

2. If the same Allegories in other places of Scripture, will bear solid
Doctrines concerning Christ, his covenant, faith, etc. even such as are in
plain Scriptures; then must this Song do the like, seeing it is the word of God,
tending to the same scope with these. But it is clear, Isa. 5. 2. Ier. 3. Matthew.
22. Rev. 19. 7. that the same Allegories of Vineyards, Fruits and Marriage,
etc. are used and to the same scope with this, and are made use of to yield
solid Doctrines concerning faith, fruitfulness, and other Doctrines
bebelonging to a Believers faith and practice: Therefore it must be ^o here;
for though this Song be larger, and is made up of more Allegories together, that
will not alter the nature of it, or of the Doctrines, which must be drawn from
it.

3. If we compare this Song, with the 45 Psalm, it cannot be denied, 1. But
that Psalm and this Song are to one scope, and of one style or strain, in
prosecuting that scope; It Is a Song of love for the King, and a spiritual
marriage is the subject thereof, as is clear from the very reading of it. 2. It
cannot be denied, but that solid proofs and Doctrines, concerning many points
of faith and practice, which are in other plain Scriptures, are, and may be
warrantably drawn from it, even as if it were plain Gospel: Therefore must the
Doctrines be such which arise from this Song also, for that Psalm is used even
by the Apostle, Heb. 1. 8, 9. to confirm the great truths of the Gospel.

4. If this whole Song be one piece, and of one nature, driving all along the
same general scope, then such Doctrines, as the places in it which are clear,
do yield; Such, I say, must be contained (if we could discern them) in these
places of it which are most obscure: But what is most plain in this Song,
speaks out such plain Doctrines, experiences, etc. Therefore what is more
obscure, may be resolved in such also: For we may best know what kind of
Doctrines flows from what is obscure, by the places that are more clear,
seeing God in the most dark Scriptures ordinarily has insert some plain
passages, or given some hints of his mind, to be as a key for opening all the
rest. Now if we will for instance, consider some such places as these, My
beloved is mine, etc. I called, but he gave me no answer, they yield plain
Doctrines, as other plain Scriptures do: And therefore, seeing it is one
continued Song, and each of these dark, and plain places answer one another, to
continue the series of the Discourse upon the same subject, we may know by what
is plain, how to understand what is couched, within that which is more dark.

5. As one piece of the Allegory is to be resolved, so by proportion must all
the rest, there being one thread and scope: Now that some pieces of the
Allegory, may be expounded in clear Doctrines, concerning Christ, and his
Church, may be gathered from paralleling some parts of it with other
Scriptures: As if we compare that excellent description of Christ, Chap. 5. 10.
with that which John sets down, Rev. 1. 13. we will see a great resemblance
betwixt the two (if this last have not respect unto the former) especially in
that which is spoken anent his feet, and legs, and his countenance; But it is
certain, that description, Rev. 1. 13. is given him with a purpose to describe
him, and to set out the several attributes, and excellent qualities, he is
furnished with, as Omniscience by his eyes, Justice by his legs, walking
surely; Omnipotence by his arms, etc. which are particularly so applied in the
Epistles to the seven Churches, Chap. 2. and 3. and afterward: If then there,
by the Spirit's warrant, we may draw from Christ's being said to have eyes,
that he is Omniscient (and so in other properties) may we not also think, that
seeing it is the same spirit that speaks here, in the particular description that
is given of Christ, and the Bride in their several parts, that these same
particular properties may be aimed at; and may we not make use of such
interpretations else where given, for our help in the like particulars, and so
also in other things?

6. Thus we argue, Either this Song is so to be resolved, as has been said,
and such Doctrines are to be drawn from it, as arise from the Gospel, for
expressing the way of Believers with Christ, and his with them; Or then, 1.
There are no Doctrines to be drawn from it, but this Song is a mere Complement,
and but ignorantly, with holy blind affection to be sung, which is absurd; Or,
2. The Doctrines are but to be guessed at, and so the truth of them is only
conjectural, which will come near the former absurdity, and spoil the Believer
of any solid edification, he could have from it; Or, 3. It must contain such a
kind of love, such cases and Doctrines concerning Christ and Believers, which
are different from the Gospel, and the cases of Saints plainly recorded
elsewhere: Now this would necessitate an uncertainty of it is meaning, and
hazard the coining of two ways of Christ's dealing with his people, as also,
of theirs with him, two Unions, two Marriages, etc. Or, 4. It must contain the
same Doctrines concerning faith, Christ, the Covenant, the Church, etc. which
are contained in other Scriptures, and in the Gospel, which was the thing to be
proven.

We have been the larger on this, to obviat two extremes, that men are given to
follow, in reference to this Song. 1. Some loathing plain truths, which are
plainly delivered in Scriptures, properly to be taken; and because this in
expression and strain differs, they conclude there must be some uncouth,
strange and odd thing here. It is true, if we look to the degree of warm
affections, that breath forth here, we may conceive that there is something
odd, and singular in this Song: But, as to the kind of Doctrine here delivered,
there is nothing new; and to imagine the contrary, were as if a man supposed,
there behoved to be some strange Liquor, or Meat in curious-like Glasses, and
Dishes, because the Master of an house might use variety of Vessels, for the
delectation of the Feasters, yet still giving the same solid food and drink,
though diversely prepared; Or, as if a man would suppose, Paul and Barnabas,
Christ our Lord, and John, did Preach different Gospels, because they were of
different Gifts, and had a different manner of expression. 2. On the other
hand, some are ready to cast at this Book as useless, because they see not
plain truths at the first in it, and possibly think all endeavors to expound
it, or draw Doctrines from it, but a guessing, and are ready to offend, when
they meet with nothing but some such truths as are obvious in some other
Scriptures. This wrongs the worth, and divine authority of this Scripture also,
and though many (and we among others) may mis-apply somethings in this Song,
yet to say they cannot be rightly applied, or that such Doctrines as we have
before mentioned, are not native to it, is too precipitant, to say no more.

For further clearing and confirming of these propositions and conclusions, we
shall answer some Objections or Questions which may be proposed concerning what
is said.

First, It may be objected, if Allegorick Scriptures be so to be expounded, and
such Doctrines to be drawn from them; then why are such Scriptures set down
under such figurative expressions? might they not be better in plain words? or
might not such plain Scriptures be rather expounded, which bear such Doctrines
with less difficulty?

Ans. If this were urged, it would not only reflect on this Song; but on many
places of Scripture, and also, on the expounding of such Scriptures; yea, it
would reflect on the wisdom of the Spirit, and his Sovereignty, who may choose
what way he pleases, to express his mind to his People, and what ever way he
take to do this, sure, it is still the best, and it may warrant us to acquiesce
in the way he has taken to speak his mind, that it is he that speaks: Yet,
there may be good ends given of this his way, or weighty reasons (even for our
behove) why he speaks to his People in such terms, and language: As, 1. Here he
puts all the conditions of a Believer together, as in one Mapp, which are
more sparsly, and as it were, here and there, to be found elsewhere through the
Scriptures; We have them here compended together, in a sort of Spiritual
dependence one upon another, and in a connection one with another. And they are
put in a Song, to make them the more sweet and lovely; and under such Poetical
and figurative expressions, as best agrees with the nature of Songs, and
Poetical Writings; that so Believers may have them together, and may sing them
together, for the help of their memory, and upstirring of their affections.

2. These figures and similitudes, have their own use, to make us the better
take up, and understand the spiritual things which are represented by them;
when in a manner, he condescends to illustrat them by similitudes, and so to
teach (as it were) to our senses, things which are not otherwise so obvious:
For which cause, Christ often taught by Parables, the greatest mysteries of the
Gospel.

3. Thus not only the judgment is informed, but it serves the more to work on
our affections, both to convince us of, and to deterr us, from, what is ill,
when it is proposed indifferently in an Allegory, as Nathan in his Parable to
David did: And also, it conduces the more to gain our affections to love such
things as are here set out, wherefore, even Heaven it self is so described from
similitudes of such things as are in account with men, Rev. 21. 22. And Christ's
Love becomes thus more comfortable, and our relation to him the more
kindly-like, when it is illustrat by Marriage, and the kindly expressions of a
Husband and Wife; for this also, God is compared to a Father, and his pity to a
fathers pity to children, to make it the more sensible, and comfortable.

4. Thus also any knowledge that is attained, or any impression that is made,
is the better fixed and kept; similitudes are often retained, when plain
truths are forgotten, as we may see in experience; yea, the retaining of the
similitude in the memory, does not only keep the words in mind, but helps to
some acquaintance with the thing which is signified, and furthereth us in
understanding the manner, how such and such things, the Lord does to his
People, are brought about.

5. Thus both the wisdom and care of God and his Spirit appears, who takes
diverse ways to commend his truth unto men, and to gain them to the love of
it, that they who will not be affected with plain truth, he may be more taking
expressions, commend unto them the same thing; which is the reason why he has
given diverse Gifts and ways of holding forth his truth unto Ministers; some
have one way, like sons of Thunder; some another, like sons of Consolation; and
yet all to carry on the same end, that the one may be helpful unto the other.
Indeed if God had delivered his truth only in obscure terms, the objection
might seem to have some weight; but when he does it both in plain and obscure
ways, this is his condescendency and wisdom, by all means seeking to gain some.

6. Thus also the Lord removes occasion of loathing from his Word, by putting
it in some lovely Artifice, in the manner of it is delivery; and also, he does
hereby provoke his people to more diligence, in searching after the meaning of
it; It being often our way to esteem least of what is most obvious, and most of
that which is by some pains attained.

7. Thus also the Lord makes the study of his Word delectable, when both the
judgment and affections, are jointly wrought upon: And to show that all the
Believers conditions may be matter of a sweet song to him, whereas somethings,
if plainly laid down, would not be so cheerfully digested: Thus he makes the
saddest matter sweet, by his manner of proposing it.

8. Also the Lord uses to keep the Songs, and spiritual allowance of his own,
somewhat veiled from the rest of the world; for they have meat to eat the world
knows not of, that Believers may see, and feed sweetly, where they discern
nothing, and that they having this Commented on by experience betwixt him and
them, may sing that Song, which none other in the world can learn, as the
144000 do, Rev. 14. 1. for thus it is said, Math. 13. 9, 10, 11, etc. that
Christ spoke in Parables, that not only he might condescend to the weakness of
his own, so as they might bear it, Mark 4. 33, 34. but also, that others,
seeing might see, and not perceive: Often that same way which his own gets good
of, p^oveth a stumbling to others, through their own corruption.

9. There may be also something of Gods design here, to try the humility and
since^ity of his people, if they will stoop to every way he uses, because it is
his; and if they will love the Word, not as so, or so proposed, but as it
comes from him, and is his, and as such humbly receive it, as being that which
(though it seem to others foolishness, yet) makes them wise unto Salvation.
The mockers taunted Ezekiel's Message under this notion, that he spoke
Parables, Ezekiel. 20. 49. but Z^ch. 11. 10, 11. when the Prophet broke the two
Staves (which was a dark and mysterious-like action) the poor of the flock
waited on him, when (as it is like) others stumbled also. By all which, we may
see why the Lord has so compacted together, plain useful Doctrines, under such
expressions in this Song; and also, why our undertaking to open it, may be well
constructed, even though these same truths may elsewhere as clearly arise;
yet, these truths are here in such a way connected together, and so not only
proposed, but also commended unto us, as will not any where else be found.

Obj. 2. If any say, the raising of such Gospel-Doctrines, makes this Song look
more like the Gospel of the New Testament, than a Song of the Old. Ans. 1.

Is it the worse, that it look like the Gospel? Or, are not such Doctrine^ (if
they follow from it) the better and more comfortable? Certainly there is no
Doctrine, more edifying and comfortable to Believers, and more like, or more
becoming Christ's way with Believers, or their's with him (which is the scope
and subject of this Song) then Gospel-Doctrines are. High soaring words of
vanity, and mysteries having nothing but an empty sound, are much more unlike
this spiritual Song, t^an these. 2. If it set out Christ's way to Believers,
even under the Old Testament, and Believers way of keeping communion with God
even then; is not that the same Gospel-way which we have now? Their faith and
communion with God, stood not in the outward Ceremonies, which were Typical;
but in the exercise of inward Graces, faith, love, etc. which are the same now
as then; Was not Christ the same to them as to us? Had they not the same
Spirit, Covenant, etc. and so the cases and experiences of, or incident to
Believers then, are also applicable to us now? That Christ was then to come,
and has now suffered, and that the way of revealing him then, was some way
different from that we have now, will not make another Gospel, Covenant, Faith,
yea, nor Church; we being grafted in that same Stock which they once grew upon,
and being by Faith Heirs of the same promises, which sometime they possessed.

Object. 3. If any should yet doubt, if Solomon knew or intended such Doctrines
as these, and that therefore, they cannot be well digested, if drawn from this
Song, beyond his mind and meaning. ^ Ans. 1. Our great purpose is to know what
the Spirit intended, and not what Solomon understood; and if this be the
Spirit's intention, to set out Christ's way with his Church; then such
Doctrines as agree therewith, must be agreeable to his meaning. 2. Yea, suppose
Solomon and other Prophets should be ignorant, in a great measure, of the
meaning of such things, as the Spirit foretold by them (as it is not impossible
in some extraordinary things, especially when their knowledge in these was not
essential to the truth of their Prophecy, for they might have a kind of
nescience in the particulars, though they were sure the things they delivered
were in the complex Prophecy God's word) yet, will any say, that we should
limit the words spoken by them, to their understanding of them? If so, by what
rule would we know, if, or how they did understand them?

3. Therefore we say, It was with Solomon here, as with other Prophets, (as
Isaiah, and others) who spoke many of the Gospel Truths, which in particular
they might not so fully know, as we do now, when these Prophecies are
fulfilled; yet was it never doubted, but the most deep mysteries of the Gospel,
were contained in their Prophecies.

Yet, 4. We say there is no ground to think, but Solomon knew much of the mind
of the Spirit in this Song, yea, more than many Learned Men now adays. For, 1.
He was not only a Believer, but one eminent for gifts and knowledge; and none
will say but he was so for divine knowledge, as well as humane; as his Books,
particularly, Prove. 4. 8, 9. Chapters, in his description of Christ, the
substantial wisdom of the Father, etc. do show: And can it be thought, he wrote
this Book, without any sense of what he wrote? 2. Can it be thought, but he
lavelled what he wrote here at a scope? and that afterward himself made use of
it, for his edification and comfort? which could not be done, if he had not
understood the most of these Gospel-mysteries, upon which all this sweet
conference betwixt Christ and Believers, is founded. 3. His writing in such
terms shows, that the words were not ignorantly fallen upon; but he, having
knowledge of all Herbs, Spices, etc. and how to apply them to spiritual things,
pitched upon these as the most pertinent similitudes, which are therefore by
the special wisdom of the Spirit, made use of in this Song, as in other his
Writings; yea, certainly his knowledge, how spiritual mysteries are couched up
in these similitudes, and represented by them, was beyond what we can reach
unto now; and therefore we dare not insist, or be peremptory in the particular
application of these similitudes. 4. The subject of this Song not being
Prophetical, but Narrative and Doctrinal, containing such exercises, as might
be, and certainly were found in Believers, even then, and such dispensations as
they used to meet with, will any say he was a stranger unto them, seeing there
was access to know these much better, then Prophesies of things which were to
come? Yea, 5. Is there any thing here, but what in other Scriptures of the Old
Testament (and especially Songs and Psalms) is to be found, where the cases and
exercises of Gods people are set down? And it needs not be thought strange, if
we equal him in knowledge with others of his time, or before him; and that he
sets down in a more artificial manner, according to his measure of Gifts, that
which others set down in more plain terms, yet both by the same Spirit.

We may then confidently hazard, to draw the same Doctrines concerning Christ,
the Gospel, Church, etc. from it, that are to be found in other more clear and
plain Scriptures. One of the Fathers ( Athanas. in Synops.) comparing this Song
with other Scriptures of the Old Testament, says, it is as John Baptist among
the Prophets, other Scriptures speak of Christ as coming, (says he) and afar
off; this speaks of Him, and to Him, as already come, and near hand; and indeed
it is so: For so even then, he was sometimes very familiar and present both to
the Faith and Sense of his people, as well as now. Thus also, even Origin
(though in plain Scriptures too luxuriant, yet in this he) seems to own this
same scope. Thus also Zanch. in Ephesians. 5. makes it a compend and Copy of the
spiritual Marriage with Christ. And Bodius in Ephesians. page 114. says, it is ipsius
fidei, and Religionis Christianae, medulla.

If it be said, if we interpret this Song after this manner, then all the
observations will run upon Believers cases only; which would seem to say, that
no Doctrines may be drawn from it, for the edification of these who are yet
unrenewed; and what use can it then be of, to them, who yet are the greater
part in the Church?

1 Ans. The Gospel has Doctrines suitable to all within the Church; and this
Song being in substance, Christ's way with his Church, must also contain
Doctrines useful for all within the same.

2. In this Song the Church is not only considered as invisible, and unite by
true faith to Christ; but also as visible, and as under external Ordinances, as
has been said; and in that respect, it furnishes Doctrines fit for all.

3. This Song will furnish Doctrines useful for these, as other Parables or
Allegories of that kind do, which Christ used often even for the edification of
such.

4. Doctrines from all places of Scripture, may be raised by analogy; as from
such places, where God holds forth the way he uses with his own, when they
have wronged him by sin, which is to humble them and bring them to Repentance,
ere they see his face again, sin becomes bitter even to them: From such places,
I say, we may gather by proportion, that God's way with unrenewed sinners, whom
he minds to bring to peace and friendship with himself, is to humble them, and
make sin bitter to them, seeing the recovering of peace, and the first founding
of peace, as to this, is brought about after the same manner.

5. From such places, as speak directly Christ's special love to Believers,
there may be drawn good uses and applications to others; partly, to engage them
to him, who so loves his own; partly, to terrify these who are not his, by
their being debarred from any right to such excellent privileges.

6. Where the Brides carriage is commendable, it is a copy and pattern to all,
even as Examples and Precepts are ordinarily given in common to all, and serve
to direct every one in what they should aim at; and also to convince for what
they are short of: The duties she is taken up with, being moral, her example in
these, must lay an universal obligation upon all, and in such things wherein
she falls through infirmity, her carriage serves well to deter all from
these evils.

In the Last place, for better understanding of the subject of this Song, we
would take along with us, 1. some Observations. 2. some Rules.

1. The subject thereof is to hold forth the mutual and interchangeable
exercise, and out-lettings of love, as well betwixt Christ and particular
Believers, as betwixt him and the Church: As also, his various dispensations to
the Bride, her diverse conditions and tempers, and both his and her carriage
under them, and her out-gates.

2. The manner how this sweet subject is set down, is by way of Dialogue, in
several conferences, after a Dramatick way (as it is called) because thus the
mutual love of these parties, is best expressed: In which there are, 1. The
principal parties in the discourse. 2. Others as Friends or Attendants waiting
on: In the Gospel, Ioh. 3. 28, 29. there are mentioned the Bridegroom, and his
Friends, and the Bride: And children of the Marriage-Chamber are spoken of,
Math. 9. 15. by which are understood Virgins and Companions, that attend her,
and also go forth to wait on him; which are of two sorts, some Wise, being
really so, some Foolish, being wise in profession only, Math. 25. 1, 2. There
is also mention made of a Mother, Gal. 4. 26. which has two sorts of children,
some born after the Flesh, and but children as it were of the Bondwoman;
others born after the Spirit, and true members of the Church invisible: The
former persecutes the latter; and of both kinds of children, are some of all
ranks, amongst Priests, Apostles, Ministers, etc.

We will find all these parties in this Song, acting their several parts.

First, The Bridegroom is Christ, John 3. 24. called the one Husband, 2 Cor.
11. 2. for there is not another spiritual husband, to whom Believers can be
matched; He is the King's son, for whom the marriage is made, Matthew. 22. 1, 2
etc. He is the Lamb, unto whose marriage the hearers of the Gospel are invited,
Rev. 19. 9. and Psalm. 45. He is the King unto whom the Queen is to be brought
after she is adorned; by this name he is also styled in this Song, The King,
Chap. 1. 4. 12. etc. and the beloved; Those, and such titles are given to him,
which cannot be understood to be attribute to any but to Christ only, by
Believers.

2. The Bride is the Church, and every Believer in diverse considerations (as
is said before) who are married to Christ, and are to be made ready and adorned
for the solemnizing of the marriage. Of the nature of this marriage see more,
Chap. 8. 8.

3. The Bridegroom's friends are honest Ministers, who rejoice to see him
great; Such as John was, John 3. 29. and such were the Apostles, John 15. 15.
Such are here the Watchmen, trusted with the oversight and edification of
others, spoken unto, Chap. 2. 15. and spoken of, Chap. 3. 3.

4. The Virgins, or children of the marriage-chamber, are here called Daughters
of Zion, Chap. 3. 11. and of Jerusalem (many whereof are weak, ready to
stumble, Chap. 1. 6. and of little knowledge, Chap. 5. 9. and ready to stir up
the Bridegroom, Chap. 3. 5.) and the Virgins that love Christ, Chap. 1. 3. and
the upright, Chap. 1. 4.

5. The Mother is the universal visible Church, wherein are many true
Believers, who are converted to Christ by the Word and Ordinances dispensed
therein, and to which also many Hypocrites belong as members.

6. The children of the promise, are true Virgins that love Christ; the
children of the bondwoman, and the flesh, are unrenewed Professors in the
Church, as also, false teachers, who act their part here likewise, Chap. 1. 6.
and 2. 15. and 5. 7.

3. This conference, as it is betwixt Christ and the Believer, is followed as
betwixt married parties. 1. In their titles, they attribute to each other. 2.
In their claiming of this relation one in another, as that he is here is, and she
is his. 3. In their expressions, which are such as use to be betwixt most
loving parties, who live exercising conjugal love, most kindly and intimatly
together. The reason whereof is, 1. To show the near Union that is betwixt
Christ and his Church; there is a relation, and a most near relation betwixt
them, that is not betwixt him and any others. 2. To show the kindly effects of
that relation in both the parties, especially the faithfulness and tenderness
of the husband, in walking according to it in every thing. 3. It Is to sweeten
every piece of exercise, the Believer meets with; Yea, to make all
dispensations digest the better, seeing they are dispensed, and ordered by such
a loving husband. 4. It Is for warming the Believers heart the more to Christ,
and to make this Song heartsome and delightsome, that so Believers may have
always a marriage-Song, and every night may be to them as a marriage-night.

4. The purpose or subject of this Song, is Christ, and divine things of all
sorts; but mainly the experiences of grown Christians, held forth in most noble
and lively expressions, as was before a little cleared.

5. The scope of all is, to express the desirablenesse of fellowship with the
Bridegroom, and how the Bride thirsts and longs for it, and how careful
she is to entertain it, and by laying out his matchless excellencies to
commend him to others; which also seems to be the scope and design, for which
this Scripture is given to the Church; and so her breathing after communion
with him, does here begin the conference, v. 2. Let him kiss me, etc.

6. The manner of their expression is, 1. Sweet and loving: and therefore, this
conference is carried on, under the terms of marriage, and the titles of
beloved, my love, spouse, etc. (as being the most lively that can express that
relation, and most apposite for entertaining of mutual love) are here made use
of. 2. The manner of expression is something obscure, though sweet, that so the
Lord's people may be stirred up to painfulnesse, and diligence in searching out
his mind; and also, because the mysteries here contained, are great, and
cannot, as they are in themselves, be conceived: Therefore that they may be
illustrate, Parables are used, as Mat. 13. 34. compared with Mark 4. 33. where
it is clear, that the intent and effect of the Lord's speaking by Parables, is
to help some to take up these mysteries, and to leave some ignorant. 3. The
Spirit of God does here make use of borrowed expressions, the more lively to
set out the spiritual matter contained under them; and by things most taking,
and best known to our senses, to hold out divine Mysteries, unto which these
expressions are to be applied. 4. Often these same expressions, are made use of
in one place, in speaking to the Bridegroom, and in another speaking to the
Bride, he calling her chief amongst the Daughters, and she him chief amongst
the Sons, but in a different sense; for, he styles her from his acceptance of
her, and from his imputation, and communication of his graces to her: But she
styles him from his own excellency and worth, he having all in himself, and
nothing borrowed from any other, but imparting that which is his, to her.

2. The Rules we would take along with us in our proceeding, are these:

First, We would find out, who speaks in every passage of this Song; for this
serves much to clear what is spoken.

2. We would carefully ponder, what is the purpose of the Spirit in every part
thereof.

3. We must apply, and conform expressions to the scope, and expound them by
it, and not stick too much in following of every thing, which these Allegories
seem to bear; but draw the Doctrines from them, being compared with the scope,
and other places of Scripture, not insisting too far upon the similitudes.

4. We are to take special notice of the Brides frame, in her manner of
speaking; For we may observe, that often in the vehemence of her passionate
love, she breaks out without any seen connection, or order, as Chap. 1. 2. and
by cutted, broken, and vehement expressions, in her diverse f^ames and tender
fits, as her case is up or down, (abruptly, as it were) she uses to express
her self.

5. We must not apply all so to the Church, as to shut out Believers, nor
contrarily; but take in both, where both may come in; and more especially apply
to the one, where the purpose makes most for it, as has been said.

CHAP. I.
Verse. 1. The Song of Songs, which is Solomon's.
BEfore we enter upon the purpose of this Chapter, or give the division of it,
we would first speak to the Title contained, ver. 1.

We account this Title Scripture, it being in the Original, even as other
Titles, prefixed to diverse Psalms, as to Psalm. 51. 102, etc. In it three
things are set down. 1. The nature of this Scripture. 2. It Is Excellency. 3.
It Is instrumental Author, who was made use of, by the Spirit in Penning of it.

First, For the nature of this Scripture, It Is a Song. Songs in Scripture, are
such Portions, or Books thereof, as were especially intended to be made use of,
for the praising of God, the edifying and comforting of his people, in singing
of them. Three sorts of them were in use amongst the Hebrews (as the Titles of
our Psalms do clear, and as they are mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 19.) 1.
Psalms, such were used, both with voice and Instruments. 2. There were Hymns
(so the 145 Psalm is entitled) such in the matter of them, were wholly made up
of praise, and what immediately led to that. 3. There were spiritual Songs,
which were more extensive in the matter, taking in Histories, cases, and
exercises of all sorts; and might be sung with the voice, without Instruments,
either publicly, or privately. Of this last sort, is this Song, intended to be
made use of in the praises of God; and so composed, both for matter and manner,
as it might best attain that end, and prove edifying and comfortable also to
Believers, in their singing of it.

2. The excellency of this Song is expressed in this, that it is A Song of Songs,
A most excellent Song, this being the manner how the Hebrews express their
superlatives. While it is called A Song of Songs, it is compared with, and
preferred to, all other Songs: And we conceive the comparison is not only
betwixt this and humane Songs; But, 1. It Is compared with, and preferred to,
all these which Solomon wrote, and it is preferable to all these 1005 mentioned,
1 King. 4. 32. 2. It Is compared with all other Scriptural Songs, such as is
recorded, Exodus 15. and Judge. 5. etc. Of all which, this is the most excellent,
as being, 1. Purposly intended to treat of the most choice and excellent
subject, to wit, Christ and his Church; which is not done upon particular
occasions, as in other Songs, but is the great purpose that is only designed
and pursued. 2. It treats of Christ and his Church, in their most glorious,
lively, and lovely actions, to wit, his care of, and his love unto, his Church,
and that in it is most eminent degree; and also, of her love to him, in it is
various measures and workings. 3. It Is in a most excellent manner composed, by
way of conference and sweet Colloques betwixt these two parties, having in it
many excellent expressions, and variety of them, well interwoven with sundry
cases of several sorts, to make the whole draught the more taking and
excellent. 4. It Is set forth in a most lovely, excellent, majestic style and
strain, which exceedingly ravishes and captivats affections, making the love
contained in it, sweetly savor and relish through the beautiful garment of
borrowed expressions, which is put upon it. 5. It Is a most excellent Song, in
respect of it is comprehensivenesse; here is an armory and storehouse of Songs
in this one, where there is something treasured up for every case, that may be
edifying and comfortable, which will not be so found in any other Song; there
being something here suiting all sorts of Believers, under all the variety of
cases and dispensations, wherewith they are exercised; and also, all the
relations under which the Church stands: All which, should commend this Song
unto us.

It is recorded of the Hebrews, that whatever Scripture was delivered in a
poetical ^rame, they accounted themselves specially bound to take notice of
that, and to get it by heart; and indeed it is not for naught, that some
Scriptures, and not others, are casten in that mould; and something of this, as
the intent of the Holy Ghost, may be gathered from Moses his putting his last
words in a Song, Deuteronomy. 32. that they might be the better remembered.

The 3. thing in the title, is the Penman made use of by the Spirit, in the
writing and recording this Song: It Is Solomon, a great man, rich, wise, yea an
elect Saint; Yet one, who had also fallen into many foul faults, whom the Lord
has suffered to die, without recording expressly any thing of his recovery,
though we make no doubt of it; which (because Bellarmine, lib. 3. de Iustif.
Chap. 14. page 368. Tannovius and others, are at pains in contradicting this,
yea, Augustine doubts of it, because nothing is directly recorded of his
recovery) we shall endeavor to make clear from these considerations,

First, From the Lords promises to him, 2 Samuel 7. 14, 15. where these three
things are observable, which the Lord undertakes concerning him. 1. That he
will be to him a father. 2. That he will correct him with the rods of men, if
he shall sin; which says, he would not eternally punish him. 3. That he would
not do with him, as he did with Saul, whom he rejected; he would not take away
his mercy from Solomon, as he had done from him: And if no more were in these
Promises, but what is temporal, there would be no great consolation in them to
David (whose consolation is one chief part of the scope of that place.) Beside,
these promises, Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33. (which are the same with these, 2 Samuel
7.) are looked upon as special evidences of God's love, and peculiar Promises
of his Saving-Covenant.

2. When he is born, the Lord gives him his name, yea, sends Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.
with this warrant, to name him Iedidiah, because the Lord loved him; which
cannot be a love flowing from any thing in him, as if he had been well pleased
with his carriage, ( Solomon had not yet done any thing good or evil) but it
must be a love prior to his works, and so not arising from his good deeds, and
therefore not cut off by his sins; which being like the love, God had to Jacob,
before he had done good or evil, Romans 9. 11. must speak out Electing love, as
it does in that place.

3. He is made use of by the Spirit, to be a Penman of Holy Writ, and a Prophet
of the Lord; all which, are by our Lord, Luke 13. 28. said, to sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven; and there is no reason to
exclude him, seeing that universal ( all the Prophets, etc.) would not be a
truth, unless he were there: And though some wicked men have prophesied, as
Balaam did, yet are they never accounted Prophets of the Lord, as Solomon was,
but false Prophets and Inchanters; neither were they Penmen of Holy Writ; who
were, as Peter calls them, 2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy men of God, speaking as they
were inspired by the Holy Ghost.

4. Neither are the peculiar Privileges he was admitted unto, to be forgotten;
by him the Lord built the Temple, by him the Covenant was explicitly renewed
with God, 1 King. 8. 9. and his prayers are often particularly mentioned, to be
heard; yea, after his death, some testimonies are recorded of him, which cannot
consist with his rejection: See 2 Chronicles. 11. 17. where the ways of Solomon are
put in, as commendable with David's, though there were defects in both; and this
being immediately after Solomon's death, it would seem he left the worship of
God pure, and so had turned from his Idolatry, though all the monuments of it,
were not abolished. And especially in this, he was singularly privileged,
that, in a most lively way, he was the Type of our blessed Lord Jesus, in his
Intercession, Reign, and peaceable Government: Beside, that by particular
Covenant, the Kingdom of Christ, and his descent from him, was established to
him.

5. It Is of weight also, that it seems more than probable, that Solomon wrote
Ecclesiastes after his recovery; it being neither amongst the Proverbs, nor
Songs which are mentioned, 1 King. 4. 32. And in it, he speaks out the
experience he had both of folly and madness, and the vanity he had found in all
created things, even when he had perfected his Essay of all the possible ways
of attaining, either the knowledge of their perfections, or satisfaction in the
enjoyment of them.

The Scripture therefore, has not left his recovery altogether dark; yet, as
to any Historical narration thereof, the Lord has so ordered, that he passes
away under a cloud, for these good ends:

First: Thereby, Solomon is chastised with the rods of men (even after death)
upon his name; for, his miscarriages are set down expressly, but his recovery
(as to any direct testimony thereof) is past over.

2. By this, the Lord makes his displeasure with Solomon's ways, known;
though he had favor to his person, and gave him his soul for a prey.

3. Thus the Lord would affright others from declining, and hereby teaches his
people, to be afraid to rest upon Gifts; yea, or upon Graces, seeing he has
left this matter so far in the dark, as might yield an occasion (as it were) to
question the eternal condition of Solomon.

4. It may be also, that Solomon after his recovery, did never recover his
former luster, nor attain to such a profitable way of appearing in God's
public matters, for which formerly he had been so observable: For so it is
taken notice even of David, after his fall, that his following life is stained,
as different from what went before; therefore it is the commendation of
Iehoshaphat, 1 Chronicles. 17. 3. that he walked in the first ways of his father
David, which certainly, is not done to condemn David's state after that time,
but to leave that mark (as a chastisement) on his failings: And seeing Solomon's
were greater, therefore may this silence of his recovery, be more universal as
to him.

Before we draw any thing from this, by way of use, I shall answer a doubt, and
it is this, How can all these thousand and five Songs, mentioned, 1 King. 4.
32. be lost, without ^ronging the per^ection of Canonick Scripture? Or, what is
come of them? Or, what is to be accounted of the loss of them?

Ans. We say, 1. The Scriptures may be full in the articles of faith, even
though some portions thereof, which once were extant, were now a-missing;
except it could be made out, that some points of faith were in these Books,
which are not to be found in other Scriptures. 2. Yet, seeing it is not safe,
and it wants not many inconveniences, to assert that any Book once designed of
God to his Church, as a canon or rule of faith and manners, should be lost. And
seeing, it is not consistent with that wise Providence of his, whereby he has
still carefully preserved the treasure of his Oracles in his Church, We rather
incline to say, that though these Songs were possibly useful, and might be
written by the Spirit's direction; yet, that they were not intended for the
universal edification of the Church, nor enrolled as a part of his Word,
appointed for that end. Neither can it be thought strange, that it should so
be; for, that a thing be Scripture, it is not only needful, that it be inspired,
but also that it be appointed of God for public use. It Is not improbable, but
Isaiah, Moses, David, Paul, and others might have written many more writtings,
upon particular occasions, or to particular persons, which were useful in
themselves for edification; and yet were never appointed of God to be looked
upon, or received as Scriptures for public use in his Church: So do we account
of these Songs mentioned in the objection, and other writings of Solomon, now
not extant: And it may be the Spirit has pitched on this Song, to be recorded,
as the sum and chief of all the rest; as he did pitch upon some particular
Prayers of David and Moses, etc. passing by others.

And Lastly, We are rather to be thankful, for the great advantage we have by
this, than anxiously to inquire, what has become of the rest.

There are four things, we would propose for use, from the Title of this Song.

First, That singing of Believers cases, even their several cases, is
allowable: Or, that singing of diverse and different cases, yea, even their
saddest cases, is not inconsistent with, but very agreeable unto, the work of
praise: Ye see, this is a Song for the nature of it, which Song is to be sung,
yet for matter, exceeding comprehensive of all sorts of cases, and these
various.

There are (amongst others) five cases, in which to sing, does sometimes
stumble, at least, stick much with those who are weak and tender; All which, we
will find cleared in the Brides practice of singing this Song.

First, It Is doubted, if sad cases should be sung, seeing, James 5. 13. it is
said, Is any man merry? let him sing Psalms. Ans. It Is true, these who are
merry should sing, but not only they, no more then only they who are afflicted,
should pray; It Is not our case, nor our cheerful disposition, but the duty that
should be respected in this work of praise; yea, we should sing, for chearing
our disposition, and mitigating and sweet^ing our crosses: So does the Bride
here sing her suffe^ings, Chap. 1. 6. Chap. 5. 7. when she was smitten; yea,
her de^ertions, she puts these also in a Song.

2. It Is stumbled at sometimes, to sing complaints of our own sinfulness, and
to turn our failings into Songs; What matter of cheerfulness, is there in
these, may one think? But we say here, she does so, mine own Vineyard have I
not kept (says she) Chap. 1. 6. I sleep, etc. Chap. 5. 2. It Is a ground of
cheerfulness, that we may sing over these unto God, with expectation to be
pardoned and delivered from them, as Psalm. 65. 3.

3. When the matter is different from our case, some thinks it is hard to sing
such Psalms. Ans. Certainly in this Song, there are different, yea, contrary
cases; yet none can think, but a Believer may sing it all at one time. Yea, 2.
There had never then, been a Psalm sung in public; for in no Congregation, can
all the members ever be in one case. 3. The same might be objected against
public Prayers also, seeing there may be many petitions that are not suitable
to all joyners; yet has the Lord commanded both public Praying and Praising.

4. When the matter, which is sung, is above us, being a thing we have not yet
reached, and so cannot assert it in our particular condition as truth, As these
words, Psalm. 18. 20, 21. I have kept his ways, etc. Ans. By this Song, all, at
least most part of Believers, are made to sing many things, beyond their own
seize possibly; yea, Chap. 8. that phrase, My Vineyard which is mine, is
before me, is of that same extent, with that, Psalm. 18. 20. Yet will not any
think, that the Spirit propounding this Song, and that Psalm, as a subject for
public praise, did ever intend that none should sing it, but such as were as
holy as David; yea, it would seem, that if either David or Solomon, had stuck
to the absolute perfection which these words seem to hold forth (if they be
expounded according to the strict rule of the Law, and be not taken in an
Evangelick sense) that neither of them would, or could have sung them: yea,
it is observable, that in this Song, there are spots mentioned; and not keeping
of the Vineyard, Chap. 1. is one part of the Song, as well as keeping of it,
Chap. 8. is another.

How then may we join in these? Ans. 1. We sing not our own sense, and
experience only, but what may attain the end of praise, which is attained, in
our acknowledging what others have reached, though we our selves come short. 2.
Not only our own case, as particular members, is to be sung; but in public we
take in the praises of the whole body. 3. That expression, Chap. 1. 6. Mine own
Vineyard, etc. holds forth the sense she had of her negligence, not as if she
had no way done her duty, but she confesses her failings in it; which she
sings to the praise of that free grace, that had pardoned her. Again, the other
expression, Chap. 8. 12. My Vineyard which is mine, is before me, expresses
her sense of her sincerity, blessing God for it, and refreshing her self in the
acknowledging of it: and both these may agree, as to some measure, in the
Believers experience, at one and the same time; though, when the Believer
sins more grostely, they do not so well agree to him, except in respect of
different times and cases.

In praising then, we would neither simply look to our frame, nor to the matter
in it self, which is to be sung, nor to the cases we are in, as if these were
the warrant of our singing, or the rule to regul^^ ^s in it; but unto these
three things. 1. The end where^ore singing is appointed. 2. The command. 3. The
notion or consideration, in respect of which, the Believer joyneth in the duty
of praise.

The ends are principally three. 1. Glorifying God, and making his praise
glorious: thus Histories of the Lords dealing with his people of old, and thus
the cases of others, in our singing of them, serve to that end, that he did
such works, that such a case was once sung to him, and such a Saint was so
dealth with; otherwise, we might scruple to sing, Psalm. 44. We have heard with
our ears, our fathers have told us, and other Scriptures, as well as cases: And
so the most part of the subject of praise, and the Book of the Psalms, would be
laid aside as useless, and not so much as to be read; for we ought not to
read, or say an untruth, more then to sing it.

A second end is, edifying of others with whom we join, as well as studying
edification our selves: So, Col. 3. 16. the end to be proposed in singing, is,
teaching and admonishing one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs. And suppose, some found themselves unsuitable in their own case, to the
purpose that is to be sung, yet will it not teach them what they should be, and
admonish them because they are not such?

A third end we are to aim at in singing, is our own chearing and refreshing,
making melody in our hearts to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19. Which arises not always
from the matter simply considered, as it holds true in our own experience: But,
1. from our conscientious going about it, as a piece of worship to God, and so
doing, we are accepted in that. 2. From the heartsomenesse of that
soul-refreshing exercise of praise; and so that Scripture which might be more
sadening in meditation to us, yet should be chearing in praise, because it is
then used in that Ordinance. 3. From the possibility that is herein discovered,
of attaining such a blessing, frame, or experience, because once a Saint did
attain it: and since they were men of the like passions, and infirmities with
us, why may not we aim at, and hope to be made Saints of the like graces with
them, since they were, what they were, by the grace of God? 4. From this, that
it was once made good in another, which mercy should be a ground to us, to
mention it to the Lords praise. 5. From it is being a part of Scripture,
appointed for his praise, whither it agree with our case or not: That being the
end wherefore it was designed to be sung, is a sufficient warrant, for our
joining in the singing thereof.

Secondly, We would consider the command we have, not only to praise, but to
praise in these words of David, and other Penmen of holy Psalms; for which
cause, God has furnished his Church with Songs (but not so with Forms of
Prayers, to which he would have us astricted) and that for preventing doubts
concerning the matter: For, 1. If God did propone these songs to be sung, then
they are fit to praise him. 2. If he did allow none to sing them, but such as
had no hesitation or scruple to assert them, with application to themselves;
then, either never should they be sung, or never in public: But, 3. Did he not
appoint them to be used in David's time? And joyners then were not all of one
size; Sure, they had never been committed to public use, if none might have
joined in singing them, but these who could sing them from their own
experience: Or, will a Believer be challenged for praising God, in the rule and
words laid down by him? Certainly not: However he may be challenged, if he be
not sutably affected in the singing of them.

Thirdly, We would consider the notion, or capacity under which Believers join
in this duty; for they join either as parts of the whole Church, and so they go
about their part of the duty of praise (as the matter holds true in any
member indefinitely, even as they join in prayers) so being that which is sung,
be allowed matter for that end: Or, they join as true Believers, and then what
points out infirmity, they look on it as agreeing to their flesh; what points
out sincerity, they as spiritual, though not perfect, join on that account in
the thankful acknowledging of it; what confesses a sin, if guilty, they
acknowledge it, if not, they bless God they are preserved by grace, yet they
are made to see their corruption, which has the seed of that sin in it, and
take warning; as in singing the 51 Psalm is requisite, when all are not under
that guilt, which David there confesses.

A fifth case in singing, which has been matter of doubting to some, is, when
they are put to sing with others, who possibly are strangers to God. Ans. Such
may be cleared from this, that the Bride joyneth with the Daughters of
Jerusalem, often they have a share in holding up this Song; so does she go to
the Watchmen, being willing to join with them who smote her: And certainly this
and other Songs, being to be sung in public in the Congregation, and suc^^
Congregation, as none will plead that it ought to have been separate from, it is
clear they joined, and that upon the account of the former grounds.

The second thing we are to observe for use, is from the commendation of this
Song, being for it is excellency A Song of Songs: and it is this, that, the
Believer has the choicest ^ong, and most excellent mirth in the world; not
such songs or joy as the world has, or gives, Ioh. 14. ^7. Yea, their songs,
are such songs, as none can learn, but themselves, Rev. 14. 3. Ohow happy and
cheerful a life might a Believer have, if he did not sometime mar his own
comfort! All is most excellent which he has, his songs are so, for they have
the most excellent subject, to wit, Christ, Psalm. 45. and the most excellent
grounds of rejoicing, and most solid; the largest, sweetest, and most
comfortable allowance in the world. Considering all this Song together, though
it has sundry sad and perplexing cases, yet it is most excellent: Or, right
thoughts of Christ, will make every condition sweet, and a song; Nothing will
come wrong to a Believer, Christ, Christ makes up all, and makes all
excellent: every condition with him is excellent; whosoever covets him, coveteth
what is best; whosoever neglects him, neglects what is only worth the seeking, and
what can only afford a song to the owner: And it is clearness in Christ's
worth, and an interest in him, that turns all conditions into a song.

Thirdly, From the Author (I mean the Penman) consider, that piety and
tenderness is not unbecoming, but is rather an ornament to the most noble,
most rich, and most wise men in the world: It Is a greater glory to Solomon, and
a greater evidence of his eternal good condition, that he was acquainted with,
and taken up in holy exercises, than that he was a King; yea, places, parts,
riches, etc. are beautiful, when made subservient to piety; Piety makes these
to shine in Solomon: And the Spirit also makes use of natural and moral
wisdom, which the Lord had bestowed upon him, to set out deep mysteries in
these writings; which shows, that the Lord would have any measure of these
gifts he has bestowed on us, adorned with the exercise of grace, and made
subservient to his glory. Also we may see here, that much business in men's
common affairs, and a tender walk, are not inconsistent; if men would prudently
manage their time, they might have access to their employments, and keep a
spiritual frame also, as Solomon, David and others did. It Is our corruption,
and not the multitude of lawful employments, that distracts us: David went
home to bless his own family, in the midst of public affairs, 2 Samuel 6. 20.

Fourthly, From the consideration of the Penman, (stained with such faults)
made use of, by God in the composition of this Song; we may observe, 1. That
neither place, parts, nay, nor graces, will exempt any man from falling: O
Believers, what need is there to be watchful and humble! May not these examples
of David, Solomon, Peter, etc. lay your pride, and put you to your arms, and
necessitate you to be upon your watch? Who of you, will claim to Solomon's
knowledge, experience, or privileges? Yet even he, the Penman of this sweet
Scripture, had his affections to God cooled, and became an offense even to this
day; what is spoken of his fearful backsliding and fall, being still a rock of
offense, upon which many still break their necks? 2. There may be much
corruption dwelling beside much light and grace, and yet, the one not fully put
out, or extinguish the other. 3. Grace has fitted and made use of many a
knotty Tree for the Lords work; for what Solomon naturally has been, may
appear in his carriage (seeing men's sinful carriage and way, is but the
product of the natural corruption that is in their heart) notwithstanding he is
thus made use of. 4. Corruption mayly long under grace's feet, and grace may
attain to a great height, and yet corruption may again strangely break out, and
grace be brought very low: What knowledge had Solomon? What presence and
clearness had he gotten by the Lord's appearing to him? What hearing of
P^ayer? How useful was he in God's work, in building the Temple, ordering all
the Levits, etc? and continued thus eminent for many years, even till he was
well stricken in years, and then fell so foully? How may this strike us with
fear? It Is much to win fair off the Stage, without a spot, Be humble, and he
that stands, let him take heed lest he fall. 5. Grace can wash foul spots out
of Believers Garments, seeing no question Solomon was washen; and as he was
recovered, so grace is able to recover the Saints from their most dangerous and
fearful backslidings. 6. Sometime the Spirit will honor the Penmen of Holy
Writ, by mentioning and recording their names, other times not; as is clear
from some Books, unknown by whom they were written; the Lord does in this
according to his pleasure, and as he sees it may tend to edification.

Verse. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better
then Wine.
Having spoken to the Title, we come now to the Song it self: which being by
way of Conference, or Dialogue, we shall divide the several Chapters, according
to the number of the Speakers, and their several intercourses in speaking: And
so in this Chap. we have 5. parts. In the 1. the Bride speaks to verse. 8. In
the 2. the Bridegroom, to verse. 12. In the 3. the Bride again, to verse. 15. And
4. the Bridegroom speak, verse. 14. And lastly, the Bride, in the two last
verses.

The Bride begins this sweet Conference, verse. 2. and continues to verse. 8. 1.
She speaks to Christ, verse. 2, 3, 4. Then 2. to the Daughters of Jerusalem,
verse. 5, 6. Lastly, she turns her self again to the Bridegroom, verse. 7.

In the first of these, there is, 1. Her aim and desire, by way of an earnest
wish laid down, verse. 1. 2. The motives that stir up this desire in her, and
whereby she presses it on him, verse. 2, 3. 3. There is a formal Prayer set
down, verse. 4. which is amplified in these three: 1. In the motive proposed. 2.
In the answer obtained, and felt. 3. In the effects that followed on it.

Her great wish is, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. That it is
the Bride that speaks, is clear; She begins, not because love arises first on
her side (for here she begins, as having already closed with him, and therefore
she speaks to him, as one who knows his worth, and longs for the out-lettings
of his love) but because such expressions of Christ's love, as are to be found
in this Song, whereby his complacency is vented and manifested toward us, does
first presuppose the working of love in us, and our exercising of it on him,
and then his delighting (that is, his expressing his delight) in us: For
although the man first suit the wife (and so Christ first sueth for his Bride)
yet when persons are married, it is most suitable, that the wife should very
pressingly long for, and express desire after the husband, even as the Bride
does here after Christ's kisses, and the expressions of his love. Of this order
of Christ's love, see Chap. 8. Verse. 10.

In the words, consider 1. what she desires, and that is, the kisses of his
mouth. 2. How she points Christ forth, by this significant demonstrative, Him.
3. Her abrupt manner of breaking out with this her desire, as one that had been
dwelling on the thoughts of Christ, and feeding on his excellency; and
therefore now she breaks out, Let him kiss me, etc. as if her heart were at
her mouth, or would leap out of her mouth, to meet with his.

First, by kisses, we understand most lovely, friendly, familiar and sensible
manifestations of his love; kisses of the mouth are so amongst friends, so it
was betwixt Jonathan and David, and so it is especially betwixt Husband and
Wife.

Next, there are several delightsome circumstances, that heighten the Brides
esteem of this, the so much desired expression of his love. The 1. is employed,
in the person who is to kiss, it is Him, Let him kiss, He who is the most
excellent and singular person in the world. The 2. is hinted in the party whom
he is to kiss, it is me, Let him kiss me, a contemptible despicable creature;
for so she was in her self, as appears from verse. 5, 6. yet this is the person,
this love is to be vented on. 3. Wherewith is he to kiss? It Is with the kisses
of his mouth; which we conceive is not only added as an Hebraism, like that
expression, The words of his mouth, and such like phrases, but also to affect
her self, by expressing fully what she breathed after, to wit, kisses, or love,
which are the more lovely to her, that they come from his mouth, as having a
sweetness in it ( Chap. 5. 16.) above any thing in the world. That Christ's
love has such a sweetness in it, the reason subjoyned will clear, for thy
love is, etc. That which is here kisses, is immediately denominat loves; It is
his love that she prized, and whereof kisses were but evidences.

They are kisses in the plural number, partly to show how many ways Christ has
to manifest his love, partly to show the continuance and frequency of these
manifestations, which she would be at: The thing which she here desires, is not
love simply, but the sense of love; for she questioned not his love, but
desired to have sensible expressions of it, and therefore compares it not only
to looks, that she might see him, but to kisses; which is also clear from the
reason annexed, while she compares his love to Wine.

Again, her manner of designing Christ, is observable, Him. It Is a relative,
where no antecedent goes before, yet certainly it looks to Christ alone, as the
reasons show; Here no rules of Art are kept, for love stands not on these: This
manner of speaking is to be found also in Moral Authors, when one eminent is
set forth, who is singularly known beside others, as having in the estimation
of the speakers no match: So Pythagora's Scholars used to say of their Master,
(...), He said it: And in Scripture, when the Saints speak of the Lord, they
thus design him, because they are not afraid to be mistaken, Psalm. 87. 1. His
foundation, etc. and Isaiah 53. 2. He shall grow up like to a tender plant:
This is neither for want of titles due to him, or rhetoric in her, but because
in this manner of expression the Saints set forth, 1. Christ's singular
excellency, which is such, that he has no match, or equal, there is but one
Him. 2. Their singular esteem of him, whatever others think. 1 Cor. 8. 6. To us
there is but one Lord, Jesus: only Christ is esteemed of by them. 3. A constant
and habitual thinking, and meditating on him; for though there be no connection
in the words expressed, yet what is expressed, may have, and has connection
with the thoughts of her heart: and if all were seen that were within, it would
be easily known what Him she meant: And so we are to gather it is dependence on
the affection, and meditation it flows from, rather than from any preceding
words; for here there are none. 4. It Is to show, her thoughts of Christ were
not limited, or stinted to her words, or her speaking of him: for though there
be no words preceding, to make known who this Him is, spoken of, yet we may
well conceive her heart taken up with desire after him, and meditation on him:
and so there is a good coherence, Let him, that is, Him I have been thinking
on, Him whom my soul desires, he only whom I esteem of, and who has no equal,
etc. This so^t of abruptness of speech, has no incongruity in spiritual
rethorick.

Whence we may observe, 1. That Christ has a way of communicating his love,
and the sense of it to a Believer, which is not common to others. 2. That this
is the great scope and desire of a Believer, if they had their choice, it is to
have sensible communion with Christ: This is their one thing, Psalm. 27. 4. It Is
the first and last suit of this Song, and the voice of the Spirit and Bride,
and the last Prayer that is in the Scripture, Rev. 22. 17. 3. That Believers
can discern this fellowship (it is so sweet and sensible) which is to be had
with Jesus Christ. 4. That they have an high esteem of it, as being a special
signification of his love. 5. That much inward heart-fellowship with Christ,
has suitable outward expressions flowing from it. 6. That Believers in an
habitual walk with Christ, will be abrupt in their suits to him, sometimes
meditating on him, sometimes praying to him. 7. That where Christ is known, and
rightly thought of, there will be no equal to him in the heart.

2. In the next place, she lays down the motives that made her so desire this;
which are rather to set forth Christ's excellency, to strengthen her own faith,
and warm her own love in pursuing after so concerning a suit, than from any
fear she had of being mistaken by him, in being as it were, so bold and homely
with him in her desires. 1. The reason is generally proposed, verse. 2. and
enlarged and confirmed, verse. 3. The sum of it is, Thy love is exceeding
excellent, and I have more need, and greater esteem of it, than of any thing in
the world, therefore I seek after it, and hope to attain it.

There are four words here to be cleared, 1. Thy loves (so it is in the
Original in the plural number) Christ's love is sometimes (as the love of God)
taken essentially, as an attribute in him, which is himself, God is love, 1
Ioh. 4. 8. Thus the Lord, in his love, is the same in all times. 2. For some
effect of that love, when he does manifest it to his people, by conferring good
on them, and by the sensible intimations thereof to them: So it is, Ioh. 14.
21, 23. We take it in the last sense here; for she was in Christ's love, but
desired the manifestations of it; and it is by these that his love becomes
sensible and refreshfull to Believers. It Is Loves in the plural number,
although it be one infinite fountain in God, to show how many ways it vented,
or how many effects that one love produced, or what esteem she had of it, and
of the continuance and frequency of the manifestations thereof to her; this one
love of his, was, as many loves.

The second word to be cleared, is Wine. Wine is chearing to men, Psalm. 104.
15. and makes their heart glad: under it here is understood, what is most
chearing and comfortable in it is use to men.

3. Christ's love is better, 1. Simply in it self, it is most excellent. 2. In
it is effects, more exhilarating, chearing and refreshing. And, 3. in her
esteem, to me (says she) it is better; I love it, prize it, and esteem it more,
as Psalm. 4. 8, 9. Thereby thou have made my heart more glad, etc. This his love
is every way preferable, to all the most chearing and refreshing things in the
world.

4. The inference, for, is to be considered: It shows that these words are a
reason of her suit, and so the sense runs thus, because thy love is of great
value, and has more comfortable effects on me, than the most delightsome of
creatures, therefore let me have it. Out of which reasoning we may see, what
motives will have weight with Christ, and will sway with sincere souls in
dealing with him, for the intimation of his love; for, the love of Christ, and
the sweetness and satisfaction that is to be found in it, is the great
prevailing motive, that has weight with them: And sense of the need of
Christ's love, and esteem of it, and delight in it alone, when no
creature-comfort can afford refreshing, may, and will warrant poor hungry and
thirsty souls, to be pressing for the love of Christ, when they may not be
without it. Which shows,

1. That a heart that knows Jesus Christ, will love to dwell on the thoughts of
his worth, and to present him often to it self, as the most ravishing object,
and will make use of pressing motives and arguments, to stir up it self to seek
after the intimations of his love. 2. That the more a soul diveth in the love
of Christ, it is the more ravished with it, and presses, yea, pants the more
after it: It was Him before, Let him kiss me, as being something afraid to
speak to him; it is now, Thou, Thy love, etc. as being more inflamed with love,
since she began to speak, and therefore more familiarly bold, in pressing her
suit upon him. 3. The exercise of love strengthens faith; and contrarily, when
love wears out of exercise, faith dies: These graces stand and fall together,
they are lively and languish together. 4. Where Christ's love is seriously
thought of, and felt, created consolations will grow bare, and lose all relish;
Wine, and the best of creature comforts, will lose their savor and sweetness
with such a soul, when once it is seen how good he is. 5. An high esteem of
Christ, is, no ill argument in pressing for, and pursuing after his presence;
for, to these that thus love and esteem him, he will manifest himself, Ioh. 14.
21, 23. 6. Where there has been any taste of Christ's love, the soul cannot
endure to want it, it cannot enjoy it self, if it do not enjoy him; This is the
cordial that cheareth it in any condition, and makes every bitter thing sweet.

Verse. 3. Because of the savor of thy good Ointments, thy name is as Ointment
poured forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee.
The second reason (which is also a confirmation and enlargement of the former)
is verse. 3. and it runs upon these supposed and employed grounds. 1. That there
are many precious excellencies in Christ. So that, 2. the speaking of his Name,
is as if a man would open a sweet favou^ing Box of Ointment, as that woman did,
Ioh. 12. 3. There is no title, or office, or qualification in Christ, but all
are savoury; his very Garments smell of Myrrh, and Aloes, and Cassia, etc.
Psalm. 45 8. 3. It suppons that this worth and loveliness of Christ, ravishes
all that ever knew him (here called Virgins) with love to him: and therefore
(which is the strength of the reason) it is no marvel, would she say, I love
him so servently, and desire so earnestly the manifestations of his love, which
I have sound so sweet.

So the verse. may be taken up in these four things. 1. Christ's furniture, he
has many savoury Ointments, and good. 2. The further explication, and
amplification of this his commendation, expressing both what she meant by
Ointments, and also the abundance and freshness of these Ointments, which were
in Christ; in these words, thy name is as Ointment poured forth. 3. The effect
that ^ollowed on these, or the attractive virtue of them, which is such, that
the most chaste, who kept their affections from other objects, are yet without
prejudice to their chaste nature, taken up and ravished with that loveliness of
Christ: Therefore (says she) do the Virgins love thee. 4. There is the scope,
which is partly to show the reality of Christ's worth, which not only she, but
all Believers were in love with; partly to show, that it was no strange thing,
to see her so taken up with him, it would be rather strange if it were
other-ways; seeing it is not possible for any to see and taste what Christ is,
and not be ravished with his love.

Ointments are both of an adorning, and refreshing nature, especially to the
sense of smelling, Psalm. 104. 15. Ointment makes men's face to shine, and the
house where it is, to savor, when it is precious and good, Ioh. 12. 3. Men in
vanity use sweet Powders, and such things as these, which can but little
commend them; But Christ's Ointments are his graces, Psalm. 45. 2. wherewith he
is anointed, for opening the blind eyes, for preaching glad tidings to the
poor, to bind up the brokenhearted, to give the oil of joy for mourning, etc.
as it is, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Which qualifications, are both more delightsome and
savoury in themselves, and to the soul that is sensible of it is need of him,
than any Ointments the high Priest of old used, which were but typical of the
graces and qualifications wherewith Christ is furnished: Hence is the Gospel, 2
Cor. 2. 14, 15. (whereby these graces are manifested) called a sweet savor.

Again, these Ointments are said to be good: so are they in their nature, and
in their effects on sinners, as is clear from Isa. 61. 1, 2, etc. And 2. they
are said to savor, the sent and smell of them, is sweet and refreshful to the
spiritual senses. And 3. they are called his, ( thy good Ointments:) They are
his, not only as he is God, having all sufficiency essentially in him, but as
Mediator, having purchased eternal redemption, and having the Spirit without
measure communicate to him, Ioh. 3. 34: and in that respect, anointed with the
oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45. 7. that out of his fullness, we
might all receive grace for grace, Joh. 1. 14. Our graces being of that same
nature, that his are of. It Is comfortable, that Christ has many good
Ointments; that they are his own, and that he has the right of disposing of
them, and that as Mediator, they are given unto him for that very purpose.

Observe. 1. Grace is a cordial and savoury thing, no Ointment is like it. 2.
Christ abounds in grace, he is full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1. 14. Hence our
wants are said to be made up, according to his riches in glory, by Jesus
Christ, Phil. 4. 19. 3. They are good and excellent graces and qualifications,
wherewith the Mediator is furnished; such as do exactly answer all the
necessities and wants of empty and needy sinners.

2. The commendation is explicat, or illustrat by a similitude: The thing she
explains, and which she understood by Ointments, is his Name; The similitude
whereby it is illustrate, is, Ointment poured forth. Christ's Name is himself,
or the knowledge of himself, or every thing whereby himself is made known, his
Attributes, Word, Works, especially these of Redemption, his Ordinances,
Covenant, Promises, etc. which are all his Name (for so the Preaching of the
Gospel is called the bearing of his Name, Act. 9. 15. and making known, or
declaring of his Name, Psalm. 22. 22. Heb. 2. 12. etc.) This is the thing
illustrat. Now this Name is compared, not to Ointment simply, as sealed up in a
Box, but to Ointment as poured forth and diffused. Whereby, 1. the abundance of
these graces is holden forth, there is no scarcity of them in him. 2. His
liberality in communicating of them, he pours them out, as one opening a Box of
Ointment, should so diffuse and distribute it. 3. By this is set out, the
lively savourinesse of his graces; they savor not only as Ointment closed up,
but as Ointment diffused. In a word, there is nothing in Christ (for whatever
is in him, is comprehended under his Name) but the unfolding of it will be more
refreshful, and abundant in spiritual delights, than if men would break and
open many Boxes of costly Ointments, and pour them all out on others.

Observe. 1. Believers are not soon satisfied in taking up, or expressing of
Christ's worth. 2. Christ and all that is in him, is as full of spiritual life
and refreshing, as a Box that is full of the most precious Ointment: Christ is
well stored with grace, it is poured into his lips, Psalm. 45. 2. 3. This savor
of Christ's graces is not felt by every one, the Box of his Ointments is not
open to all, but only to some, and that is to them that believe; for to them he
is precious, and every thing that is in him, is most cordial and savoury to the
Believer. 4. The more Christ and his worth be enquired into, it will savor the
better, and be the more refreshfull (for it is his Name which is this Ointment)
Christ in his excellent worth, through men's strangeness to him, is unknown in
the world; they do not enquire into this savoury Name, but if he were once
known, they would find that in him, that would make them give over their other
unprofitable pursuits, and pant after him.

The effect of these his Ointments (which is a proof of the reality of this
truth, and the third thing in the verse.) is in these words, Therefore the
Virgins love thee. By Virgins here, are not understood bare Professors, but
sincere Believers, who are not counterfeit in their affection, nor so common in
their love, as to bestow it on any creature whorishly, but who reserve it for
Christ only: So the Church is called, 2 Cor. 11. 2. A chaste Virgin; And so
these who were kept unspotted, and sealed for the Lord, Rev. 14. 4, 5. are
called Virgins. They are here called Virgins, in the plural number, because
this denomination belongs to all Believers, distributively, and in particular.
They are said to love Christ, that is, whatever others do, who have no
spiritual senses, and whose example is not to be regarded; yet these (says
she) desire thee only, and delight in thee only: and this differenceth true
Virgins from others.

If it be asked, whether that be single love, which loves Christ for his
Ointments? We answer, Christ's Ointments may be two ways considered, 1. As they
make himself lovely and desirable; so we may, and should love him, because he
is a most lovely object, as being so well qualified and furnished. 2. As by
these, many benefits are communicate to us; thus we ought to love him for his
goodness to us, although not principally, because no effect of that love is
fully adequat, and comparable to that love in him, which is the fountain, from
which these benefits flow; yet, this love is both gratitude and duty, taught by
Nature, and no mercenary thing, when it is superadded to the former. Hence
observe,

1. All have not a true esteem of Christ, though he be most excellently lovely:
for, it is the Virgins only that love him. 2. There be some that have an high
esteem of him, and are much taken with the savoury Ointments, and excellent
qualifications wherewith he is furnished. 3. None can love him and other things
excessively also; they who truly love him, their love is reserved for him,
therefore they are called Virgins: It is but common love, and scarce worth the
naming, that does not single out it is object from all other things. 4. They who
truly love him, are the choice and waill of all the world beside; their example
is to be followed, and weight laid on their practice (in the essentials of
spiritual communion) more than on the examples of Kings, Scholars, or
Wisemen: So does she reason here from the Virgins, and passes what others do.
5. True chaste love to Christ, is a character of a Virgin-believer, and agrees
to them all, and to none other. 6. The love that every Believer has to Christ,
is a proof of his worth; and will be either a motive to make us love him, or an
aggravation of our neglect.

Verse. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee: the King has brought me into his
chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more
then Wine: the upright love thee.
Being now more confirmed in her desire, from the reasons she has laid down,
she comes in the 4. verse. more directly to propound and press her suit: for,
rational insisting upon the grounds of grace, in pressing a petition, both
sharpens desire, and strengthens the soul with more vigor and boldness, to
pursue it is desires by Prayer. In the words we may consider, 1. the petition.
2. The motive made use of to press it. 3. The answer, or grant of what was
sought. 4. The effects of the answer following on her part, suitable some-way
to her engagement.

The petition is, Draw me, a word used in the Gospel, to set forth the
efficacious work of the Spirit of God upon the heart, engaging the soul in a
most sweet, powerful and effectual way to Jesus Christ: None can come to me
(says Christ) except the Father draw him, Joh. 6. 44. It is used here, to set
forth the Brides desire to be brought into fellowship with Christ, by the power
of this same Spirit, that as she desires a visit from Christ, so she desires
his Spirit, that he may by his powerful operations draw her near to him. And
although a Believer be not at a total distance with Christ, and so needs not
renovation, as one in nature does; yet considering what a Believer may fall
into, a deadness of frame, as to the lively exercise of grace, and a great
distance, as to any sensible sweet communion with Jesus Christ, and that it
must be by the power of that same Spirit (without which even these that are in
Christ can do nothing) that they must be recovered, and again brought to taste
of the joy of his salvation (as is clear from David's prayer, Psalm. 51. 10. to
have a clean heart created in him, etc. See verse. 12. of that Psalm.) And that
there are degrees of communion with him, and nearness to him, none of which
can be win at without the Spirit's drawing, more then being made near at the
first in respect of state: I say, all these things being considered, it is
clear, that this petition is very pertinent, even to the Bride, and does import
these particulars: 1. A distance, or ceasing of correspondence for a time, and
in part, betwixt Christ and her. 2. Her sense and resentment of it, so that she
cannot quietly rest in it, being much unsatisfied with her present case. 3. An
esteem of Christ and union with him, and a desire to be near, even very near
him; which is the scope of her petition, to be drawn unto him, that she may
have (as it were) her head in his bosom. 4. A sense of self-insufficiency, and
that she had nothing of her own to help her to this nearness, and so a denying
of all ability for that in her self. 5. A general faith, that Christ can do
what she cannot do, and that there is help to be gotten from him (upon whom the
help of his people is laid) for acting spiritual life, and recovering her to a
condition of nearness with himself. 6. An actual putting at him (so to speak)
and making use of him by faith, for obtaining from him, and by him, quickening,
efficacious and soul-recovering influences, which she could not otherwise win
at. 7. Diligence in Prayer, she prays much, and cries for help when she can do
no more.

The motive whereby she presses this petition, is, We will run after thee:
wherein we are to consider these three things, 1. What this is, to run; which
is, in short, to make progress Christ-ward, and advance in the way of
holiness, with cheerfulness and alacrity (having her heart lifted up in the
ways of the Lord) for, the Believers life is a race, Heaven is the prize, 1
Cor. 9. 24. and Philip. 3. 13, 14, etc. and the graces and influences of the
Spirit, give legs, strength and vigor to the inner-man to run, as wind does to
a ship, to cause her make way; as it is Psalm. 119. 32. Then I shall run the way
of thy commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart, which is, on the matter,
the same with drawing here. And this running is opposed to deadness, or
slowness in her progress before; Now (says she) I make no way, but draw me,
and we shall go swiftly, speedily, willingly and cheerfully. Hence we may
gather,

First, That often when there is desertion as to Christ's presence, there is an
up-sitting in duty and the exercise of grace. 2. That bonds in duty are as
observable and heavy to Believers, as want of comfort. 3. That there is in them
an high estimation, and a serious desire of enlargement in duty, or of liberty
to run in the way of God's Commandments. 4. This desire is very acceptable with
Jesus Christ, and therefore is made use of as a motive in pressing her petition
before him: he takes it well, when a Believer is like to ly by and sit up, that
he look up to him, and pray and pant for help, to set him to his feet again.

2. Consider why the person is changed, Draw me (says she) and we shall run:
If we take the Church collectively under me, then we, will set out the
particular members: And it is this much, do me good, or pour thy Spirit on the
Church, and we shall run in our stations who are members: It Is the better with
all the members, when it is well with the Church in general. But it would seem
to look to particular Believers, the effect of drawing being most proper and
peculiar on them: and so it is to be understood thus, If thou will draw me, and
by the power of thy grace work effectually upon me, then many more shall get
advantage by it: which holds true, partly, by reason of the sympathy that is
amongst the members of that one body; partly, because a work of grace fits, and
engages one the more to be forthcoming for the good of others; partly, because
of the influence which liveliness in one, may have upon the quickening and
stirring up of others; even as often, when deadness begins in one, it
leaveneth and infecteth more; so by God's blessing may liveliness do. This same
argument is made use of by David, Psalm. 91. when he is dealing for the
establishment and liberty of God's Spirit, then (says he) verse. 12, 13. I will
teach sinners thy way, and they shall be converted unto thee. He was not only
purposed to stir up himself, and walk tenderly in the strength he should
receive, but that he would lay out himself for the good of others, and he
promised himself success therein through the grace of God. And so Joshua, 24.
15. I and my house will serve the Lord: which speaks, that his serving the
Lord, would have influence upon his house. Experience does often make out, that
a lively soul in a Congregation, or Family, will readily occasion and provoke
others, to stir and seek with them.

3. The force of the reason, in the connection it has with the petition,
imports, 1. That she was much in love with holiness, and had an ardent desire
after more of it. 2. That she resolved to improve her recepts, for the
edification of others. 3. That these designs were very acceptable to Christ. 4.
That except she were drawn, she would come short of both. 5. A cheerful
engaging to be forthcoming to his honor and the good of others, and to
undertake what he shall call to, and fit for; These go well together, that when
we see and are sensible, that we of our selves, as of our selves, can do
nothing, 2 Cor. 3. 5. yet we may humbly engage, to do all things through Christ
strengthening us: In a word, I have need (would she say) to be drawn, if
holiness be needful; and I hope, thou who respects holiness in me and others
of thy people, will grant what I seek. Her engaging to run, if he would draw,
is no vain undertaking; but a humble pressing motive, holding forth some
sincerity given from him, but no ability in her self, but as he who has given
her to will, must also work in her to do.

The third thing in the verse. is, the return or grant of this suit; The King
(says she) has brought me into his Chambers; He has indeed brought me where
I was desirous to be. The words, he has brought me, being compared with the
petition, draw me, and the effects following, whereby she changes from praying
to praising, and that with expressions holding forth a kind of surprisal, do
evidence this to be a real return to her prayer, and a comfortable alteration
upon, and change in her condition.

In this answer, consider, 1. what she receives, a noble privilege; she is
admitted into the King's Chambers, to nearness with him, which she longed-for,
and now she has it. Chambers are the most intimat places of familiar
fellowship, especially with Kings, where none but Courtiers indeed come. They
were the place where the Bridegroom and the Bride rejoiced together; and it
has a tacit opposition to a salutation by the way, or admission to outer
rooms, this to which she is admitted, is more, yet is it something here-away
attainable; which we conceive, is the enjoying of that love she formerly
sought-for, and which afterward she ingageth to remember, as having now
obtained it. In a word, she is where she would be, as the effects show.

2. Consider who brought her into these Chambers; it is the King, even him she
prayed unto, to draw her, he has heard her: This King (as being the chief of
all that ever bare that name) is called the King, by way of eminency; And so,
Psalm. 45. 1, 2. and Zech. 4. 9. he is not only King, and Supreme as God, having
the same essential dominion with the Father, over all the Creatures; but also,
(which is here especially meant) as Mediator, he is a King by donation, Psalm.
2. 6, 7. and also by conquest, having purchased his Kingdom with his blood, and
by the power of his spiritual Arms that are effectual upon the hearts of
sinners, brings them to subject to him, Psalm. 45. 5. So he confesses himself
to be a King before Pontius Pilate, Ioh. 18. 36, 37. although his Kingdom be
not of this world. It Is he, who by his blood has made access for Believers to
nearness with God, as it is, Ephesians. 2. 18. through that new and living way, Heb.
10. 19, 20. so that she may well say, he brought her in. She attributes this to
him expressly, 1. For his commendation, and to give him the acknowledgment due
to him in this work, which would never have been wrought without him: All
nearness and access to God, all progress in holiness, and comfort in
duties, should not only be sought by, and from Christ; but he acknowledged for
these, and the praise of them returned to him.

2. She observes the return of her prayer, and his readiness to be entreated,
I prayed to him to draw (says she) and he did it effectually; he drew me, and
brought me into the Chambers. Here we may see, 1. Christ is easily entreated,
Isa. 65. 24. Before they call, I will answer. 2. Believers should observe
returns of prayer, and bless Christ for them. 3. She acknowledges he had
brought her into the Chambers, to magnify and to commend the mercy the more:
It Is the greater honor, that not only she is there, but that the King himself
(like the Prodigal's father) met her, and took her in: Christ's convoy is much
worth, and sinners may hazard forward with it, and not despair of access. 4.
She attributes it to him, that she may keep mind of his grace, whereby she
stands and injoyes these privileges; and that she may be still humble under
them, as having none of these from her self: It is much, under sense and a fair
gale of flowing love, to carry even, and to be humble: And it is rare to be full
of this new Wine, and bear it well.

3. Consider the importance of the word in the Original, it is here translated,
he brought me in, as it is Chap. 2. verse. 4. but the word in that Conjugation,
in which it is used in the first Language, signifies, he made me come, or go
in; implying, 1. A ^ort of aversness, and inability in her self. 2. Many
difficulties in the way. 3. An efficacious work overcoming all these, and
effectually bringing her over all, as the same word is used, Psalm. 78. 71.
where God's bringing David from the fold to be King, over so many difficulties,
is spoken of.

The last thing in the verse is, the effect following on this her admission,
which is both exceeding great spiritual cheerfulness in her self, and
gladness of heart also in others, whereby both her own, and their hea^ts were
much enlarged in duty, as she undertook (and therefore the person from me to we
is changed again) for before, (she says) he brought me, etc. but now, we will
be glad, etc. The effects, by way of gratitude, are in two expressions, 1. We
will rejoice and be glad in thee. And 2. We will remember thy love more then
Wine: And as she took her motive, while she desired Christ's love, from that
esteem which all Believers (under the Title of Virgins) had of it; so now,
having obtained what she sought, she confirms her estimation of that enjoyment,
from the experience of the same Believers, under the name of upright; that by
such an universal testimony in both assertions, she might the more confirm her
says anent the reality of Christ's worth, seeing her esteem of him did flow from
no deluded sense in her, but was built on such solid reasons, as she durst
appeal to the experience of all Believers, who thought Christ well worthy the
loving: And so this is not only brought in here to show the nature of
Believers, whose disposition inclines them natively to love Christ, but also to
show the excellent loveliness of Christ, as an object worthy to be loved, in
the conviction of all that ever knew him. The first expression holds forth a
warm change upon her affections; no sooner is she admitted into the Chambers,
but she cries out, O we will rejoice and be glad in thee. Where, 1. Ye have
her exercise and frame, it is to rejoice and be glad; cheerfulness and joy,
disposing the heart to praise, are sometimes called-for as well as Prayer. If
we look on this joy as it stands here, It says, 1. There are degrees and steps
in Communion with Christ; and the Saints are sometimes admitted to higher
degrees thereof, than at other times: Sure, it is a heartsome life to be near
Christ and in his Chambers. 2. This joy, and that nearness with Christ, which
is the ground of it, are both often the effect of Prayer, and follows upon it,
when Faith is in a lively way exercised in that duty. 3. That Faith exercised
on Christ, can make a sudden change to the better in a Believers case, Psalm.
30. 6, 7, etc. 4. That a Believer should observe the changes of Christ's
dispensations, the returns of their own prayers, and be suitably affected with
them, whether he delay the answer, or give them a present return.

The 2. thing in the expression, is the object of this joy; it is in thee, not
in Corn or Wine, not in their present sense, but in him as the Author of their
present comfortable condition, and as being himself their happiness, even in
their greatest enjoyments, according to that word, 1 Cor. 1. 31. Let him that
rejoiceth, rejoice in the Lord: and this qualifies joy, and keeps it from
degenerating into carnal delight, when he that rejoiceth, rejoiceth in the
Lord; and it is a good character to try such joy with, as may warrantably pass
under that name of the joy of the Lord, and as will have that effect with it,
to strengthen us in his way, Neh. 8. 10.

3. We may consider a twofold change of the number in the Brides speaking; it is
We, which was Me: The King brought me, said she, but now We will rejoice. The
reasons were given on the petition; and further, we may add here, that it is to
show her being conform in her practice to her undertaking; and to show that
that admission of hers redounded to the good of more, and ought to take them up
in praise with her. The other change of the person is, from the third to the
second, from He, the King, to Thee in the second Person, (we will rejoice in
Thee) which shows a holy complacency and delight, sometimes making her to speak
of him, sometimes to him, yet so, as she loves to have Christ both the object
and subject of her discourse, and the more he be to her, she is the more
satisfied: This being another character of spiritual joy, and exulting in
Christ, it still makes him to be the more to them, and they are still pressing
under it, to be the nearer to him.

The 2. effect is, We will remember thy love more then Wine: What is understood
by Love and Wine, as also, why the number is changed from the singular to the
plural, has been formerly cleared. The word Remember, does import these three
things, 1. A thankful acknowledgment of the favor received, and a making of it
to be remembered to his praise; this remembering is opposite to forgetting, Psalm.
103. 2. From which we may observe two things, 1. The acknowledgment of the
mercies we have received, is a necessary piece of the duty of praise; They will
never praise for a mercy, who will not acknowledge they have received it:
forgetfulness and unbelief does much mar praise. 2. They that pray most for
any mercy, will most really praise when it is received; and this last is a duty
as well as the former, but is not made conscience of, nor suitably performed,
but by hearts that acknowledge God's goodness to themselves. 2. It imports, a
recording of this experience of God's goodness, for her own profit for the
time to come: Thus every manifestation of his grace, is to be kept as an
experience for afterward, when that frame may be away, and he may hide his
face, whereupon there will follow a change in the Believers frame: It Is good
keeping the impression of his kind manifestations still upon the heart; So the
Psalmist endeavored, Psalm. 119. 93. I will never forget thy precepts, for with
them thou have quickened me. 3. It imports, the doing of both these with
delight, we will remember thy love (says she) more then wine, that is, the
thoughts of Christ's love does and shall relish more sweetly, than wine, or any
comforts amongst creatures; the very thoughts of it are, and will be so cordial
and refreshful.

The last expression, the upright love thee, is added for confirmation, as was
said on verse. 3. and may be looked upon, as brought in by way of obviating an
objection; who (might it be said to the Bride) will so rejoice in Christ with
thee? She answers, whatever the most part of the world do, yet these who have
spiritual senses, love Christ as I do. The difference betwixt this and the
former expression in the end of the third verse. is in two: 1. Though the
persons be the same, yet she gives them different styles; There she calls them
Virgins, as being chaste in their love, not joining themselves to idols, nor
going a-whoring after creatures; here she calls them upright, as being sincere,
neither dissemblers, nor hypocrites, but such as were really that which they
appeared to be, having a practice suitable to their profession; such was Job,
Job 1. 1. An upright man; such was Nathanael, Joh. 1. 47. An Israelite indeed:
These have not double ends, nor double hearts, but are straight, and may abide
the touchstone, their practice being, their very heart turned outward. The
other difference is in the scope, formerly they were brought in, as being
desirous of Christ, as she was; here as delighted with Christ when he is
enjoyed, both go together: And whoever are desirous after him, will be
delighted in him, while present, and afflicted for, and affected with, his
absence: In both she evidenceth a suitableness in her frame to the generation
of God's people, and ^ares not from whom she differ, if she be conform to them.

Observe. 1. Where there is love to Christ, there is sincerity in practice;
neither is there true love to be found in any hypocrite; for, sincerity and
love to Christ go together. 2. Sincerity is a character of a Virgin and true
Believer: If we would know who are the Virgins spoken of, verse. 3. she tells us
here, they are the upright. 3. All who are sincere or upright, come-in in one
category and reckoning; they are all of the same spiritual nature or
disposition, and what may be said of one of them (as to that) may be said of
them all. 4. God reckons Believers, not by the degree of their progress, but
by the kind and nature of their walk, if it be sincere or not, that is, if they
be straight as to their ends, motives, and manner in duties, or not. 5. These
characters which agree in common to Believers as such, and these cases which
agree with the ordinary way of all the Saints in Scripture, are solid, and
weight may be laid upon them in concluding our sincerity, or the goodness of
our state; but peculiar evidences, or singular experience would not be leaned
unto in that, as if our uprightness, or the goodness of our state could not
be made out without these, wherein possibly an hypocrite can go nearer to
resemble a child of God, than in that which is more ordinary to Saints, as such.

Verse. 5. I am black, but comely, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, as the Tents of
Kedar, as the Curtains of Solomon.
Verse. 6. Look not upon me because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon
me: my mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the
Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept.
In the 5. and 6. verses, we have the second piece of the Brides first
discourse, and it is the speech she has to the Daughters of Jerusalem:
wherein, verse. 5. she gives a description of her self; then verse. 6. applies
and clears it, for some edifying use unto these beginners.

For clearing of this place, let us 1. see, who these Daughters of Jerusalem
are. 2. What is the scope of these words. 3. What is their dependence upon, and
connection with the former. 4. What is more particularly the meaning of them.

By Daughters of Jerusalem in common, are certainly understood professors,
members of the Church; and so born in, and belonging unto Jerusalem; but
because there are members of several sorts, some strong, some weak, some sound,
some unsound, some tender, some profane; we must inquire a little further who
are meant by these Daughters of Jerusalem, they being often mentioned in this
Song.

First, We look on them as distinct from mothers children, mentioned in the
following verse, as a party different from the Daughters here spoken to; and so
they are not to be accounted amongst the profane imbittered heart-enemies of
Godliness, who yet live in the Church: They are not the worst then of them
that are in the visible Church. 2. We take them also as distinguished from the
Virgins and upright, who loved and delighted in Christ in the former verse. For,
chap. 5. 8, 9. and 6. 1. we will find them very ignorant of Christ, although
they have some affection. In a word, we take them to include two sorts of
Professors: 1. Such as are weak and scarcely formed, yet are docile, and
respective to outward Ordinances, and Godliness in the practice of it: So
their respect to the Bride, and the question propounded by them, chap. 5. 9.
does clear. 2. They comprehend such as are formed Believers, really honest, and
who have some sound beginnings, yet mixed with much weakness, ignorance and
infirmity, and so not come up the length of grown Christians; such who need
milk, and cannot endure strong meat; so their question and undertaking, chap.
6. 1. does evidence; they were Daughters, while yet they were really very
ignorant of Christ, and were ready to provoke him before he pleased, (as the
often repeated charge the Bride gives them throughout this Song imports) and
they were Daughters still, even after they were something better taught and
engaged. We find, 1 Ioh. 2. 13. the Apostle speaks of three sorts, 1. Fathers,
that are grown Believers, rich in experience, such we esteem to be understood
by the Bride in this Song. 2. Young Men, who are strong, well-advanced
Believers, such were the Virgins and upright here made mention of. A 3. sort
are styled little Children, that is, some who (as it were) are yet on the
Breasts, and that in knowledge, practice, or experience, had not come to a
consistence, or to have their senses exercised to know good or evil, as it is,
Heb. 5. 14. such we account these Daughters of Jerusalem, and so may comprehend
under them Professors, who stand not in the way of their own edification,
though they be weak.

2. The scope of her discourse to them, is to prevent their stumbling at the
Cross, or being deterred from godliness, because of any blackness or spots
that were to be seen in her; it being a great stumbling to weak Professors, to
see sufferings accompany tenderness (especially when it is persecuted, and
pursued by professors of the same truth) as also, to see infirmities and sinful
blemishes in persons eminently Godly: Now her scope is, for their edification,
to condescend to satisfy them in both.

3. The reason why she breaks in with this discourse, upon the back of the
former (which shows the connection) may be twofold, 1. To remove an objection
that might be made, if any should say, What needs all this rejoicing? Are ye
not both stained with sin, and blackned with suffering? She answers by a
distinction, granting that in part she was black, and that was truth, yet that
blackness was not inconsistent with comeliness, which she clears, and that
therefore she might in part rejoice also. The other way that this depends on
the former is, that she may further her project of engaging others to rejoice
with her, she endeavors to remove these two occasions of stumbling (taken from
the failings and sufferings of the Godly) out of the way of weak Professors,
that she may get them along with her; and so it agrees well with the scope.

4. More particularly consider the words, wherein she endeavors to satisfy
these doubts, and ye will find these things in them. 1. She conceds what is
truth. 2. Qualifies it by a distinction. 3. Illustrates it. And these three are
in the 5. verse. (4.) In verse. 6. She applies it. And 5. more particularly
explicats it. First then (says she) I answer, by conceding what is truth, I am
black, both with crosses and corruptions, that cannot be denied. 2. She
qualifies her concession, though I be black, yet I am comely, that is, I am not
universally or altogether unlovely, mine estate is mixed, being made up of
crosses and comforts, corruptions and graces, beauty and blackness. 3. She
illustrates this description of her self, or her mixed condition, by two
similitudes, both tending to one thing, or one of them tending to set forth her
blackness, the other her beauty. I am (says she) like the Tents of Kedar,
which were blackish, and of no great value, being, by these who lived in them,
so frequently transported in such hot countries; this sets forth her
blackness. The 2. similitude is, that she was like the Curtains of Solomon: he
built glorious dwellings, and being a rich King, no question had rich Hangings;
this sets forth her beauty: as if she would say, ye must not judge of my worth
from one side, especially my outside, or upon one consideration, for I have in
me, both to humble and comfort me. It may be also, though these Tents of Kedar
were not outwardly beautiful, yet they were within well furnished; and that the
Curtains of Solomon which were most rich, had outer coverings of smaller value,
as the Tabernacle had of Badgers skins; and so the similitudes illustrate her
condition, and sets out the thing more to the life, as Kedar's Tents (says
she) look poor and base-like, yet if ye look within, they are glorious; so
think not strange, if I appear without beauty to the eye, there may be, yea,
there is comeliness within, if ye could discern it, for within the Kings
daughter is all glorious, Psalm. 45. 13. which way of distinguishing, is a
notable piece of spiritual wisdom and learning, and a great mean of peace in
our selves; when what is true of our infirmities, is acknowledged, and yet the
conclusion that tentation would infer, is denied. Here observe, 1. The
conditions of Believers, even the best of them are mixed of good and ill, sin
and grace, comfortable privileges and sad sufferings. 2. There is a mixture of
blackness in Believers beauty, even in their best frame and condition, for she
is now in the King's Chamber, and yet we find her saying, I am black. 3.
Believers, if they would consider what they are rightly, they would look on
themselves as having contraries in them. 4. Where challenges are just and well
grounded, they should be acknowledged, and taken with. 5. It is wisdom so to
acknowledge our sin, as we may difference it from any work of God's grace in
us. 6. Believers their observing of their sinfulness, should not make them
deny their grace; and their observing their grace, should not make them forget
their sinfulness. 7. The cross that follows godliness, or the stain and spot
that is on a godly person, is sooner taken notice of by on-lookers, than either
the advantages that follow holiness, or the graces and spiritual beauty of
holy persons; this makes it needful to remove this offense. 8. When it may be
edifying, Believers would assert the worth and beauty of holiness, and their
own comeliness thereby, as well as confess their own infirmities; and
Christian communion will require both.

Having illustrate her answer, in the 4. place she applies it, ver. 6. Look not
on me (says she) because I am black, seeing I am comely as well as black; look
not on me only as such, and think it not strange that I am so: Looking here,
implies indignation and disdain. And so, Look not, is here to be taken, 1. As
being a caveat against indignation or disdain: Look not, etc. that is, disdain
me not, as if nothing desirable were in me; for, sin often waiting on the
affliction of God's people, obscures the beauty of grace, and makes them to be
disdained and undervalued in the world. 2. This Look not, is a caution to
dissuade them from gazing, or curious wondering at any cross that was on her,
or sin that was in her: It should not be the object of their curiosity, much
less of their delight, or contentment to see it so, Obad. 12. It Is condemned
in Edom, Thou should not have looked upon the day of thy brother. Next, while
she says, Look not upon me because I am black, she does not dissuade them from
looking on her blackness simply, but from looking only on it, that should not
be the alone ground of their search into her condition, but they should take
notice of what good was in her, as well as what was wrong: So then, her
blackness, should not be the only cause of their looking on her, it should not
be their work to ask after her crosses and infirmities, and no more; this she
suppons may afright and terrify them; And so it is employed here, that
on-lookers often pore more on Believers infirmities, than on their graces; and
this is the fruit which follows, they procure a stumbling and fall to
themselves.

5. In the rest of the 6. verse. she does more fully explicate her answer, in so
far as concerned her blackness (for so the words run in this 6. verse.) two
ways, 1. In setting out her sufferings in general. 2. In a more particular
distribution of the kind and occasions of her seeming unlovelinesse. Generally,
her sad condition is expressed in these words, The Sun has looked upon me. The
Sun in these Countries had great heat, as we may see in Jonah 4. 8. where the
beating of the Sun upon him did sore vex him; Jacob also says, it burnt him in
the daytime, Genesis 31. 40. Therefore, Matthew, 13. 6. and 21. the Lord expresses
persecution, under the similitude of the scorching heat of the Sun. Here the
meaning is (as if she had said) it is no marvel I be black, I have been made
obnoxious to all sorts of persecution, and therefore can have no outward
beauty, but must be in the eyes of the world contemptible, even as one cannot
endure the hot Sunbeams and not be blackned. So there are in this expression,
these things imported, 1. Persecution. 2. Vehement persecution. 3. Visible
effects following it, she is thereby made black. 4. A continuance under it. So
the Sun's looking on her, till she be made black, imports 5. There is her
patient enduring of it. 6. There is her sense of it. Yet, 7. she is not ashamed
of it, while she shows this her suffering to be no cause, why others should
stumble at her.

Afterward, she proceeds more particularly, to describe first her sufferings,
then her infirmities. She describes her sufferings, 1. In the instruments of
them. 2. The cause of them. 3. The nature of them. The actors are not heathens,
but mothers children; the visible Church is the common mother, who has
children born after the flesh, as well as after the Spirit; These children are
professors of the same truth, but really not only strangers, but heart-enemies
to Godliness and true tenderness; Such was Ishmael, and such are all
unrenewed persons, who are children of the flesh, and such there will be ( Gal.
4. 29.) so long as there is a Church visible: Such instruments the Apostle
complains of, 2 Cor. 11. 26. that he had perils from false brethren within, as
well as from strangers without. This is not only mentioned to show there are
such enemies, but to set out more fully the Churches strait; she is often more
bitterly, and more subtly persecuted by these who are called Christians, or
Professors of the Gospel, than by Heathens themselves.

2. The cause of her sufferings, as from men, is, They were angry with me
(says she;) She had not done them any personal wrong (as David often asserts
of himself, in the like case) though she was not free of sin against God; but
it proceeded from a malicious, malignant disposition of the natural men of the
World, who, as they hate Christ, so do they hate all that are his, Ioh. 15. 18,
19. accounting them as the off-scourings of all men, and troublers of the World
continually, upon no other ground, but because they are not such as themselves,
and because God has chosen them out of the World. This shows both the
causlessenesse of their persecution, as also the degree of bitterness, that it
did proceed from. From which, Obs. 1. There are no such bitter enemies unto a
godly person, as a graceless malignant Professor: See Isa. 66. 5. 2. No sort
of persecution does so blacken, or obscure the beauty of an honest Believer so
much, as the foul b^tter reproaches of malignant Professors. Yet, 3. Believers
are often even under that cross. And 4. The best beloved Believer, even
Christ's Bride, will not in the World eschew it; innocence will be no guard,
but to the conscience within. And if the Bridegroom himself, while he was in
the World, did not escape it, the Bride cannot think to go free.

The nature of her sufferings is expressed thus, They made me keeper of the
Vineyards. That this implies suffering, and no trust put on her, the scope and
her complaint makes it clear: Beside, that it is given as the evidence of the
hatred and malice of these persecuters. This general expression then, being
compared with other Scriptures, will import these ingredients in her suffering,
which occasioned her blackness. 1. That her suffering was heavy and painful;
for it was a great drudgery, to be put to keep the Vineyards; to be made
keeper, was to watch both night and day, and so no wonder she was scorched,
Matthew. 20. 11. The bearing burdens in the Vineyard, in the heat of the day, is
spoken of as the greatest weight, and heaviest piece of their work. 2 That her
suffering was reproachful; for, the keeping of the Vineyards: was a base and
contemptible service, therefore it is said, Ier. 52. 16. that the poor, who were
not taken notice of, were left to dress the Vines; and it is a promise, Isai.
61. 5. that his people should have freedom from that drudgery, and strangers
should be employed in it, for them. 3. That her sufferings occasioned sad
distractions to her in the worship and service of God; for, in Scripture
sometimes, Vine-dressing is opposed to the worshipping of God, as a
distracting, diverting exercise, which is very afflicting to God's people:
Therefore when they have a promise of more immediate access to God's worship,
it is said, they shall be liberate from such diverting employments, Isai. 61. 5.
and 6. and in stead of these, they shall get another task, to wit, to be
Priests to the Lord, and Ministers of our God, as if these exercises were
somewhat inconsistent together; and so she opposes her own proper duty to
this, in the next words: In a word, these malignant brethren procured her pain,
shame, and distraction from the service of God, as much as they could, and in a
great part prevailed.

Observe. 1. Malice in rotten Professors against godliness, will sometimes come
to a great height. 2. Malice in wicked men thinks nothing of true tenderness,
or of these who truly are so; but esteems them, and uses them as if they were
most base and vile. 3. Often in outward things, the prophanest members of the
Church have the preeminence; and the most godly, as to these things, are in the
meanest and basest condition; so as sometimes, they appoint the godly as their
slaves, to their work. 4. Often while wicked professors are in power, the
truly godly are under affliction.

Though this suffering was sharp, yet she resents her sinful infirmities much
more sadly, in the words following, But (says she heavily) mine own Vineyard
have I not kept; and this her sloathfulnesse and unwatchfulnesse made her
black, and also procured the blackness that was on her by her sufferings. This
part of the verse implies, 1. The Brides privilege. 2. Her duty. 3. Her sin.
4. Her sense of it. 1. Her privilege is, she has a Vineyard of her own,
beside these she was put to keep. The similitude of a Vineyard here, is to be
taken in another sense, than in the former expression; Neither are we to think
strange of this, seeing similitudes are to be interpret according to the
different scope of expressions, and places in which they are used. By Vineyard
then here, is to be understood the particular privileges, graces and talents
of any sort, which are given of God to a Believer: these are the things she
should have watched over; the neglecting thereof, brings blackness on her, and
procures heavy challenges, called a Vineyard here; and also, Chap. 8. 13.
partly, because there are many several graces to be found in Believers, as
plants planted in them; partly, because these will furnish them matter of
continual exercise and labor; and partly, because what they have, they are to
improve, that there may be fruit on them, and rent brought in to the master
that entrusted them. Chap. 8. 12. 13. This Vineyard is called hers, because the
special oversight and charge of it, was committed to her. 2. Her duty is to keep
and watch over this Vineyard, that is, to improve the talents she has gotten,
to see that no plants be unfruitful, and that no hurt from any cause inward or
outward annoy them: Christianity or Godliness is no idle task, every
privilege has a duty waiting on it. 3. Her sin is, that what with other
diversions, and what from her own unwatchfulnesse, she had neglected the
keeping of this Vineyard; so that this one task, which was put in her hand, she
had not discharged it; but lasinesse came on, and the Vineyard was not dressed,
thorns and nettles grew, and tentations brake in, and this marred her
fruitfulness: In a word, she was no way answerable to the trust was put on her
by Christ. 4 She resents this: where these things may be taken notice of, 1.
She sees it, and observes it. 2. She acknowledges it. 3. She is sensible of it,
and weighted with it, as the greatest piece of her affliction. It Is ill to be
unwatchful, for that may draw on both fruitlessenesse and heaviness on a
Believer; but it is good to observe and be affected with it, and to be walking
under the sense of it, even in our most joyful frame, such as hers was here.

Here then, Obs. 1. Believers have a painful laborious task of duty committed
to them. 2. They may much neglect this work, and task wherewith they are
entrusted. 3. Neglect and sloth makes the weeds to grow in their Vineyard, and
the building which they ought to keep up, to drop through. 4. It Is not
unsuitable or unprofitable for Believers, in their most refreshing conditions
and frames, sadly to remember their former unwatchfulnesse, and to be suitably
affected therewith. 5. Believers should be well acquaint at home, how it stands
with them as to their own condition and state. 6. They who are best versed in
their own condition, will find most clearly the cause of all their hurt to be
in themselves; what ever is wrong in their case, themselves have the only
guilty hand in it.

If any should ask, how makes this last part of the verse for her scope, in
removing the offense before these weak beginners? I Ans. It does it well: for,
says she, there is no reason ye should stumble, or be troubled because of my
afflictions, they were without cause, as to men, though I am under much sin and
guilt before God: Neither scarr at godliness or joy in Christ, because of my
infirmities; for, these spots came from mine own unwatchfulnesse, and not from
godliness it self (which is the souls special beauty) therefore take warning
from my slips, and study to prevent the bringing on of such a stain and blot
upon your profession, by security and negligence; but esteem not the less, but
the more of Christ his people and ways, and the beauty of holiness, which is
to be seen in them; because by my unwatchfulnesse and untendernesse, I have
marred this beauty in my self, and that is the reason I look so deformed-like.

Verse. 7. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou
make thy flocks to rest at noon: for why should I be as one that turns
aside by the flocks of thy companions?
In the 7. Verse, We have the 3. part of the Brides first speech; in which, she
turns her self from the Daughters, to the Bridegroom; and the scope of what
she speaks here is, that by applying her self, by prayer and faith, to Christ
Jesus (who is, and whom she for comfort acknowledges to be the great and good
Shepherd of his sheep, Ioh. 10. 11.) she may be guarded against the hurtful
effects of these two evils which she acknowledged in the former verse, to wit,
afflictions and sinful infirmities; In respect of the one, she desires Christ's
guiding; and in respect of the other, his consolation; that so she being under
his charge, may be upheld by him, and kept from miscarrying: That this is the
scope, and so depends upon the former verse, especially the last part of it,
will be clear by comparing the last part of this verse, and the last part of
the former together. There are these three in it. 1. The title given to Christ.
2. The petition, or thing sought. 3. The argument, whereby it is enforced.

First, The title is a sweet and affectionat one, O thou whom my soul loves.
In this title these things are employed, 1. A loveliness in Christ, and such a
soul-affecting and ravishing loveliness, as no creature-beauty has, nor can
have. 2. An ardent and vehement love in her toward him, so that she might say,
her soul loved, honored desired, and esteemed him. 3. A dis-relishing of all
things beside Christ, as nothing; He is the only object her soul loves, he
alone has her heart, and is in the throne as chief in her affections, and has
no allowed co-partner there, to whom this title may be applied. 4. It Is
employed, what title Christ will best accept of, even that which bears out most
affection to him; there can be no greater honor, or more acceptable piece of
respect put on him by a Believer, than this, to own him and avow him as the
only object of his souls love; as the Bride does here, O thou whom my soul
loves!

2. The thing that is here sought by the Bride, is set down in two petitions,
meetting with the twofold strait she was in, to wit, of crosses and
infirmities; and because fear of sin weighed her most, she begins with the suit
that might guard against that, and in the reason presses it most. The first
Petition then is, Tell me where thou feedest, (to wit, thy flock,) for feeding,
here is to be understood actively, that is, where he feeds others; and not
passively (as in other places) where he feeds and delights himself. The 2
Petition is, Tell me where thou make thy flocks to rest at noon; That is,
make me know, where and how thou comforts and refreshes thy people, under
scorching persecutions and trials: So these Petitions go upon the relation that
is between Christ and his people, of Shepherd and flock, which is frequent in
Scripture. In sum, that which she seeks, is this, Thou who guids all thine, as
a shepherd does a flock, let me know how thou orders thy people, and carries
them through in times of snares, and where thou refreshest them in time of
trouble: These being the two great duties of a shepherd, are well performed by
Christ. 1. It Is his work to feed them, and lead them in wholesome and safe
pastures, Psalm. 23. And, 2. to give them quiet and cool resting-places in the
time of heat, when the Sun becomes scorching; and therefore prays she to him,
Seeing thou do both these to thine, let me know the right way of partaking of
the benefit of thy care. Which two Petitions imply, 1. That there is a near
relation betwixt Christ and all Believers, he is the shepherd, and they the
flock. Isa. 40. 11. Ezekiel. 34. 11. 12. Psalm. 23. 1, 2. 2. That Christ's flock
may be, yea, usually are in hazard both of sin or straying, and also of
affliction. 3. That Christ Jesus is tender of his people, in reference to any
hazard they are in of sin, or suffering; He is the good shepherd, Ioh. 10. 11.
he carries the lambs in his bosom, Isa. 40. 11. he stands and feeds his flock,
Micah 5. 4. 4. That he has resting-places, and shaddows for refreshing and
hiding his people, in all the storms and heats they may meet with. 5. That
Believers sometimes under straits, may not know well how, either to rid
themselves out of tentations, or to quiet themselves under crosses, till he
help them with light and strength: they cannot know the Well, whence their
supply and consolation comes, till it be discovered, as it was to Hagar. 6.
That even then, when they know not how to be guarded against sin, and shaddowed
under suffering, Christ knows both, and has help in both these cases provided
for them. 7. That as it is he who must guide them in snares, and support them in
sufferings; so Believers, when they are at their own wits-end in respect of
both, ought even then to look for help and direction in these from him.

The reason presses for his guiding, with a great weight; For, why (says she)
should I be as one that turns aside, after the flocks of thy companions? In
which, these things are employed, 1. That Christ may have companions, (not who
are indeed so, but) such who ^et themselves up equally beside him, and make it
their design to have others to follow them, but do not follow Christ
themselves; Thus Heretics, false Christ's, Matthew. 24. 23, 24. lusts, idols, or
whatever is equalled or preferred to Christ, and not subjected to him, is made,
as it were, his companion: sure, the scope shows, they were not friendly
companions; but it speaks the nature of corrupt men, who are seducers, and the
sin of seduced people, that the one seeks to themselves, and the other
attributes to them, too much. 2. That these companions may have flocks, and
many followers, even as our Lord Jesus has, so Matthew. 24. 23. 2 Pet. 2. 1,
etc. 3. That Believers, if not by Christ's care prevented, may go astray after
some of these companions, and throng on in a way of error and defection with
them. 4. That Believers will be afraid of this ill, and also sensible of their
own propensnesse to it. 5. It imports an abhorrency and indignation at that
evil, of being carried away a whooring from Christ, Why (says she) should I
be, etc? 6. She accounts it a great mercy to be kept in Christ's way, and makes
it a main piece of her prayer, that this may be granted to her as her mercy. 7.
She exercises faith on Christ, and vents her requests by prayer to him,
concerning every thing she wants; be wanting what will, she betakes her self to
him for the obtaining of it. 8. Where there is a loathnesse to go astray, or
fall in snares, it will stir up to serious wrestling with Christ to prevent it.
9. Hazard of sin to Believers (who are sensible of their inclination to go
astray) and weakness to hold on in Gods way, is a great motive that being made
use of in prayer, has much weight for obtaining direction, and an hearing from
Christ; as it is a notable spur to stir up to pray seriously, For (says she)
why should I be, etc? which speaks forth her indignation against every wrong
way, and her expectation, that if any thing prevailed with him, that would; and
so we will find her success in this suit, to follow in the next words.

2 Part. CHRIST'S Words.
Verse. 8. If thou know not, (O thou fairest among Women) go thy way forth by
the footsteps of the Flock, and feed thy Kids beside the Shepherds Tents.
From the 8. verse. to the 12, follows Christ's express return to her former
suit; and because it is he that speaks, we take it up as the second part of the
Chapter. In the Brids condition there was, 1. Crosses and afflictions. 2. Sins
and infirmities. 3. Snares and hazard of new failings. Now Christ so frames his
answer, as he may meet with all her necessities most comfortably and lovingly;
and because she was most affected with the fear of sin, he answers that first:
And so he does, 1. In order to her being guided against snares, give a
direction for her duty, verse. 8. 2. In order to her consolation under her
suffering, and the sense of her ^ailings, he commends her, verse. 9, 10. 3. He
gives her a promise, in order to her further consolation, verse. 11. The scope
of all is, to comfort her; and every part of the answer being from Christ's
mouth, may be effectual for that end.

In the direction, verse. 8. there is, 1. The Title he gives her. 2. The
directions themselves, which are two. 3. A supposition, or ground upon which he
gives them.

First, The Title he gives her is ( O thou fairest among Women) which is much
from Christ to the Bride, who immediately before styled her self black;
Believers who are humble under the sense of their own infirmities, are never
the less highly esteemed by Christ; nor are always his thoughts of Believers
as theirs are of themselves; nay, by the contrary, blushing at their own
deformity, is a chief part of their beauty. The giving her this title, implies
these three things, 1. A real worth in a believer, beyond the most noble person
in the world. 2. A real respect unto, and esteem that Christ has of them,
which he has of none other. 3. Wonderful tenderness, condescending for her
consolation, to intimat these his thoughts of her to her self, now when she was
otherwise sadly afflicted, and under a double distress.

If it be asked, how these excellent titles and commendations may be applied to
a sinful believer. Ans. These four ways, 1. By communication and participation
of the divine Nature, they have a stamp of the Spirit of holiness imparted to
them, whereby they resemble God, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and none other in the World can
compare with them in this. 2. In respect of the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, wherewith they are adorned, and which they have put on, which
makes them very glorious and lovely, so that they are beautiful beyond all
others, through his comeliness put upon them. 3. In respect of Christ's
gracious acceptance, whereby he does esteem otherwise of them, than of the
most royal and beautiful in the world, they find such favor in his eyes. 4. In
respect of his design, project and purchase; she is so, and to be made so in
end; he will have his people made completely beautiful and spotless, before he
have done with them, Ephesians. 5. 26. without spot and wrinkle: all which are
peculiar to a believer, of whom glorious things are spoken and written, which
are applicable to none other.

The Directions are two, Would thou know, says he, how to be kept out of
snares? Then, 1. Look how the old Worthies walked, and follow their way. 2.
Have respect to the public Ordinances, and hold near them, that you may have
direction from the Word, by these to whom I have committed the trust of
dipensing the same: I have (says he) no new light to give you, nor any new way
to heaven to show you, nor any new means, ordinances, or officers to send
amongst you, nor yet must ye expect immediate revelations; but walk in the light
that shines to you, by the preaching of the Word by my Ministers, who are the
under-shepherds which I have set over you: For thus I guide all my counsel,
whom I afterward receive to glory.

The first Direction ( go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock) holds
forth, 1. That all believers, of old and late, are of one flock, of one common
concernment, and under the care of one chief shepherd: This is the flock spoken
of, verse. 7. whereof Christ is shepherd. 2. That there is but one way to
heaven, for the substantials of faith and godliness, in which they that went
before have walked, and these that follow-after must walk in the same way, if
ever they think to come there. 3. That there are many in all ages, whom God
has helped in trying times to keep in his way, and have been carried well
through all difficulties to heaven. 4. That believers would observe these
beyond others, as being especially worthy of imitation. 5. That they should,
and may follow the commendable practices of believers in former times, and not
affect singularity. 6. That it is commendable, and often safe in times when new
opinions and doctrines bear sway, to follow their way, who we are sure went
before us to Heaven, Heb. 13. 7. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. Heb. 6. 14. This imitation of
others, is to be limited with that necessary caution, in so far as the practice
of others agrees with the first pattern, Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. In a word, this
Direction shows there is no way, but the good old way to be asked for, and
followed in the most declining times, Ier. 6. 16. and that we would keep the
very print of their steps, studying to be followers of their faith, who have
been honorably carried through before us.

The 2. Direction puts them to the right use and improvement of the Ministry
of the Word, which he will have them to respect; feed thy Kids beside the
Shepherds tents. Shepherds here in the plural number, are the servants of that
one Shepherd, whose own the sheep are: So Ministers are called often Shepherds
or Pastors, both in the Old and New Testament, 1. Because of their relation to
Christ, by whom they are entrusted to feed his sheep; He is the Owner, they are
but Shepherds, Ezekiel. 34. 2. Because of their relation to the flock, which is
committed to their care, and for which they must give an account, Heb. 13. 17.
3. Because of the nature of their charge, as being assiduous, difficult, and
tenderly to be gone about; For, such is the work and care of a shepherd, as we
may see by what Jacob speaks of himself, when he had the charge of Laban's
flock. Genesis 31. 40. 4. To show the necessity of that Ordainance. And 5. The
respect people ought to have to them, who are over them in the Lord: No flock
needs a shepherd more than a Congregation needs a Minister, people without
laborers, being like sheep without a shepherd, Matthew. 9. 36. under a sad
necessity of wandering and being lost. Next, Shepherds tents are mentioned,
with allusion to these parts, where shepherds in the wilderness carried tents
about with them; and so to be near the tent, was to be near the shepherd: It Is
like they kept Lambs and Kids nearest unto their tents, because they needed
more oversight than the rest of the flock, for a lamb to be at it is liberty in
a large place, was dangerous, Hos. 4. 16. By Kids, we understand young
unexperienced believers or professors, whereby it is clear, 1. That there are
kids and young ones in Christ's flock. Yea, 2. That the strongest believers,
even the Bride, have their own infirmities; and there are some particulars
wherein they are weak: For this direction is given to the Bride, as a
particular and experienced believer; and seeing ordinarily weak believers are
called Lambs, and unrenewed men Goats, it may be Kids here are mentioned to
point at the relicts of sinful nature, even in believers, which is the reason
why they need still oversight. 3. It Is clear, that the office of the
Ministry, is a standing perpetual and necessary office in the Church,
otherwise this direction would not always satisfy the believers question here
proposed. 4. The strongest believers, have need and use of a Ministry. 5. It Is
a great part of a Minister's charge, to keep believers right, in snaring and
seducing times, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. etc. 6. Believers would make use of public
ordinances, and Christ's Ministers, especially in reference to snares and
errors; and they would take their directions from them, and in their
difficulties consult with them, and their counsel would be laid weight upon. 7.
Allowed dependence on a Ministry* is a great mean to keep souls from error;
whereas on the contrary, when no weight is laid on a ministry, unstable souls
are hurried away. 8. Christ has given no immediate or extraordinary way to be
sought unto, and made use of, even by his Bride, in her difficulties; but the
great mean he will have her to make use of, is a sent ministry, and therefore
no other is to be expected: It Is no wonder therefore the devil (when his design
is to cry down truth and spread error) seek to draw the Lord's people from the
shepherds tents; and no wonder souls, who once do cast off respect to their
Overseers, be hurried away with the temptations of the times, as in experience
has often been found a truth. 9. Ministers should have a special eye on the
weakest of the flock, their care should be that the Kids may be next them: Our
blessed Lord does so, when the Lambs are carried in his own bosom, Isa. 40.
11. and therefore, seeing weak believers have most need of Christ's oversight,
if they begin to slight the Ministry and Ordinances, they cannot but be a
ready prey; and the devil has gained much of his intent when he has once
gained that. O that men would try whose voice that is, that says, Come aback
from the shepherds tents (when Christ says, Abide near them) It Is as if a Wolf
would desire the Lambs to come out from under the shepherd's eye; And lastly,
when Christ gives this direction to his own Bride, we may see he allows none
to be above ordinances in the militant Church, it will be soon enough then,
when they are brought to heaven, and put above the reach of seducers.

The supposition is in these words, If thou know not, etc. which is not any
upbraiding answer, but tends to insinuat the direction the more; I have given
you means (says he) and so he puts her back to the serious use of these, as he
sent Paul, Acts 9. to Ananias, to have his mind made known by him: Which
implies, 1. That a believer may be in many things ignorant. 2. That Christ
pities the ignorant, and has compassion on them who are out of the way, or are
in hazard to go out of the way, Heb. 5. 3. That believers would not in praying
to Christ, neglect the ordinary means in seeking knowledge; nor in using them,
neglect him: She prays to him, and he directs her in them. 4. Directions for a
believers walk, given by Christ's Ministers from his Word, are his own, and are
accounted by him as if he did immediately speak them himself. 5. Christ would
have his Ministry and Ordinances kept up in esteem and request amongst his
people; Therefore, he will not be particular in giving answer to his Bride, but
sends her to them, that she might know the usefulness of them, and learn to
know his mind from them. 6. They cannot expect to make great progress in
Religion, that neglects the Ministry, seeing it is to them, that Christ
recomends his own Bride; If people were inquiring at Christ, what should they
do now in a time, when temptations to error and defection abound? no other
answer were to be expected, then what he gives to his Bride here: Yea, if
Abraham were entreated to send some from the dead, to advise people to abhor
profanity and error: His answer would be, they have Moses and the Prophets,
they shall have no other, and no other would prevail, if these Ordinances do
not: People would conscienciously, and thriftily use the means and light they
have; for, it is by such the Lord trains his own Bride: and though he will admit
her as a courtier to his Chamber, yet this familiarity he admits her to, is in
the use of Ordinances, and he will have no believer above Ordinances and need
of Ministers, whiles he keeps them within the compass of snares.

Verse. 9. I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaoh's
Chariots.
Verse. 10. Thy cheeks are comely with rows of Jewels, thy neck with chains of
Gold.
The commendation follows, verse. 9, 10, in which the Bridegroom has respect
to two things, which afflicted her most in her condition. 1. That she was in
hazard to be a prey to every sin, and to every enemy. 2. That she lay under
many blots, and was made black by her own miscarriages; Therefore the Lord,
that he might comfort her against those, is brought-in speaking thus: Thou art
neither so weak, nor so black and unbeautiful as the world thinks thee, and as
thou esteems of thy self, my testimony of thee is better to be believed, than
either the worlds, or thy own; and I assert thee to be stately and strong,
beautiful and comely.

First, Verse. 9. He sets out her stateliness, strength and courage, by a
similitude taken from horses, are (says he) Horses stately and strong? For so
in Job is the horse described, Chap. 39. 19, 20, etc. and is not a Company of
them much more stately, especially a company of Egyptian horses, which were the
best in the World? 2 Chronicles. 1. 17. Isa. 31. 1. And if any in Egypt were beyond
others, certainly Pharaoh the King had such in his own Chariots. Now (says he)
if these be lovely, strong and stately, then thou art so; For, I have compared
thee to such: This expression, I have compared thee, bears out the confirmation
of the assertion; for, it is not men that thinks thee so, but I who knows where
true worth is, and who can be surety for my own assertion, I have said thou art
as strong as these, I have likened thee to them, and made thee like them. This
holds forth these things, 1. That there is an excellent courage and boldness,
wherewith the believer is furnished beyond others, he is bold as a Lion, Prove.
28. 1. both in duties and sufferings. 2. That there is in believers an
undauntednesse of spirit, and an unconquerablenesse, that overcome they cannot
be; better fight with all Pharaoh's Chariots, than with them, Zech. 12. Rev.
12. 3. The words hold out, that there is an infallible certainty in this truth;
we have here Christ's verdict of it, he in his reckoning counts believers so,
and he cannot be mistaken. 4. There is the cause, why the Bride is so strong
and stately, he makes her so: And so these words, I have compared thee, may be
taken efficiently, I have made thee comparable, or made thee to be like them;
and there is an article in the Original, which may confirm this, and the words
may be turned, like my company of horses, or of my horses; which shows that, as
believers themselves ^re Christ's, so also, whatever stock of spiritual
strength and courage they have, it is his, and from him: And that they are
Christ's, and made use of by him, shows the use of their strength, Micah 4. 13.
and so Zech. 10. 3. they are called my goodly horse. 5. It implies this, that
it becomes not believers to droop, faint, or be discouraged under diff^culties,
seeing he has past such a sentence, or given such a verdict of them; It Is a
reflecting on him, as if it were not so with them as he affirms, or as if he
did bear false testimony concerning them. Now this courage, strength and
boldness which is here attributed to believers, is to be understood of that
which is competent to them peculiarly as believers; and their success in all
their spiritual conf^icts, is still to be looked upon with respect to the
event, which is ever to be more than conquerours, in the issue at least, what
ever appears for the present.

The second part of the commendation is, Verse. 10. Wherein her comeliness and
beautiful adorning, is set out: Though thou think thy self black (says he)
yet, Thy cheeks are comely with rows of Jewels, and thy neck with chains of
Gold: What is meant by neck, or cheeks, or chains, or rows of Jewels, we think
not necessary to be particularly inquired into; the allusion is to Women, who
in these places, by such ornaments used to be adorned; and possibly there is
here also an allusion to the horses of great ones, who are said to have chains
of gold about their necks, Judge. 8. 26.

The scope and sum of the verse may be taken up in these things, 1. That though
the Bride have some infirmities, yet there is exceeding great comeliness and
loveliness to be seen in her, she is said to be comely, and that out of
Christ's own mouth: Certainly grace puts much real beauty upon the person that
has it. 2. That she has more ornaments than one, there are here Jewels in the
plural number, and chains of Gold also; one grace goes never alone, neither is
imputed righteousness and sanctification ever separat; who ever has one
grace, has all. 3. That this beauty which is to be seen on believers is
universal, as to the subject; for, here one part of the body is adorned, as
well as another, both neck and cheeks; the whole man is renewed, and the person
is justified. 4. This comeliness grows not of any stock within the believer,
nor is it natural to him, but it is communicate or imparted beauty, such as is
put on, a comeliness proceeding from the beneficence of another, and is the
work of a cunning workman. See Ezekiel. 16. 10, 11. where similitudes, like these
in this Text, are made use of.

Verse. 11. We will make thee borders of Gold, with studs of Silver.
In the 11. Verse. for confirming of the former consolation, he gives her a
promise; the scope whereof is to obviat an objection, which jealous sense might
make against what he has said: How shall beauty be obtained, or continued?
might she say, whence shall it come, seeing I am so black and loathsome? To this
he answers, as it were, by a sweet promise, We will make, etc. Wherein we may
consider, 1. The thing promised, it is borders of Gold, and studs of Silver. 2.
The party promising, and undertaking the performance of it: We will make them
to thee, says he.

Borders of Gold, and studs of Silver(it is like) have been some special
ornaments in these days, and that which is here pointed at by them, in general
seems to be an addition to what formerly the Bride possessed, he would add to
her beauty, and gloriously complete it: And certainly it must be an excellent
work, which needs such workers as are here spoken of. We take the thing
promised, to comprehend the increase, continuance and perfecting of her
comeliness and beauty; in which work the blessed Trinity are engaged: and so,
the second thing is, who undertakes it, We will make thee, says the
Bridegroom: This word make, in the Original is used for making of man at first,
Genesis 1. 26. As also, for renewing of him, and begetting holiness in him, Psalm.
100. because it is no less work to renew, than to creat man. The number here is
changed from the singular, I have compared, etc. Verse. 9. to the plural, We
will, etc. As it is also in the first making of man, from the singular, He made
Heaven and Earth, to the plural, let Us make man according to our Image; as if
the Holy Ghost, purposly, in mentioning this renewing-work of grace, did allude
to the first work of man's creation. And this, 1. To show, the excellency of it,
not that God was put to any deliberation, but that the work was, and is
exceeding excellent, and therefor deliberatly, as it were, gone about. 2. To
show, that man has no more hand in his renovation than his first creation,
that is, he is no more of himself able to bring about the one than the other.
By this We, we do not understand God speaking of himself in the plural number,
as in some languages, for honors cause, Kings do of themselves: For, 1. If that
were more honorable, then it would have always been used for Gods honor,
especially at solemn times, such as when the Law was given; but we find the
contrary true from the Scripture. 2. Although that manner of speaking be used
in some other languages, yet it is never so used in the Hebrew tongue (as, by
these who understand it, is asserted; and by some of the most Learned Jews is
acknowledged) and therefore we understand the Trinity of Persons in one
Godhead to be here understood; for, this One is also Three, the Father, Son
and Spirit, having a joint design in promoving the Salvation of the Elect, Isa.
61. 1, 2. And grace being a work, and gift prayed for, from them all, Rev. 1.
4, 5. it must be understood of these three blessed Persons of the holy Trinity,
this work being common to the three Persons of the Godhead, and communicable
to no other. This then makes the consolation strong; for, says Christ,
although the perfecting of your grace be a great task, and far above your
reach, yet fear not, We, the Father, Son and Spirit have undertaken it, and
shall make it out to you.

Hence we may lea^n, 1. That grown believers, even the Bride, has need of more
grace and spiritual comeliness; There is a necessity of looking after a
further growth in those, even to be transchanged from glory to glory, 2. Cor.
3. ult. 2. That growing ingrace, and perseverance therein, is a great
consolation and comfort to a true believer; and therefore the promise of it is
given to the Bride for that end here. 3. That neither growth in grace, nor
perseverance therein, is a work of the believers own working, but the
omnipotency of grace is exercised here. 4. There is plurality of persons in the
one Godhead; The Godhead, that is I, is also We. 5. All the persons of the
blessed Trinity concur, and are engaged in promoving the holiness, and in
perfecting the beauty of a believer. 6. All the graces of a believer are pieces
of the workmanship of the holy Trinity: Grace then must be an excellent thing.
7. The perfecting and perseverance of a believer is infallibly sure and
certain, seeing all the persons of the Godhead are engaged in this work; and
they who this day are believers, may promise this to themselves. 8. Much of
believers beauty is yet in the promise, and in the perfecting, so that it has
it is defects and imperfections while they are here. 9. What is promised is so
sure, that it ought to be no less comfortable, than if it were enjoyed; for
the promise ought to have no less weight for that end, than the former
commendation. 10. Christ allows his people freedom from anxiety, because of
things that are to come, and to be comforted in him against the fears of
those, as well as to draw consolation from him against any evil that is
present; therefore is this intimat unto them. 11. Believers ought still to hold
all their enjoyments and privileges as from him, and the expectation of what
is coming, as well as the performance of what is past. 12. Faith in the
promise, has a large comprehensive object to rest upon, and to draw
consolation from, even the power of the Godhead, and what may be by the Father,
Son and Spirit created, and brought about for a believers good, even though it
have not at present a being; we will make thee what is wanting and what is
needful, says the promise; creating power is engaged to through his work
concerning them, I creat the fruit of the lips, Isa. 57. 19. and I will creat
Jerusalem a joy, etc. more cannot be desired, and less the Lord allows not.

Part 3. BRIDES Words.
Verse. 12. While the King sits at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth the
smell thereof.
Verse. 13. A bundle of Myrrh is my beloved unto me; he shall lie all night
betwixt my breasts.
Verse. 14. My beloved is unto me as a cluster of Camphire in the Vineyards of
En-gedi.
The third Part of the Chapter follows in these three verses, 12. 13. 14. In
it, the Bride expresses how refreshful Christ was to her, and how she did
solace her self in him: This she holds forth, not only in the sweet and warm
title she gives him; But further in these three things, 1. She declares the
comfortablenesse of the fellowship she had with him, verse. 12. 2. By two
comparisons she illustrats it, in the beginning of the 13. and 14. verse. 3. She
sets forth the warmness of her own affections to him in the end of verse. 13.

The titles she gives him are two, 1. The King, whereby his Sovereignty and
Majesty is set forth. The second is beloved or welbeloved, a title importing
much love and affection: It differs from that title, my love, which he gave
her, verse. 9. for that is a compellation given to her by him, as from a
Superior to an in^e^ior, or as from an Husband to a Wife; this title which she
here gives him, is as from an inferior, as a wi^e to her husband. The first,
holds forth condescending tenderness; the second, respective love; but both
agree in this, that they are most loving, and affectionat titles.

She sets forth the comfortableness of Christ's fellowship, verse. 12. Where, we
are to consider these three things, 1. The privilege of his sweet company,
which she enjoyed, in these words, The King sits at his Table. 2. The effect
thereof, held forth in this similitude, my spikenard, etc. 3. The connection of
these two, in this expression, while the King sits, etc.

First, The King here spoken of, is Christ, as was cleared, verse. 4. His Table
or feasting-hou^e is the Gospel, Prove. 9. 1, etc. where the feast of fat things
is prepared, Isa. 25. 6. His sitting at his Table, or her sitting with him at
it, imports familiar fellowship with him by the Gospel; So the Table of the
Lord is taken, 1 Cor. 10. 21. and Matthew. 22. 4. The comfortable fellowship that
is to be had with him by the Gospel, is held forth under the similitude of a
great feast; as fellowship in glory and enjoying of him there, is set out by
eating and drinking with him at his Table, Luke 22. 29, 30. Now this is most
friendly, when Christ not only furnishes a Table, Psalm. 23. 5. but he comes and
sits down, and sups with them, and admits them to sup with him, Rev. 3. 21. It
is called His Table, because he both furnishes it, and is Master and Maker of
the feast, yea, the matter of it also.

2. The effect of this fellowship, is my spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof. Spikenard here signifies the graces of the Spirit, wherewith the
believer is furnished out of the treasure of the sweet spices that are in
Christ: Which are compared to spikenard, because grace is precious in it self,
and savoury and pleasant to God, Psalm. 141. 2. and to others also, who have
spiritual senses. To send forth the smell, is to be in lively exercise, and to
be fresh and vigorous; Grace without smell or lively exercise, being like
flowers somewhat withered that savor not, or like unbeaten spice, that sends
not forth it is savor.

3. There is the connection of this effect (which is so comfortable to her) with
Christ's presence, as the cause: It Is while he sits, that her Spikenard sends
forth it is smell, it is then and not else, that her graces flow; Such influence
has his presence on her, as a cool-wind has on a garden, for making the smell
thereof to flow out, as it is chap. 4. 16.

Here Obs. 1. Christ the Bridegroom is a King. 2. It makes all his
condescending to sinners the more lovely, admirable and comfortable, that he is
so excellent; that he being such a King; sits at the Table with poor
believers, is much; Love in Christ, brings his Majesty, as it were, below it
self, to feed and feast his poor people. 3. There is a way of most sweet, and
comfortable communion to be had even with the King, in his own Ordinances. 4.
There is a great difference betwixt an ordinance or duty, and Christ's presence
in it; These are separable. 5. It Is Christ present that makes a feast to a
believer, and makes all Gospel Ordinances and duties so refreshful. 6.
Believers may, and will observe, when Christ is at the Table, and when not: and
it will be empty to them when he is absent. 7. All the provision wherewith
believers table is furnished, and they are ^easted, is Christ. 8. Christ should
have a continued dwelling in the believer, and they a continual conversing with
him, as these who diet ordinarily at one table.

The effect (namely the flowing of her graces) and it is connection with his
presence, as the cause, shows, 1. There is a stock of grace, and Spikenard in
them, with whom Christ uses to sup, and there is no other but such admitted to
his table. 2. The graces of the Spirit in believers, may be in a great part
without savor, void of lively exercise, almost dead as to it is effects. 3. It
is exceedingly refreshful to believers, to have their graces flowing and
acting. 4. Christ's presence has much influence to make all things lively and
savoury, where he sits, all things that are beside him (as it were) blossoms
and savours; The graces of his people are then very fresh and lively. And, 5.
though grace be savoury in it self, yet in Christ's absence, that savor will
be restrained, and not sent forth; For, it is employed, that when the King sat
not at his table, her Spikenard did not send forth it is smell. 6. Christ's
company or fellowship with him, will not only be prized by believers, as it
brings sensible comfort to them; but also as it revives their graces, and makes
them lively.

2. Her satisfaction in Christ's fellowship, verse. 13. and 14. is illustrat in
two similitudes, whereby her holy fondness (to speak so) on him appears. The
1. similitude is, a bundle of myrrh. Mirrhe was a precious and savo^ry spice,
made use of in the anointing oil, Exodus 30. ^3. and in embalming Christ's
body. A bundle of it, signifies abundance of it, not a stalk or a grain, but a
bundle that must be of more worth, and virtue than a lesser quantity. The 2.
similitude, to the same scope, is, a cluster of Camphire, or Cypress; a sweet,
odoriserous and precious wood in these parts; and a cluster of it, implies a
congeries of it, having much of it is excellency bound up together: and under
these two similitudes (because one is not enough to set forth the thing) is
understood a most precious, refreshful excellency which is to be found in
Christ, and wherewith the most desirable excellency amongst the creatures being
compared, he is much more excellent than they all; He is more sweet and
precious than a cluster, even of that Camphire which grows in the Vineyards of
En-gedi, where it is like the most precious of that kind grew. Now these
expressions hold forth, 1. Christ's preciousnesse. 2. His efficacy and virtue.
3. His abounding in both; the worth and virtue that is in him, cannot be
comprehended, nor told. 4. The Brides wisdom in making use of such things to
describe Christ; and her affection in preferring him to all other things, and
in satisfying her self in him; which is the last thing in these verses.

This respect of hers, or the warmness of her affection to him, is set forth
two ways, 1. In that expression, he is unto me (which is both in the beginning
of the 13. and in the beginning of the 14. verse) whereby is signified, not
only Christ's worth in general, but, 1. His savourinesse and loveliness to her
in particular; she speaks of him, as she her self had found him. 2. To
express what room she gives him in her affection, he was lovely in himself,
and he was so to her, and in her esteem; He is (says she) a bundle of Myrrh
unto me, a cluster of Camphire to me: This is further clear from that other
expression, namely, he shall lie all night (says she) betwixt my breasts, even
as one hugges and embraces whom they love, or what they love; and keeps it in
their arms, and thrusts it in their bosom; so (says she) my beloved shall have
my heart to rest in, and if one room be further in, than another, there he
shall be admitted. Which imports, 1. Great love to him. 2. A satisfying her
spiritual senses on him. 3. Tenaciousnesse in keeping and ^etaining him, when
he is gotten, and great loathnesse to quit or part with him. 4. It shows his
right seat and place of residence; The bosom and heart is Christ's room and
bed. 5. It shows a continuance in retaining him and entertaining him, she
would do it not for a start, but for all night. 6. A watchfulness in not
interupting his rest, or disquieting of him, he shall not be troubled, (says
she) but he shall ly all night, unprovocked to depart. These are good evidences
of affection to Christ, and offer ground for good directions how to walk under
sensible manifestations, when he does communicate himself.

Part 4. CHRIST'S Words.
Verse. 15. Behold, thou art fair, my Love; behold thou art fair, thou have
Doves eyes.
These words contain a part of that excellent and comfortable conference
between Christ and the Spouse: There is here a mutual commendation one of
another, as if they were in a holy contest of love, who should have the last
word in expressing of the others commendation. In the verse before, the Bride
has been expressing her love to Christ, and he again comes in upon the back of
this, expressing his esteem of her, and that with a behold, Behold, etc.

If ye look upon this verse in it self, and with it is dependence on the former
words, it will hold out these things; 1. That love-fellowship with Christ, must
be a very heartsome life, O the sweet, mutual satisfaction that is there! 2.
That Christ must be a very loving and kindly husband; so have all they found
him, that have been married unto him: And therefore, Ephesians. 5. 27. He is proposed
as a pattern to all husbands, and may well be so. 3. That our Lord Jesus thinks
good sometimes to intimat his love to believers, and to let them know what he
thinks of them; and this he does, that the believer may be confirmed in the
faith of his love; for, this is both profitable, and also comfortable and
refreshful. Lastly, from the connection, observe, that there is no time wherein
Christ more readily manifests and intimats his love to believers, than when
their love is most warm to him. In the former verse, she has a room provided
between her breasts for him, and in these words our Lord comes in with a very
refreshful salutation to her: for, though his love go before ours in the rise
of it; yet he has ordered it so, that the intimation of his love to us, should
be after the stirring of ours toward him, Ioh. 14. 21.

In the commendation that he here gives her, consider these five particulars,
1. The title he gives her, my love. 2. The commendation it self, Thou art fair.
3. The note of attention prefixed, Behold. 4. The repetition of both. 5. A
particular instance of a piece of that beauty he commends in her.

1. The title is a very kindly and sweet one; and this makes it lovely, that
therein he not only intimats, but appropriats his love to her, allowing her to
lay claim thereto as her own, my love, says he, and it says, that there can
be nothing more cordial and refreshful to believers, than Christ's intimating
of his love to them; and therefore, he chooses this very title for that end:
The men of the world exceedingly prejudge themselves, that they think not more
of this, and study not to be acquaint with it.

2. The commendation that he gives her, is, Thou art fair. If it be asked, what
this imports? we may look upon it these three ways. 1. As it imports an
inherent beauty in the Bride. 2. As it looks to the cleanness, and beauty of
her state, as being justified before God; and this she has, as being clothed
with the righteousness of Christ. 3. As it holds forth Christ's loving
estimation of her, that though there were many spots in her; yet he pronounces
her fair (and lovely, because of his delight in her, and his purpose to make
her fair) and without spot or wrinckle, or any such thing: From all which,
these three truths may be gathered. 1. That such as are Christ's, or have a
title to him, are very lovely creatures, and cannot but have in them exceeding
great loveliness, because there is to be found with them a work of his grace,
a new creature, and a conversation some way lavelled to the adorning of the
Gospel. 2. Christ Jesus has a very great esteem of his Bride, and though we
cannot conceive of love in him, as it is in us; yet the expressions used here,
gives us ground to believe, that Christ has a great esteem of believers, how
worthless so ever they be in themselves. Lastly, comparing this with verse. 5.
We may see, That believers are never more beautiful in Christ's eyes, than when
their own spots are most discernable to themselves; and oftimes when they are
sharpest in censuring themselves, he is most ready to absolve and commend them.

The third thing is, the rouzing note of attention which is prefixed; and this
is here added to the commendation of the Bride, for these reasons, which may be
as observations. 1. That he may show the reality of that beauty that is in
believers, that it is a very real thing. 2. That he may show the reality of the
estimation, which he has of his Bride. 3. It imports a desire he had to make
her believe, and a difficulty that was in bringing her to believe, either the
beauty that was in her, or his estimation of her; and therefore is this note of
attention doubled. She has her eyes so fixed on her own blackness, that she
has need to be rouzed up, to take notice both of the grace of God in her, and
also of the esteem that Christ had of her.

The particular that he commends in her, in the last part of the words, is,
Thou have D^ves eyes. He insists not only in the general, but is particular in
this commendation he gives her. And this shows, 1. Christ's particular
observation not only of the believers state, frame and carriage in general, but
of their graces in particular. 2. That there may be some particular grace,
wherein belevers may be especially eminent; even as it is in corrupt, ^atural
men, that are still under the pollution and dominion of the body of death; yet
there is some one or other predominant lust that is strongest: in some sort it
is so with the believer; there is some one thing or other, wherein grace
especially vents, and puts forth it self in exercise. Abraham is eminent for
faith, Moses for meekness, Job for patience: And hence the believer is
considered sometimes under the notion of one grace, and sometimes of another,
as we may see, Matthew. 5. 3. That our blessed Lord Jesus has a particular
delight in the holy simplicity and sincerity of a believer; Or, holy simplicity
and sincerity, puts a great loveliness upon believers; for, by this, thou have
Doves eyes, we conceive to be understood a holy simplicity, separating her, in
her way, from the way of the men of the world: for, while their eyes, or
affections run after other objects, hers are taken up with Christ; for, by
eyes, are set out men's affections in Scripture; So, Matthew. 6. 22. and often in
this Song, the eyes signify the affections, as in that expression, Thou have
ravished me with one of thine eyes, etc. the eyes being somewayes the seat and
also the doors of the affections. Now, Doves eyes set out not only the Brides
affection, and love to Christ, but also the nature of her love, which is the
thing here mainly commended, as simplicity, chastity, and singleness, for
which that creature is commended, Matthew. 10. Be simple as Doves. And this is
the commendation of the love, that true believers have to Christ, that it is
chaste, single and sincere love; Singleness is the special thing Christ
commends in his people. It Is that for which believers are so much commended,
Act. 2. 46.

Part 5. BRIDES Words.
Verse. 16. Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed is
green.
Verse. 17. The beams of our house are Cedar, and our rafters of Fir.
We come to the last part of the Chapter, in the two last verses, in which the
Bride commends Christ's beauty, and the sweetness of fellowship with him: He
had been commending her, and now she hastens to get the commendation turned
over on him, Behold, thou art fair, etc. And there are two things which she
here commends. 1. She commends the Bridegroom himself, Behold, thou, etc. 2.
She commends fellowship with him under the similitude of bed, house and
galleries, verse. 16. 17. From the connection of this with the former purpose, ye
may see how restless believers are, when they meet with any commendation from
Christ, till they get it turned over to his commendation and praise: And this
is the property of a believer, to be improving every good word they get from
Christ, to his own commendation that speaks it; This is the end and design why
grace is bestowed upon believers, that it may turn in the upshot and issue to
the commendation of his grace. 2. That there is nothing more readily warms the
hearts of believers, with love, and looses their tongues in expressions of
commending Christ, than the intimation of his love to them; this makes their
tongue as the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45. 1.

More particularly in this commendation the Bride gives him, ye will find these
four things. 1. There is the style she gives him, my beloved. 2. There is the
commendation given, and it is the same with the commendation which in the former
verse he gave her. 3. The note of attention prefixed, Behold. Lastly, an
addition to the commendation Christ gave her, while she turns it over upon him,
and which is as a qualification of Christ's beauty; because one expression will
not do it, she makes use of two, thou art fair (says she) yea pleasant: He had
said she was ^air, nay (says she) thou art fair, etc. she turns it over to
him, because the same things that are commendable i^ her, are infinitely and
much more commendable in him; that which is in the believer, being the extract
of the principal which is in him, Christ being the principal, and the graces
that are in the believer but the transumpt or copy: All these things are in
Christ like the light in the Sun, and in the believer but like the light in the
Moon, communicate to it by the Sun; and they are in Christ as in their own
element and ocean, and in the believer but like some little stream communicate
from that infinite fountain; and it is upon this ground, that the same
commendation given by Christ to her, is tu^ned over by her to him: And it is
even as much as if she had said to him, My beloved, what is my ^airnesse? It Is
thou who art fair, I am not worthy to be reckoned fair, the commendation
belongs to thee, thou art worthy of it: And this is the nature of love in
believers, to blush (in a manner) when Christ commends them, and to cast all
such commendations back again upon him, that they may rest upon Christ, as the
party who deserves them best.

From the title ye may see here, 1. Much humility in the Bride, and also much
reverence and respect to Christ, which is the reason why she will not let the
commendation lie upon her, but puts it back upon him: Love to Christ, and
estimation of him, aims always at this, that whatever is commendable in the
believer, should ultimatly resolve upon him. 2. Here is much familiarity,
notwithstanding of her humility, in that she calls him my beloved, as he called
her my love. Humility and reverence, an high estimation of Christ, and
confidence in him, and familiarity with him go all well together in the
believer; and the believer would labor to have all these in exercise together,
and would never let one of them part from another. In a word, it is a humble
familiar way in believing, which we would aim at. 3. One special thing that
makes Christ lovely to believers, and natively stirs them up to commend him,
is when they are clear anent his love to them.

If it be asked, why she turns over this commendatien to him in the second
person, Thou art, etc? Ans. She does it, 1. To testify her sincerity, that she
was not flattering nor complementing, but she durst make him witness of what
she said. 2. To show that there are many spiritual con^erences, and sweet
soliloquies between the souls of believers and Christ, wherein they are very
^amiliar with him, which none knows, nor can know, but Christ and they; for,
she is speaking to him when no body knows, and he to her. 3. Because there are
many divine experiences of believers, that are scarcely communicable to any
other, but Christ: and therefore she will tell them over to him.

The commendation she puts upon him, is even the same which he before gave her,
Thou art fair (says she) And that which she aims at in this, is, 1. To set
forth the exceeding great beauty that is in our Lord Jesus; which beauty is
spiritually to be understood, n^mely of the qualifications wherewith he is
furnished, having grace poured into his lips, Psalm. 45. 2. Ioh. 1. 14. 2. The
great esteem that the believer has of Christ, and that both for what he is in
himself, and for what he is to him: Thou art fair in thy self (says she) and
fair to me; and it says, a little glimpse of Christ's beauty, has an
attractive efficacy upon the heart of a believer: When Christ Jesus is seen, it
puts a wonderful stamp of love upon the hearts of his people; he has a very
amiable aspect, that cannot but get love in the beholders, as they said that
heard him, never man spoke as he speaks; so they that have seen him, will say,
never man's countenance looked like his, amongst all the sons of men he bears
the standard, and has a loveliness wherein he is beyond them all: No wonder,
he being the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express image of his
person. 3. It is to show, wherefrom all her beauty was derived (as was hinted
before) it was from his; If I be fair (says she) it is because thou art fair,
it is thy beauty that puts beauty upon me.

The third thing, is the Behold prefixed, and it holds out these three. 1. The
excellency and admirablenesse of the matter: Christ's beauty, is a subject of a
most transcendent and admirable excellency. 2. Her seriousness in the
expressions of his commendation, as having her heart at her mouth, while she
speaks of it, being so affected and taken up with it. 3. Though he needed not,
yet she needed up-stirring, her self: and there was need she should stir up
others, and therefore this word, for her own, and others cause, is prefixed.

The last part of this commendation, is (as was said) an addition to what he
spoke in her commendation: yea, pleasant says she; This pleasantness, and
loveliness does relate to the communicativenesse of Christ's worth, his
communicating of what is lovely in him to others; It had not been enough for
us, that he had been lovely in himself as God, if he were not also lovely by
that relation that is between him and a believer in the Covenant of grace,
whereby there is not only a communicablenesse, but also an actual communication
of these things to a believer, which may make him lovely, and beautiful before
God. And this makes Christ pleasant, that of his fullness we receive and grace
for grace, Ioh. 1. 16. When the believer shares of Christ's fullness, he cannot
but be beautiful, and Christ cannot but be pleasant. And indeed if we could
express any thing of the importance of the word, it is a most material and
massy expression, of that inexpressible worth that is in him, and likewise of a
believers estimation of it; And, 1. In the general it imports this, A
difficulty in commending Christ rightly, there cannot be words gotten for it;
the thing that is commendable in him, is so large that words, yea, the most
superlative of them, come far short in setting him forth. 2. It sets forth, how
unsatisfied believers are with their own expressions of that worth, which they
see to be in him; they think the first word unsuitable, and therefore they
pass on to another, and in the close, they are forced as it were to give it
over, and to say, Thou art altogether lovely. 3. It imports, that there is no
kind of thing that may commend Christ, wherein he is defective; he has not
only the materials of beauty (so to say) but he has the form. All things that
are in Christ, are wonderfully delightsome and pleasant to look on. Lastly,
this expression implies, an exceeding great refreshfulnesse and contentedness,
which Christ Jesus does yield to a believer; and that exceeding great
satisfaction and delight, that a believer may have in looking on Christ: This
word pleasant, speaks their actual feeding upon the beautiful sight they have
gotten of him, so that they cannot be withdrawn from it: Must not Christ be
lovely, when his people get eyes to see him? and must it not be a heartsome
life to be in heaven, where they behold him, who is fair and lovely, as he is,
and have their eyes fixed on him for ever, when he is so beautiful even
hereaway, where we see him but darkly, through a glass, and much of his beauty
is veiled from our eyes?

That which follows, is the enlargement of the Brides commendation of Jesus
Christ, as he is called a beloved or husband, for she follows that Allegory in
commending his bed, house, and galleries; And this is the scope, to show how
excellent and stately a husband he was, And, 2. How happy and comfortable a
life his Bride had in communion and fellowship with him. In the words these
three are to be cleared, 1. What is commended, as bed, house, etc. 2. The
several commendations given to these. 3. The title of claim, or relation under
which they are commended, Our bed, etc.

That which is commended, is expressed by three words. 1. Bed 2. The beams of
the house. 3. Rafters. In sum, it is this, that as husbands (who are in good
condition) have beds to solace in with their Brides; houses to dwell in, and
galleries to walk in, for their refreshing, and have these excellently adorned
according to their rank; so our blessed husband excells in these. By bed, is
understood the special means of nearest fellowship with, and enjoying of
Christ; The bed being the place of rest, and of the nearest fellowship between
the Bridegroom and the Bride.

It Is commendation is, that it is green: That is, 1. Refreshful, like the
Spring. 2. Fruitful, and so the similitude of greenness is opposed to a
disconsolat, barren, unfruitful condition, Psalm. 92. 12, 13. and Ier. 17. 8. So
then, that which is here pointed at, is, that neernesse with Christ, is both
exceeding heartsome and refreshful, and also has much influence on believers
to keep them fresh, and make them fruitful.

The second thing commended, is the beams of the house; The house is of a
larger extent than the bed: It signifies the Church, wherein Christ dwells with
his Bride; The beams of it, are the Ordinances, Word, Sacraments, promises of
the Covenant, etc. whereby the house is both compacted together, and sustained;
there being no living with Christ, nor fellowship with him, without these. The
commendation is, that it is of Cedar. 1. Cedar was a durable wood. 2. Excellent
and precious. Chap. 3. 10. 3. It was typical of Christ, and therefore used in
the ceremonial services: So this commendation holds forth the excellent nature
of the ordinances, and promises, being of great worth, precious, and perpetual
in their use to the Church, while upon earth: But it does especially hold forth
the eternal excellency and worth, and the durable power and strength of Christ,
the main cornerstone of this building, Ephesians. 2. 20, 22.

The third word is, rafters: It Is on the margent, galleries, and so we take it,
being rendered so, Chap. 7. 5. The word signifies to run along: and the scope
here, is to show what pleasant walks there are with Christ; or, how pleasant a
thing it is to walk with him, as to dwell with him, and lie, or bed with him,.
So to walk with him, must needs be pleasant: And this Metaphor (with the rest)
is here made use of, it being ordinary in this Song, under such expressions, to
hold forth the love, fellowship, that is betwixt Christ and his Church: Now
these galleries are said to be of Fir, or Cypress, a durable wood. This word
is not elsewhere in Scripture, but the scope shows, it is some fine thing, and
points out the unspeakable satisfaction, and pleasure which is to be had in a
life of walking with him.

3. She claims title to all these, bed, house, galleries: she says not thy
bed, nor my bed (whereby Chap. 3. she signifies her own carnal ease and rest)
but our bed, our house, etc. whereby she points at somewhat which both of them
had joint interest in, and did together converse into; although her interest be
communicate from him; yet she keeps the manner of speech suitable to husband and
wife.

These words show, 1. That th^re be several degrees of fellowship with Christ,
and several ways and means, for entertaining of it; some more near, as when he
lay betwixt her breasts; some more mediat (when, as it were) he and she only
live together in the house, which may point at her trading with Christ in the
Ordinances, but without sensible manifestations; and also believers walking
with him in their ordinary callings, even when they are not in duties of
immediate worship, which is signified by galleries. 2. Any of these degrees and
means of fellowship, are excellent in themselves, and to be pressed and sought
after by the believer. 3. The nearest mean of fellowship with Christ, is most
refreshful to spiritual sense, the bed more than the house. 4. Yet though it be
so, believers would not divide them; but would think much of all the means and
ordinances, even as long as they abide here. 5. There is a mutual relation
betwixt Christ and his Bride, which gives a mutual interest in, and relation to
all that is his; What ever is his, it is ours, his bed is ours, his house ours,
etc. 6. Believers that can lay claim to Christ, may and should claim interest
in all that is his. 7. This makes every dispensation lovely, and every step of
our walk heartsome, when under every dispensation, and in every step of our
walk, we are living a life of fellowship with Christ, to be spending all our
time in lying, dwelling and walking with Christ, O how sweet a life were that!
8. The means of fellowship with Christ, in all places and times, are so well
contrived, and so large and refreshful, as they contribute exceedingly to make
a believer cheerful in all duties of worship, and in all his conversation; For
we here see, there are bed, house and galleries provided in order to her
keeping company with Christ.

CHAP. II.
Part 1. CHRIST'S Words.
Verse. 1. I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilie of the valleys.
Verse. 2. As the lilie among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.
THis second Chapter contains the same scope, and runs in the same strain, with
the former. It has two principal parts: In the first, Christ speaks in the
first two verses. In the second, the Bride continues to the end.

Again, in these two verses, Christ does first commend himself, verse. 1. 2. He
describes his Bride, verse. 2.

That it is he who speaks, appears thus; 1. It Is clear, at first looking upon
the words, that he speaks in the 2. verse, and who else can be thought to speak
in the first? He is the I in the first verse, who claims the Bride by this
possessive particle my in the second. 2. The words, I am the rose of Sharon,
etc. are stately, becoming him alone to speak them; Like these, I am the true
vine, I am the bread of life, etc. And so majestic is the commendation, that
it can agree to none other, but to him. 3. The Brids work is to commend him,
and not her self, especially with a commendation beyond what he gives her,
verse. 2. And therefore the first verse must be Christ's words, not hers.

The scope is, (for her instruction and comfort now in affliction,) that he may
make her know himself: The very knowing of Christ is comfortable, and it is one
of the most excellent, rare and ravishing things he can show his Bride, to show
her himself, or to make her know him: Neither can he choice a subject more
profitable in it self, or more welcome to her, to insist on, than to display
his own beauty, whereby she may see her blessedness in such a match.

In the first verse then, Christ comes-in commending himself, I am the rose of
Sharon, and the lilie of the valleys. The rose is a sweet savouring flower, and
so is the lilie: Sharon and the valleys are added, because these roses and
lilies that grew there, were the best that were to be found. He is said to be
that rose, or the rose, and the lilie, as if there were no other, to
distinguish him, as excellent and singular from all others. He thus sets forth
himself to show, 1. That Christ Jesus has a most lovely savor, and a most
delightful and refreshful smell, to them that have spiritual senses to discern
what is in him. 2. That there is nothing refreshful in creatures, but it is
more eminently and infinitely in him; Therefore he is called the rose and the
lilie. 3. That whatever excellency is in Christ, is singularly and incomparably
in him; There is no other rose, or lilie but he: and what excellency is to be
found in others, does not deserve the name, being compared with him. 4. That he
is never suitably commended, till he be lifted up above all. 5. That none can
commend Christ to purpose, but himself; he takes it therefore on him, I am, etc
He can indeed commend himself effectually, and none but he can do it. 6. That
he manifests more of his loveliness to these who have gotten a begun sight and
esteem of it; for, she had been commending it formerly, and now he discovers
more of it to her. 7. That it is one of Christ's greatest favors to his Bride,
and one of the special effects of his love, to set out himself as lovely to
her, and to bear-in his loveliness upon her heart; and this is the scope here.

In the second verse, he describes his Bride. Here we have these things to
consider. 1. What she is, a lilie. 2. What others of the world beside are,
called here the daughters (so men without the Church are to the Church, and
corrupt men in the Church are to believers) that is, daughters of their mother
the world; no kindly daughters to her, they are thorns. 3. The posture of
Christ's Spouse, she is as a lilie among thorns, a strange posture and soil,
for our Lord's love and lilie to grow in.

The lilie is pleasant, savoury and harmless; thorns are worth, less,
unpleasant and hurtful. The lilies being compared with them, and placed amongst
them, sets out both her excellency above them, and her sufferings from them. In
general, Obs. 1. Christ draws his own beauty and the Brides together, thereby
to show their kindred, and sibnesse (so to speak) she is not rightly taken up,
but when she is looked upon as standing by him; and he not fully set forth, nor
known without her. 2. He took two titles to himself, and he gives one of them
to the Bride, the lilie; but with this difference, that he is the lilie, she
as, or like the lilie; Setting forth, 1. Wherein her beauty consists, It Is in
likeness to him. 2. From whom it comes, it is from him, her being his love,
makes like the lilie. 3. The neernesse of the mysti^al union, that is between
Christ and his Bride; it is such, that thereby they some way share names, Ier.
23. 6. and Chap. 33. 16. 3. He intermixes her beauty and crosses together,
drawing them on one table, to give her a view of both; and that for her
humbling, and also for her comfort: It Is not good for believers, to look only
to the one without the other.

More particularly, Obs. 1. Christ's Bride is very lovely, and beautiful. 2.
The children of the world are natively hurtful to her. 3. In Christ's account
the believer is exceedingly preferable to all others, of whatsoever place or
qualifications in the world. 4. Christ's relation and affection, does not
always keep off outward afflictions from his own Bride. 5. It Is native to
believers to have a crossed life in the world, their plantation here among
thorns speaks it. 6. That the crosses are of more kinds than one, which
believers are environed with, thorns grow on all hands beside Christ's lilie.
7. Holiness and innocence will not always prevent wrongs and injuries from
others, thorns will wrong even the lilie. 8. Christ observes here, how she
looks in her sufferings, and so he takes special notice, how his people carry
in a suffering lot. 9. It Is commendable to keep clean under sufferings, and to
be lilie-like, even amongst thorns.

Part 2. BRIDES Words.
Verse. 3. As the Apple Tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among
the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste.
The second part of the Chapter may be sub-divided in two, First, from the
third verse, the Bride comes in speaking as in a lively frame, to verse. 8. 2.
From that to the end, she speaks as being at some distance with the Bridegroom.

In the first part. 1. She commends Christ, and lays down this commendation,
as the ground of her consolation, verse. 3. 2. She proves it by her experience,
ibid. 3. Explains the way of her coming to that experience, verse. 4. 4. She
cries out under the sense of it, verse. 5. 5. She shows his tender care of her
in that condition, verse. 6. And lastly, expresses her fear, lest there should
be any change to the worse in her condition, and her care to prevent it, verse.
7.

The dependence of the third verse upon the second, is clear: She takes the
commendation out of Christ's mouth, which he gave her, and after that same
manner almost turns it over on him, as she had done, Chap. 1. 16. and then
comforts her self in him: Has she crosses? then he has a shadow to hide her,
and with this she setles her self, and does not complain of her sufferings.
Hence, Obs. 1. There is no s^aying of the heart against afflictions, but in
Christ. 2. It Is better for believers to insist in commending him, than
describing their crosses.

Here there is, 1. The Brides esteem of the children of the world, called here
the sons, they are like wild barren trees, that gives no fruit or comfort: The
world is exceeding little worth, especilay to these who know Christ. 2. Her
esteem of Christ, he is like the Apple Tree: There is great odds betwixt Christ
and all the world; there is ever fruit to be found on him, and a shadow in him.
This is proven by her experience (for they that have felt and tasted how sweet
he is, can speak somewhat to this) I encountered with many difficulties, (says
she) like scorchings of the Sun (See on Chap. 1. verse. 5.) and could find no
shelter, nor refreshment amongst the creatures; but I resolved to make use of
Christ by faith, in reference to them (even as men do, by interposing a tree
betwixt them and the heat, that they may have a shadow) and I found refreshing
and ease, by the benefits and privileges that flow from Christ, and are
purchased by him, and are enjoyed by virtue of an interest in him; which were
very comfortable, even as sweet apples from an apple tree, are refreshful to
one sitting under it is shadow in a great heat.

Obs. 1. Believers may be scorched with outward and inward heat; they may be
exercised not only with sharp outward afflictions, but also with the sense of
Gods wrath, and with the fiery darts of Satan's temptations. 2. Christ is a
complete shadow, and a cure for all. 3. They that would find Christ a shadow
from the heat, must make use of him, and employ him for that end; They must sit
down, etc. 4. Believers never flee to his shadow till some heat scorch them;
For, her being scorched with heat, is supposed here, as that which made the
shadow refreshful. 5. Faith in Christ, will compose the Believer in the midst
of the greatest difficulties; It will set them down etc., yea and delight them
also. 6. Much of the nature and exercise of faith, in it is use-making of
Christ, appears in it is interpesing of Christ betwixt us and wrath, or whatever
may be troublesome to us, and in the quieting of our selves upon that ground;
for, this is it that is meant by sitting down under his shadow. 7. There are
many choice and excellent fruits in Christ, that flow from him to believers. 8.
All the spiritual benefits and privileges that believers enjoy, are Christ's
fruits; they are his fruits by purchase and right, and by him communicate to
believers. 9. Believers eat and feed, and may with his blessed allowance do so
upon what is his. 10. Christ's fruits are exceeding sweet, when they are eaten;
they are satisfyingly, and, as it were, sensibly sweet. 11. These sweet fruits
are neither eaten, nor the sweetness of them felt by believers, till they go
to Christ's shadow, and sit down delightsomly under his righteousness; then
they become refreshful.

Verse. 4. He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was
love.
She proceeds in expressing her cheerful condition, by showing the way of her
access to it, verse. 4. He brought me, etc. Wherein, 1. She sets out the
sweetness of the enjoyment of Christ's sensible love, by comparing it to a
feast, or house of wine. 2. She tells who it was that brought her to it, He
brought me. 3. The manner how she was brought to it; It was by the out-letting
of his love, His banner (says she) over me was love. The first expression sets
forth three things, 1. The great abundance of satisfying and refreshing
blessings, that are to be found in Christ; such abundance of provision as uses
to be laid up at a feast, or in a banqueting house. 2. His liberal allowance
thereof to his own, who for that end has laid up this provision for them. 3.
The nature of the intertainment; It Is a feast of the best and most cordial
things, a house of wine. The second is, He, that is, Christ brought me in. It
shows, 1. Believers impotency to enter in there of themselves, and their want
of right, that may give them access to the blessings that are laid up in
Christ. 2. That it is Christ who makes their access; he purchased an entry by
his death, he applies his purchase by his Spirit, and dispenses it by his
office, and so brings them in. 3. It suppons a freedom of grace in the bringing
them in: They are brought in by his mere favor. 4. It contains a thankful
remembrance, or acknowledgment of this deed of Christ's, and an holding of this
savor of him. The third holds forth the manner how she is brought in; It Is
under a banner of love: A stately manner; it was love that brought her in: The
expression implies, that not only it was love that moved him to bring her in,
but that he did it in a loving manner, which amplifieth and heightens his love:
She comes in marching, as it were, in triumph, having love like a banner, or
colors, adorning this march, and making way for her entry; so that even in the
manner of her being brought in, the general predominant, visible thing (as it
were) that appeared, was love. Obs. 1. Christ will sometimes bring his people in
to the sense of his love, exceeding lovingly and kindly, even as to the manner
of engaging them. 2. Believers would observe his way with them. 3. This loving
manner, in the way of his dealing with his people, does exceedingly commend his
love, and is an heightening consideration of it. 4. Christ's love is in it self
a most stately, and triumphant thing. 5. It Is only the love of Christ, that
secures believers in their battles and march, against their spiritual
adversaries; And indeed they may fight, who have love for their colors and
banner.

Verse. 5. Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love.
She is almost overcome with this banquet, and therefore cries out for help,
verse. 5. Here consider, 1. The case she is in. 2. The cure she calls for. 3.
From whom she seeks it.

Her case is, That she is sick of love. This is not to be taken for the
fainting of a soul under absence, and the want of sense; all the context before
and after, and the scope will show it is otherwise with her: But it is a
sickness from the weight and pressour of felt inconceivable love, damishing
her (as it were) and weakening her, she cannot abide that sight and fullness
which she injoyes.

2. The cure she desires confirms this, Stay me, (says she) or support me, for
I am like to fall under it; and comfort me, the word is, strengthen me, or bed
me, straw me with, or in apples, let me lie down amongst them. The first
expression looks to the house of wine where she was, which suppons no want, and
may be rendered, Stay me in flagons, as seeking support in this holy fill of the
Spirit, whereby she was staggering. The second looks to the Apple Tree, verse.
3. and she would ever roll her self amongst the apples that come from this
tree; and like the Disciples, Mat. 17. 4. says (as it were) it is good to be
here* she would even be fixed and ly down in that posture, never to part with
this happy condition again.

3. These she speaks to, and from whom she seeks help, are expressed in the
plural-number (as is clear in the Original) which shows a ravishment and kind
of rapture in this exclamation; not observing to whom she speaks, but
expressing her delight in that which she enjoyed, yet mainly intending Christ
(as the Disciples did, Matthew. 17. not knowing what they said) for it is he who
applies the cure in the next verse.

Obs. 1. Love will have a great out-letting at sometimes beyond others as if a
dam were gathered, and then letten out. 2. Sense of love in a high degree will
straiten and weight a believer, as overburthening and overpowring him, so as he
is put to say, hold, and wo's me, as it is, Isa. 6 5. the nature of Gods
presence is such, and our infirmity so unsuitable thereto. 3. Love is lovely
when the believer is almost dotting with it, and staggering under the weight
and power of it. 4. It can cure even the same sickness it makes, These flagons
and apples are the only remedy, though our bottles be now weak, and can hold
but little of this new wine.

Verse. 6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.
She expresses Christ's care of her in this condition, verse. 6. as a most
loving Husband, he sustains he in his arms, in this swoun and swarf, which from
joy she falls in, as the words do plainly bear. Obs. 1. Christ's love is a
sensible sustaining thing, and is able to support the heart under it is greatest
weakness. 2. As Christ is tender of all his people, and at all times, so
especially when they are in their fits of love-sickness. 3. As believers would
observe Christ's love at all times, so especially when they are weakest; for
then they will find it both seasonable and profitable so to do.

Verse. 7. I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem; by the Roes, and by the
Hindes of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my Love, till he please.
This verse contains her care to entertain this condition, and the way she
takes for that end. That they are the Brides words, is, 1. clear from the scope
and matter. 2. From the expressions she uses, speaking of him, my Love, and
till he please; for, it becomes us to give Christ his own liberty in staying or
going, and it were not our good that our pleasure were the rule in our
fellowship with him. Now in order to the securing of this comfortable condition
to her self; first, she adjures and charges, which is, 1. To show the
concernment of the thing. 2. Her seriousness in it; for, she is in very great
earnest. 3. A fear of misguiding this condition. 4. A difficulty so to prevent
the hazard, as to keep all quiet.

2. The parties she speaks to, while she thus adjures, are the Daughters of
Jerusalem, giving them the lesson she would take to her self, because they had
need to be thus guarded. Obs. 1. That professors are in hazard to mar their
own enjoyments, and to interrupt an intimate fellowship with Christ. 2.
Beginners are readiest to fall in this sin. 3. Seriousness will stir up
believers to be watchful over themselves, and will make them press others to
be so also.

This expression, by the Roes and Hindes of the field, is but added, for
keeping the strain of this Song (which is composed in an Allegorick way, and
every similitude is not to be narrowly searched into) and to show how tenderly
they ought to watch, to prevent this hazard, as men having to do with Roes* who
are soon stirred; Showing that a little thing may stir up Christ, and mar the
comfortable fellowship that is between him and his people.

3. The charge it self is, That they stir not up, nor awake the Beloved; as a
wife would say (when her husband is come home and resting in her arms) be quiet
all, and let no din be in the house to awake him: And this charge reaches her
self, as well as others; when she as the mother, commands all the little-ones
or children (as it were) to be quiet, that Christ may not be stirred up, and
made to remove; she ought to be much more careful in this her self. Hence,
Observe, 1. If a sensible presence be not tenderly entertained, it will not
last. 2. Believers would be most careful then, when they are admitted to near
and sensible fellowship with Christ, that nothing fall out which may provoke
him to depart. 3. The least sinful motions, and stirrings of corruption would
be suppressed, as having a great tendency to provoke and stir up the Beloved to
be gone.

Lastly, This charge is qualified in these words, till he please: Which does
not imply, that she gives them leave at any time to stir him up; but the
meaning is, see that by your fault he be not awaked, till his own time come.
Observe then, 1. Christ guids his visits and love-manifestations, by his
soveralignty and pleasure. 2. He may withdraw from his people without respect
to any particular provocation, as having sinful influence thereupon. 3.
Christ's pleasure is believers rule, in the things that are most precious to
them: Here she acquiesces, even to his withdrawing, when he shall please. 4.
Believers may have peace, and be quiet under absence, if they have not sinfully
provoked Christ to withdraw: For, this is the thing the Bride aims at, as to
her self, in this her care. 5. Often believers are guilty in marring Christ's
fellowship with them before he please, and they might enjoy Christ's company
much longer oftentimes, if they did not sin him out of house and doors.

Verse. 8. The voice of my Beloved! behold, he comes leaping upon the
mountains, skipping upon the hills.
Verse. 9. My Beloved is like a Roe, or a young Heart: Behold, he stands behind
our wall, he looks forth at the windows, showing himself through the
lattesse.
These words contain a case of the Brides, different from her case in the
former words; there she was in Christ's arms; here she sees him afar off; there
she was endeavoring to keep him still; here she is sensible that he is away,
and, verse. ult. is praying for his return. Observe then from the connection, The
most satisfying and comfortable conditions of a believer, while upon earth, are
not abiding; even the Bride must experience distance, as well as presence. 2.
Sometimes sensible presence will not continue, even when believers are most
careful to retain it, as we find she was in the words before.

Her distance has two steps, 1. There are some views of Christ, and some
intercourse with him, though afar off, in this Chapter: Then, 2. she is
deprived even of that, in the first part of the Chapter following: And readily
distance once begun, does proceed from a lesser to a greater degree, before it
be removed.

More particularly, we would observe here, 1. What is Christ's carriage, when
the Bride does not enjoy sensible presence in so lively a way; and that in two
things, 1. What he is doing; he is co^ing, leaping, standing behind the wall,
looking through the lattess, etc. 2. What he is saying, he is speaking to her,
and, as it were, writing kind love letters to her at that same time: Christ is
both doing and speaking kindly to a believer, even when he is away to sense, if
it be well discerned. 2. We may see what is the Brides carriage suitable to
his, in four steps (worthy to be imitate by believers, for their own peace, in
their disconsolate condition) 1. She observes what he does, though it be but a
twilight discovery she has of him. 2. She records what he says, and reads his
Epistle often over. 3. She comforts her self in keeping the faith of her
interest, and the hope of future enjoying of him, clear. And, 4. prays in the
mean time, for some manifestations of his love, till that come. The first is,
verse. 8. and 9. The second, verse. 10. to 16. The third verse. 16. and 17. The
fourth in the close of the 17. verse.

In her observation of Christ's way with her, verse. 8. Consider, 1. his
practice, which she observes. 2. Her observation of it. 3. How she is affected
with it. And lastly, her expression of it.

The first of these is contained in these words, He comes leaping upon the
mountains, skipping upon the hills. There are four things here to be taken
notice of, 1. A supposed distance, for when he is said to be coming, he is not
present: This distance is not in reality, as to the union that is betwixt
Christ and a Believer, that is always the same; but it is to be understood as to
the sense of his presence, which may be interrupted. 2. It Is said he comes;
Coming imports his drawing near to remove the distance, as being already on his
way. Obs. 1. It Is his coming that removes the distance between him and his
people: The first motion of love is still on his side. And, 2. even when Christ
is absent, if he were well seen, he is making way for our nearer union with
him, and is upon his way coming again, Ioh. 14. 3. Even when he is away he is
still coming, though it may be afterward the distance seem to grow greater, and
the night of absence darker. The third thing is, That there are mountains which
he comes over, that is something standing betwixt him and us, marring our
access to him, and his familiarity with us, till he remove it, as mountains
obstruct men's way in travel; and so difficulties in the way of Gods work are
compared to mountains, Zech. 4. 7. Who art thou, O great mountain? etc. So
here, as there are difficulties to be removed, before the union betwixt Christ
and us be made up.

So also there are particular sins, clouds of guiltiness, which must be
removed, ere his presence can be restored after he goes away. Again, coming
over mountains, makes one conspicuous and glorious afar off; So Christ's march
and return to a believer is ever in triumph, over some great ground of
distance, which makes him discernably glorous. 4ly. Christ is said to be
leaping and skipping: which imports, 1. an agility in him, and a facility to
overcome whatever is in the way. 2. A cheerfulness and heartiness in doing of
it; He comes with delight over the highest Hill that is in his way, when he
returns to his people. 3. It holds forth speediness, Christ comes quickly, and
he is never behind his time, he cannot mistryst a believer; his term-day is
their necessity, and be sure he will meet with them then. 4. It imports a
beauty, Majesty and stateliness in his coming, as one in triumph; and so he
comes triumphantly and in great state; And what is more stately than Christ's
triumphing over principalities and powers, and making a show of them openly, by
overcoming the difficulties in his way to his Bride.

The second thing in the Verse, is her observation of this; Christ in his way
is very discernable to any that is watchful, and Believers should observe his
way when absent, as well as present. If it be asked how she discerned it? There
is no question, faith is here taking up Christ according to his promise, Ioh.
14. 3. If I go away, I come again; and faith lays hold on this: Faith is a good
friend in desertion, for as we may here see, it speaks good of Christ even
behind his back, when sense would say he will return no more, faith says he is
coming, and prophesies good of Christ, as there is good reason.

The third thing is, how she is affected with it; This observation proves very
comfortable to her, as her abrupt and cutted expression imports, The voice of
my Beloved: As also, the Behold, she puts to it, which shows, 1. That her heart
was much affected with it. 2. That she thought much of it. 3. That it was some
way wonderful that Christ was coming, even over all these difficulties to her;
there is no such ravishing wonder to a sensible believing sinner, as this, that
Christ will pass by all its sin, yea take them all on himself, and come over
all difficulties* unto them; Therefore is this behold, added here.

The fourth thing in her expression of this, which confirms the former, and it
is such as sets out a heart, as it were surprised, and overcome with the sight
of a coming friend. Hence Obs. 1. A sinners thoughts of a coming Christ, will
be deeply affecting; and these thoughts of him are misshapen and of no worth,
that do not in some measure cast fire into, and inflame the affection^* And, 2.
a heart suitably affected with the power of Christ's wonderful grace and love,
will be expressing somewhat of it to others, as the Bride is doing here.

In the 9. verse. the observation of his carriage is continued: where, 1. He is
commended. 2. His carriage is described, with her observation of it. The
commendation she gives him is, He is like a Roe, or a young Heart: These
creatures are famous, for loving and kindly carriage to their mates, as also
for loveliness and pleasantness in themselves, Prove. 5. 19. Thus he is kindly
and loving: O so kind as Christ is to his Church and chosen! Ionathan's love to
David past the love of Women, but this surpasses that, beyond all degrees of
comparison. 2. He is timous and seasonable, in fulfilling his purposes of love
to his Bride, no Roe or Heart for swiftness is like him in this; and this may
be the ground, from which she concludes that he was coming and leaping in the
former words, because Christ's affections, and way of manifesting them, is such
as this.

2. His carriage is set forth in three steps, held forth in allegorick
expressions. The 1. is, He stands behind our wall, that is, as a loving Husband
may withdraw from the sight of his Spouse for a time, and yet not be far away,
but behind a wall, and there standing to see what will be her carriage, and to
be ready to return; or as Nurses will do with their little children, to make
them seek after them; so says she, though Christ now be out of sight, yet he
is not far off, but, as it were, behind the wall; and its called our wall, in
reference to some other she speaks with, of him; And a wall, because often we
build up these separations our selves, betwixt him and us ( Isa. 59. 1.) that
hides Christ, as a wall hides one man from another; yet even then Christ goes
not away, but waits to be gracious, as weary with forbearing: There is much
love on Christ's side, in saddest desertions, and our hand is often deep in his
withdrawings: It Is sad when the wall that hides him, is of our building: There
is often nothing betwixt him and us, but our own sin.

The 2. step is, He looks forth at the window; which is to the same purpose.
The meaning is, though I get not a full sight of him, yet he opens, as it were,
a window, and looks out, and I get some little glance of his face: Sometimes
Christ will neither (as it were) let the Believer in to him, nor will he come
out to them; yet he will make windows, as it were, in the wall, and give blinks
of himself unto them.

The third step is, He shows himself through the Lattess; that is, as there are
some Windows that have Tirlesses of Lattesses on them, by which men will see
clearly, and yet be but in a little measure seen; so, says she, Christ is
beholding us, though we cannot take him up fully; yet the smallest bore whereby
Christ manifests himself, is much, and to be acknowledged. All this she
observes with a Behold, as discerning something wonderful in all these steps:
Christ has several ways of communicating his love to his people (and that
also even under desertions and withdrawings) and there are several degrees of
these, yet the least of them is wonderful, and should be welcomed by believers,
if it were to see him, but through the Lattess.

Verse. 10. My beloved spoke, and said unto me, rise up my love, my fair one,
and come away.
Verse. 11. For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over, and gone.
Verse. 12. The flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is
come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land.
Verse. 13. The Fig Tree puts forth her green Figs, and the Vine, with the
tender Grape give a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.
Having put by her observation of his carriage, she comes to speak to the
second part, namely what was her carriage; and it was to read over, or think
over with her self, or to tell over to others, what Christ had said unto her:
This is a main piece of spiritual wisdom, to fill Christ's room in his absence
with his word and call, and to read his mind only from these, the best
interpreters of it. These words prefaced to Christ's Epistle or Sermon, my
beloved spoke, and said unto me, are not idly set down, before she tell what
the words which he spoke were, But, 1. It shows she delights in repeating his
Name, for she had made mention of it before, verse. 8. 2. It shows what
commended Christ's epistle or words to her, it was not only the matter therein
contained (though that was warm and sweet) but it is come (says she) from my
beloved, it was he that said this, it was he that sent me this word. 3. It
shows her discerning of his voice; and her assurance, that the word, call, and
promise (she was refreshing her self with) was his word, and no devised fable.
It Is a notable ground of consolation in Christ's absence to believers, when
they are clear, that such and such gracious words come out of Christ's own
mouth to them. 4. It says, that fellowship with Christ, is no dumb exercise;
these that are admitted to fellowship with him, he will be speaking with them,
otherwise then with the world. And, 5. That a believer has an ear to hear, not
only what the Minister says, but also what Christ says. 6. It Is the word as
from Christ's own mouth, that has any effectual impression; and a believer
will receive it as such, that it may leave such an impression upon his heart.
7. When Christ quickens a word, it will be sweet; and such a word will be
retained, so that these who have been quickened by it, will be able long
afterward to repeat it: It Is our getting little good of the word of the Lord,
that makes us retain it so ill. 8. It affords much satisfaction to a believer,
when he can say, Christ said this, or that to me, and that it is no delusion. 9.
What Christ says unto the spirits of his own, in communion with them, it may
bide the light, and is, on the matter, that same which he says in the Word and
Gospel, as we will see in the following discourse, which for this end, and for
the edification of others, and honor of the Beloved, she tells over.

We may take these words, or epistles of Christ's, as directed to three sorts
(as the duty here pressed, rise and come away will bear,) 1. To these that are
dead in sins, whom Christ by his voice quickens, and makes to rise, John 5. 28.
Although this be not the immediate intent of it, as it is spoken to a believer;
yet considering the scope of recording this, and the matter contained in it, it
may well be thought useful to engage these who are yet strangers to Christ,
there being still but the same way of making at the first, and afterward
recovering nearness with him, to wit, by faith in him; and so it will press
receiving of, and closing with Christ. 2. We may consider it as spoken to
believers, but to such as sleep, or are sitten up; so it presses quickening:
And, 3. As spoken to believers in a disconsolat, discouraged condition; so it is
scope is to stir, quicken, rouse and comfort Christ's Bride, in any of these two
last cases, that he may bring her in to more nearness of fellowship with
himself, and to more boldness in the use-making of him; which is the great
scope he aims at.

There are three parts of this Sermon or Epistle. 1. There is a kindly
invitation, that mainly respects the pressing of faith, from verse. 10. to 14.
2. There is a loving direction or two, verse. 14. looking especially to the
practice of duties. 3. Least any thing should be wanting, he gives a direction
concerning the troublers of her peace, verse. 15.

In all these parts, there are four things common to be found in each of them,
1. Some sadness in her condition supposed. 2. Some directions given to cure
it. 3. Some motives used, to press the practice of these directions. 4. Some
repetitions, to show his seriousness in all, and the concernment of the thing
spoken.

The case wherein these who are here spoken to, are supposed to be, in this
first part of Christ's Sermon, verse. 10, etc. is, 1. Deadness, total or
partial: Believers may be under a decay, and be in part dead. 2. It is supposed
that they are secure, and not vigorous; but insensible in a great part of that
ill. 3. That they are disconsolat, and heartlesse under distance and deadness;
which ills often tryst together.

The direction he gives in order to the helping of this, is in two words, 1.
Rise. 2. Come away. Which says, that as she was now in a case of strangeness
to Christ, so there was a necessity of rousing her self, and coming out of it;
such a necessity as there is for a straying wife to return to her husband. Now
these words are a sweet call of a kind Husband, inviting to this return, and
showing the remedy of straying, and estrangement from him. Rising imports, 1.
One that is settled some way, in a condition opposite to walking and running. 2.
A stirring up of themselves as unsatisfied therewith, and desirous to be out of
it, with some endeavor to be up again: Declining from Christ puts souls still
down, and holds them at under. Come away, holds forth a term from which she is
to come, from that condition she was in, whatever it was, it was not good: Men
are in no desirable condition, when Christ calls them. 2. A term to which she
is to come, and that is Christ; it is to follow the Bridegroom; to get her
brought to a nearer union and communion with him, is the great thing he aims
at. 3. An act whereby she passes from that she was, and turning her back on
that, moves toward him, that she may thereby attain nearer union and
fellowship with him. By both which, we conceive the exercise of faith in him,
is mainly holden forth, 1. Because, says is ordinarily in Scripture set forth
by coming, Isa. 55. 1. Ioh. 5. 40. Ioh. 6. 35. and this expression suits well
the act of says. 2. Because it is the only mean of making up the distance
betwixt him and us: Decay in the exercise of faith, and distance with Christ,
go together; and the exercise of faith, and nearness with him, are also
inseparable companions. This is the meaning then, why lies thou in this
discouraged, decayed and comfortless condition? there is another, and a far
better, to wit, a lively and comfortable condition allowed upon thee; Christ
calls thee to exercise faith in him, for recovering of thy case. And this now
is set down imperatively, by way of command, that we may know that believing in
Christ, or keeping communion with him by faith, are not left to our option, but
are laid on by a peremptory command, for necessitating us to the exercise of
it, 1 Ioh. 3. 23. as a thing most acceptable to him, with which he cannot be
angry, nor will he call obedience thereunto presumption.

3. When he has given the invitation, he presses it most seriously and
weightily; for though it be of our concernment, we are not easily induced even
to believe: O but the world is much mistaken in this, that think it an easy
matter to believe! And also, he would have us knowing, he allows us the
comfortable exercise of faith in him, with all his heart (if we may speak so)
when he thus presses and persuades us to it. Likewise we may gather, that it
is no common thing, which he exhorts unto, when he does so seriously press it;
but it is of most weighty concernment to us.

There are three ways he makes use of, to press it; 1. By excellent, loving
titles, my love, and fair one; which are given here, especially to let her know
he loved her, and thereby to encourage her to follow the call. The faith of his
love, has no little influence upon our acting faith in particulars on him. 2.
To show that he is no rigid, nor severe censurer of a discouraged believer; no,
my fair one (says he) even when she has many spots; Christ will raise no ill
report on his own, whatever be their failings. 3. He presses it from the
special relation he has to her, my love, and my fair one; which makes all his
words very kindly, and shows an obligation on her, by the Covenant Relation
that stood between them to be his, and to subject her self to his directions,
according to that word, Psalm. 45. 10. Hearken O Daugher, etc. Forget thy
fathers house, etc. And therefore she ought to leave all, and cleave to him:
Christ requires nothing from us, but according to the Covenant, that ties us to
communion or co-habitation (to speak so) with Christ; and it is a most binding
obligation; if this prevail not in pressing us to duty, that we are Christ's,
nothing will prevail: It Is no little practick in a believer, to be like the
relation they stand in to Christ; what, my love (says he) becomes it you to be
so strange? Rise and come, etc. Some other thing is allowed to you than to
others, and some other thing is called for from you, than is to be found in the
way of others.

The third way he insisteth to urge this (for the call, and kindness comes
still on his side, even when we are in the fault) is by most pressing arguments
of three sorts. The first is, verse. 11. Rise (says he) and come away; for
there is no hazard now to travel this journey, because what might scar you is
done away, the winter-cold and storm in past; and the rain that makes rivers
unpassible, and journeys dangerous and wearysome (therefore, it is Matthew. 24.
20. pray that your flight be not in the winter) these are over. This suppons,
1. There was a sharp winter, and a bitter rain (as it were) whereby the way of
fellowship with God, was unpassible, till these were removed; the sword (as it
were) standing to keep sinners from Paradise, that is, the sentence and curse
of the broken law, and the wrath of God pursuing therefore, which was indeed a
fearful winter, and storm that made the Sun dark, and the day gloomy, therefore
is God's wrath in Scripture compared to terrible blasts and tempests, and who
can stand before his cold? Psalm. 147. 17. 2. It says, that now these are done
away by Christ; and by his call in the Gospel, he assures his people, they
shall find them fully removed; so that there is no wrath nor curse, that any
who yields to it, needs to fear. 3. It implies that the Gospel brings good
news, and there is none better than this, that Gods justice is satisfied, and
his wrath removed. 4. It imports, that Christ can bear sure testimony to this,
that wrath is over, because he paid a price to remove it, and therefore
sinners may take his word, and follow his call. And, 5. That believers are
sometimes ready to suspect, more than they have ground, that there is some
storm yet before them; but Christ has made all fair-weather, ere he call: O
great argument! He calls not to fight, but to gather the spoil; He puts not
believers to the sea, till he himself has made all calm: Believers meet with
blasts and storms sometimes, but readily that is, when their back is on Christ,
and not when their faces are to him-ward: The wind of wrath is not in a sinners
face that seeks Jesus, but the word ^aith to such, fear not, Mark 16. 6. ye
seek him.

2. He presses her to rise and come, from some heartsome encouragements he
propons, verse. 12. There is a great change (says he) now, when the angry
winter is over, all things are pleasant and lovely. 1. The flowers appear, that
shows there is heat and warmness in the earth, and it is an effect of the
Spring, and a proof that winter is past. Hereby the fruits of grace, appearing
in the change that is wrought upon sinners, may be signified, as is frequently
hinted in this Song, where the Church is called a garden, and believers are the
flowers; Come, (says he) grace has made others to come through the ground,
who once were like flowers in the winter, under ground, but now they appear and
flourish. 2. The time of singing of birds is come. As in the Spring, birds
sing, which in the winter drooped; So (says he) now many poor sinners have
changed their sad note, and begin to sing, who once were sinking under fears:
And the good news of the Gospel, like the voice of the turtle, is heard in our
land; these good tidings have been sent even to us, which is no little evidence
of love, and no small confirmation to faith: That the news of the Gospel, and
the consolation of sinners thereby, is here understood, is very agreeable to
the scope: And these prove the removing of wrath, and are encouraging for
stirring sinners up to the exercise of faith. And O how heartsome, and
refreshful is the spiritual Spring, when the dayspring from on high visits us!
(as these things, mentioned in the text, are in the natural spring very
pleasant, and tend to provoke men to go and recreat themselves in the fields.)
And this is the particular scope of this place: There is never a sinner has
gotten good of Christ, but it proves him to be very kind; and the blessed
change Christ has wrought on them, should encourage others to believe,
especially when it is the day of their visitation, and the Sun of
Righteousness has become warm by the Gospel unto them, or unto the place and
society in which they live. 3. He presses his direction and call, by the very
presentnesse, and now of the season of grace, verse. 13. The fig tree puts
forth, etc. Which shows not only, that Summer is near, but that it is even at
the door, Matthew. 24. 32, 33. and (says he) the vines bud and give a smell;
whereby is holden forth, the thriving of the plants of God's vineyard, under
the dispensation of grace, as we may see, verse. 15. All these prove, that now
is the acceptable time, and now is the day of salvation; and there are l^rge
allowances of consolation to them, that now will accept of Christ's offers, and
subject to his call: Therefore, says he, even to us, sit not the time when all
is ready, but up, and come away: And that the voice of the turtle is heard in
our land, (that is even the Church wherein we live) proves it to be the season
of grace also; for, it is long since the time of the turtles singing has come
to us, and their voice is yet still heard: And this says the chock and season
of grace is amongst our hands, now when Christ's call comes to our door, and
therefore it would not be neglected.

And so he does in the fourth place, repeat the call in the end of verse. 13.
Arise my love, etc. And this repetition is to show, 1. His willingness to have
^t effectual, if sinners were as willing, it would soon be a bargain. 2. Our
sluggishnesse in not answering at once, therefore must word be upon word, call
upon call, line upon line, precept upon precept. 3. To bear out the riches of
his grace and love in this call, wherein nothing is wanting that can be
alleged to persuade a sinner to close with Christ, and to press one that has
closed with him to be cheerful in him: What a heartsome life might sinners have
with Christ, if they would embrace him, and dwell with him in the exercise of
faith! they should have always a springtime, and possess (to say so) the
sunny-side of the brae of all the world beside, walking in gardens and
orchards, where the trees of the Promises are ever fruitful, pleasant and
savoury to sight, smell, taste; and every word of Christ, as the singing of
birds, heartsome and delightful to the ear; and all of them healthful to the
believer. Who will have a heart to fit Christ's call? or if they do, who will
be able to answer it, when he shall reckon with them? It will leave all the
hearers of the Gospel utterly inexcusable. Lastly, this repetition shows the
importunatnesse, and the peremptorinesse of his call; he will have no refusal,
neither will he leave it arbitrary, if we will come, when we shall come, or
what way; but he straightly enjoyneth it, and that just now: It Is always time to
believe, when ever Christ calls, and it is never time to shift, when he
persuades. All this says, Christ must be a kind and loving Husband; how
greatly play they the fool, that reject him? and how happy are they, who are
effectualy called to the marriage of the Lamb?

Verse. 14. O my Dove! that art in the clefts of the rocks, in the secret places
of the stairs: let me see they countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is
thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.
This 14. verse. contains the second part of Christ's sweet and comfortable
Sermon. Wherein, beside the title which he gives his Bride, there are three
things, 1. Her case. 2. The directions which he propones, as the cure of her
case. 3. The motive pressing it.

The title is, my Dove: This has a sweet insinuation and motive in it.
Believers are styled so, 1. For their innocent nature, Matthew. 10. 16. 2. For
their tenderness, and trembling at the word of the Lord, Hos. 11. 11. Isa. 38.
14. Hezekiah mourned as a Dove. 3. For their beauty and purity, Psalm. 68. 13.
4. For their chaste adhering to their own mate, in which respect, that of Isa.
38. 14. is thought to allude to the mourning of the one, after the others
death* This shows what a believer should be, and who deserves this name.

The condition of this Dove is, that she is in the clefts of the rocks, and in
the secret places of the stairs: It Is ordinary for doves to hide themselves in
rocks, or holes in walls of houses; And this similitude is used sometimes in a
good sense, as Isa. 60. 8. sometimes in an ill sense, as pointing out
infirmity, and too much fear and fillinesse, Hos. 7. 11. Ephraim is a silly
Dove without heart that goes to Egypt, etc. The Bride is here compared to a
Dove hiding it self, in the last sense, out of unbelief and anxiety, taking her
to poor shifts for ease, and slighting Christ, as frighted doves that mistake
their own windows, and fly to other hiding-places; the scope being to comfort
and encourage her, and the directions calling her to holy boldness, and prayer
to him (implying that these had been neglected formerly) does confirm this:
Then says the Lord, my poor heartlesse Dove, why art thou discouraged, taking
thee to holes (as it were) to hide thee, fostering misbelief and fainting? that
is not the right way.

What then should she do (might it be said) seeing she is so unmeet to converse
with him, or look out to the view of any that looks on? He gives two
directions, holding forth what was more proper, and fit for her case, 1. Let me
see thy countenance (says he) like one that is ashamed, thou hides thy self,
as if thou durst not appear before me, but come (says he) let me see thy
countenance. This expression imports friendliness, familiarity, and boldness
in her coming before him: So this phrase of seeing ones face is taken, Genesis 43.
3, 5. and 2 Samuel 14. 32. As the not showing of the countenance, supposes
discontent or fear; So then the Lord calls by this to holy familiarity with
him, and confidence in it, in opposition to her former fainting and misbelief.
The second direction is, Let me hear thy voice, To make him hear the voice, is
to pray, Psalm. 5. 3. and under it generally all the duties of religion are
often comprehended; It Is like discouragement scarred the heartlesse Bride from
prayer, and she durst not come before him; do not so (says he) but call
confidently upon me in the day of trouble, and time of need. Obs. 1. Prayer
never angers Christ (be the believers case what it will) but forbearing of it,
will. 2. Discouragement when it seases on the child of God, is not soon shaken
off; and therefore he not only gives one direction upon another, but also adds
encouragements and motives suitable to these directions.

And so we come to the third thing in the verse, the motives he makes use of to
press his direction, which are two, 1. Sweet is thy voice. 2. Thy countenance
is comely. What is my voice and countenance, might she say (for proud unbelief
is exceeding humble, and subtle, when it is opposing, and thortoring with
Christ's call) yea (says he) thy voice is sweet; There is no music in the
world so pleasant to me, as the prayer of a poor believer. Now this does not so
much commend our prayers, as it shows his acceptance of them, and the
excellency of his golden censer, that makes them with his odours so savory
before God, Rev. 8. 3. And, 2. (says he) thy countenance though there be spots
on it, yet to me it is comely, therefore let me hear thy voice, let me see thy
countenance. Christ had rather converse with a poor believer, than with the
most gallant, stately person in all the world. Beside, Obs. 1. Fainting may
overmaster even a believer, and misbelief may mire them. 2. There are often
foolish secklesse shifts made use of by believers, for defending misbelief and
discouragement, when they are under temptation. 3. Faithless fears, and
discouragement may come to that height, as to scarr a believer from Christ's
company, and mar them in prayer to him. 4. Misbelief bears out still this to a
tempted soul, that Christ cares not for it; yea, that he disdains such a person
and their company. 5. Christ is tender of fainting believers, and of their
consolation, even when they suspect him most, and when their suspicions are
most unreasonable and uncharitable to him, Isa. 49. 14, 15. 6. Christ allows
poor believers a ^amiliar and confident walk with him; they might all be
courtiers, for the access that is allowed them, if they did not refuse their
allowance, and sinfully obstruct their own access thereto. 7. Christ loves to
be much employed by his people, and there is nothing more pleasing to him, than
frequently to hear their voice. 8. He is a sweet and gentle constructer of
them, and their service, and is not rigid, even when often they have many
misconstructions of him. 9. The more discouragement seizes upon the soul,
there should be the more prayer, and thronging in upon Christ; for there is no
outgate to be expected, but in that way. 10. None needs to fear to put Christ
on their secrets; or they need not so to fear (if they be sincere) that they
spill their prayers, as thereby to be kept from prayer, or made heartlesse in
it; For it is Christ that hears them, whose censer, Rev. 8. 6. makes them savory
before God: Let me hear thy voice is no little encouragement in that duty: And
the right consideration of it, would help to much boldness in prayer; and
especially considering, that the God who is the hearer of prayer, is our
Beloved.

Verse. 15. Take us the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines: for our
vines have tender grapes.
This 15. verse. contains the last part of Christ's Sermon: wherein, as he had
formerly given directions in reference to her particular walk; so here he
evidenceth his care of her external peace: That Christ speaks these words, the
continuation and series of them with the former, the scope (which is to make
full proof of his care) and the manner how the duty here mentioned is laid on,
to wit, by way of authority, makes it clear. There are three things in them, 1.
An external evil incident to the Church, and that is, to be spoiled by foxes.
2. A cure given in a direction, Take them, etc. 3. He gives reasons to deter
all from cruel pity, in sparing any of them. For, etc.

In clearing the case here supposed, as incident to the Church, we are to
consider, 1. What these vines are. 2. What be these foxes. 3. How they spoil
the vines. For clearing the first; Consider, that the visible Church is often
compared in Scripture to a Vineyard, Matthew. 21. 33. And the particular
professors, especially believers, are as the vine-trees that grow in it; So,
Isa. 5. 7. The Vineyard of the Lord is the house of Israel, collectively, and
the men of Judah are his pleasant plants. They are called so, 1. For their
fecklesnesse in themselves, Ezekiel. 15. 2, 3, etc. yet, excelling in fruit beyond
others. 2. Because of Gods separating them from others, and taking pains on
them above all others, Isa. 27. 2, 3. for these, and other reasons, they are
called the vines. Next, by foxes are understood false teachers, Ezekiel. 13. 4. O
Israel, thy Prophets (that is thy flattering teachers as the context clears)
are as foxes in the deserts. And, ( Mat. 7. 15.) they are called wolves in
sheeps clothing: Hereby are meant, not every one, who in something differ in
their own judgment from the received rule, if they vent it not for corrupting
of others, or the disturbing of the Churches peace; but these who are, in
respect of others, seducers, teaching men to do as they do, in that which tends
to the Churches hurt; and such also, as by flattery and unfaithfulness,
destroy souls, proportionally come in to share of the name, as they do of the
thing signified thereby, as that place of Ezekiel, before cited, and chap. 34.
2, 3. does confirm. Now they get this name for their resembling foxes, in three
things, 1. In their abominable nature, wherefore they are called, foxes,
wolves, dogs, etc. and such like, which are abhorred and hated of all men,
and so are these most hateful to God, and so ought they to be with all others.
2. For their destroying, hurtful nature, in their destroying of the Church;
therefore called ravening wolves, Mat. 7. 15. and grievous wolves, Acts 20. 29.
who subvert whole houses, Tit. 1. 11. and whose word eats as does a gangrene,
2 Timothy 2. 17. 3. They are compared to these for their subtilty, a fox being
famous for that, for which cause Herod is called a fox, Luke 13. 32. So false
teachers speak lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4. 2. creep into houses, their
doctrines eat as a canker insensibly: And they are 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. called
deceitful workers: And as their master Satan can transform himself into an
angel of light, so do they themselves into the ministers of Christ: All such
beasts whatever their shape be, are hateful to Christ and his Church. 3. These
false teachers or foxes, are said to spoil the vines, for foxes hurt not a
Vineyard, or flock of lambs more than false teachers do the Church. 1.
Corrupting the purity of Doctrine. 2. Obscuring the simplicity of Worship. 3.
Overturning the beauty of Order, and bringing^in confusion. 4. Spoiling her
bond of unity, and renting the affections, and dividing the ways of her
members, thereby dissipating the flock. 5. Extinguishing the vigor and life of
Christian practice; diverting from what is more necessary, to hurtful and vain
janglings, which do still increase to more ungodliness, and have never
profited them who were occupied therein, Heb. 13. 7. 6. By ruining souls,
carrying them headlong to the pit, 2 Pet. 2. 1. and 3. 16. There is no hurt nor
hazard the Church of Christ meets with, or ever met with, more grievous and
dangerous, than what she meets with from such, although this be an exercise and
trial, ordinarily incident to her.

2. The cure the Lord provides, is, the furnishing of his Church with
Discipline, and the giving of directions for managing of it in these words,
Take us, etc. Wherein consider these four, 1. To whom it is directed. 2. What is
required. 3. A motive insinuat in the expression, take us. 4. The extent of the
direction, for the obviating of a question. It may be supposed to be directed
to one of four. 1. Either to the Bride; or, 2. To Angels; or, 3. To
Magistrates; or, 4. To Church-guides. Now it is to none of the first three,
Therefore it must be to the last and fourth: First, It is not to the Bride:
For, 1. The word take in the Original, is in the plural-number, and signifies
take ye: now the Lord uses not to speak to the Church, but as to one. 2. He
says, take us, and so taking the Bride in with himself, as a party for whom
this service is to be performed, the speech must be directed to some third. 2.
It Is not directed to Angels, these are not spoken to in all this Song; and this
being a duty to be performed while the Church is militant, they come not in to
gather the tares from the wheat, till the end of the world, nor to separate the
bad fish from the good, till the net by fairly on the shore. 3. This direction
cannot be given to the Magistrate; for, beside that he is not mentioned in this
Song, nor as such, has he any part in the ministry of the Gospel, or capable
to be thus spoken unto (although the duty from the force of it is argument will
also reach him in his station, because he should so far as he can prevent the
spoiling of Christ's Vineyard in his place) Beside this, I say, this direction
must take place in all times, whenever the Church has such a trial to wrestle
with, otherwise it were not suitable to Christ's scope, nor commensurable with
her need: Now for many hundreds of years the Church wanted Magistrates, to put
this direction in practice, yet wanted she not foxes, nor was she without a
suitable capacity of guarding her self against them, by that power wherewith
Christ has furnished her. It remains therefore, 4. That it must be spoken to
Christ's Ministers, and Officers in the Church, called rulers in the Scripture,
and in this Song, watchmen and keepers of this Vineyard, as by office,
contradistinguished from professors, Chap. 3. 3. and 5. 7. and 8. 11, 12. Such
the Church never wanted, such are required to watch (Act. 20. 24.) against
wolves, and such in the Church of Ephesus are commended, ( Rev. 2. 3, 4.) for
putting this direction in execution. 2. The duty here required is to take them,
as men use to hunt foxes till they be taken: And this implies all that is
needful for preventing their hurting of Christ's Vines: Christ's Ministers are
to lay out themselves in discovering, confuting and convincing, censuring and
rejecting them, Tit. 3. 11. That is, not to endure them that are evil, but to
try them judicially, as it is Rev. 2. 2.

Obs. 1. Christ's Church is furnished with sufficient authority in her self,
for her own edification, and for censuring of such as would obstruct the same.
2. This Church Authority is not given to Professors in common, or to the Bride
as the first subject; but to their guides, Christ's Ministers and servants. 3.
It is no less a duty, nor is it less necessary to put forth this power
against false teachers, than against other gross offenders: So did Paul, 2 Timothy 1. ult. and so commands he others to do, Tit. 3. 10. heresy and corrupt
doctrine being also a fruit of the flesh, Gal. 5. 20. as well as other
scandalous sins.

3. There is a motive to press this, employed, while he says, take us; Which
words insinuat, that it is service both to him and her, and that Ministers are
his servants, and the Churches for Christ's sake. It shows also his sympathy,
in putting himself (as it were) in hazard with her (at least mystically
considered) and his love in comforting her, that he thinks himself concerned in
the restraint of these foxes, as well as she is.

4. The direction is amplified to remove an objection, (say some) all heresies,
or all Heretics are not equal, some comparatively are little to be regarded,
and it is cruelty to meddle with these, that seem to profess fair. No (says
he) take them all, even the little foxes; for, though they be little, yet they
are foxes, though they be not of the grossest kind (as all scandals in facts
are not alike, yet none is to be dispensed with) so they are (says he) foxes,
and corrupt others; for, a little leaven will leaven the whole lump (often
small-like schisms, or heresies, such as the Novatians and Donatists, etc. have
been exceedingly defacing to the beauty of the Church) therefore, (says he)
hunt, and take them all. How small a friend is our Lord to tolleration? and how
displeased is he with many errors, that the world thinks little of?
Magistrates, Ministers and people may learn here, what distance ought to be kept
with the spreaders of the least errors, and how every one ought to concur in
their stations, for preventing the hurt that comes by them.

The last thing in the verse, is, the reasons wherewith this direction is
backed and pressed: The first is, all of them spoil the vines: Error never
runs loose, and Heretics never get liberty, but the spoiling of the vines one
way or other follows; and can beasts be suffered in a garden, or orchard, and
the plants not be hurt?

2. If any say, they are but little foxes, and unable to hurt. He answers this,
and adds a second reason, in saying, the grapes are tender; or, the vines are
in the first grapes, that is, as they (while scarce budding or sprouting) are
easily blasted by a small wind, so the work of grace in a believer, or Christ's
ordinances in his Church, are most precious and tender wares, and cannot abide
rough hands; even the least of seducers, or corrupt teachers, may easily wrong
them; they are of such a nature, as they may be soon spoiled, if they be not
tenderly and carefully looked to. Obs. 1. They that have grace would be tender
of it; it may easily be hurt. 2. Gracious persons, would not think themselves
without the reach of hazard from corrupt teachers; for, this is spoken of the
Bride, The foxes spoil the vines. 3. Our Lord Jesus is exceeding tender of the
work of grace, in, and amongst his people, and where it is weakest, he is some
way most tender of it. 4. This argument here made use of, says also, that
these who are most tender of his Church, and the graces of his people, will be
most zealous against false teachers, even the least of them; For, these two are
joined together in him, and are in themselves necessary to preserve the one,
and restrain the other; and the suffering these to ramble and run without a
che^k, cannot be the way of building, but of spoiling Christ's Church.

The third motive, or reason pressing the watchmen to have a care of the
vines, is hinted in the possessive particle, our; for, our vines, etc. which is
relative to the watchmen, whom he takes in with himself, as having a common
interest in the Church; The Church is his, and theirs, as the flock is the
owners, and the shepherds, who are particularly set to have the oversight of
it; for, the shepherd may say, This is my flock, which no other servant can
say: And this is a great piece of dignity put upon Ministers, to be
fellow-workers with Christ, 2 Cor. 6. 1. etc. and binds on their duty strongly;
for, says Christ here to them, ye will have loss also, if ye see not to it,
because ye must count for the vineyard, wherewith ye are entrusted: It Is yours,
and yet ye are not absolute lords, for it is also mine, I am the owner of it:
And so the vines are both theirs and Christ's, their interest speaks how
naturally they should care for them; His interest shows the dependency both
ministers and people ought to have on him.

Verse. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his: he feeds among the lilies.
Verse. 17. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away: turn my beloved,
and be thou like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether.
Now follows the two last parts of her carriage in the beloveds absence; First,
after she has (as it were) read over his Epistle, she comforts her self in his
love, and her interest in him, though he be absent. (It Is good use of his word,
when it is made use of, for strengthening our faith in him, when sense is away)
There are two parts of this consolation, 1. Her faith is clear for the present,
verse. 16. 2. Her hope is solid in the expectation of an excellent day coming,
verse. 17. Next, verse. 17. she puts up a prayer for a gracious visit, which she
knows he will allow upon her until that day come; and this is the last thing
here recorded of the Brides carriage in the Bridegrooms absence.

In the 16. verse, the faith of her interst in him, is, 1. Asserted, my beloved
is mine, and I am his. 2. It Is vindicated, or established against an objection
in the following words, he feeds, etc. The assertion holds out an union betwixt
him and her, I am his, etc. Or, as it is in the Original, I am to him, and he
is to me; Such as is the union betwixt married persons, Hos. 3. 3. which the
tie of marriage brings on: Even such is this which follows covenanting with
God; for, this union presupposes it, and is founded on it, Ezekiel. 16. 8. I made
a covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine, or, to me; Although (says she)
^e be not here, yet he is my husband, and that tie stands betwixt me and him,
which is no little privilege; and in this, she comforts her self under absence.

Obs. First, There is an excellent union, and peculiar tie betwixt Christ and
believers, which none other can lay claim to but they: It Is excellent, as will
easily appear, if we consider these properties of it. 1. It Is a near union,
they are one flesh, Ephesians. 5. 27. as man and wife; they are flesh of his flesh,
and bone of his bone. 2. It Is a real and not an imaginary union (though it be
spiritual and by faith) it makes and transfers a mutual right of the one to the
other, and has real effects. 3. It Is mutual on both sides, Christ is wholly
hers, and she is wholly dedicated to him. 4. It Is a kindly union, such as is
betwixt husband and wise, and followed with the fruits of a most sweet
relation. 5. It Is an union which is some way full; whole Christ is hers, and
she by consent and title is wholly his. 6. I'ts an indissoluable union, there
is no dissolving of it by any thing that can fall out, otherwise the
consolation were not solid. Again, Obs. 2. That this relation, which the
believer has to Christ, is the great ground of his happiness and consolation,
and not any sensible presence, or any dispensation, or gift communicate by
Christ to him. 3. That believers may attain assurance, and clearness anent
their interest is him, and may come to know really that Christ is theirs: and
believers should aim to be through in this, that their calling and election may
be made sure to themselves. 2. Pet. 1. 10. 4. Believers when they have attained
clearness, should acknowledge it, and comfort themselves in it, and not raise
new disputes about it. 5. This clearness may consist with absence and want of
sensible presence, and there is no case wherein a believer should stick faster
to his confidence, than in such a case, when under desertion and absence, as
the Spouse does here.

2. She vindicats her faith in these words, He feeds among the lilies. The
words may be looked upon as the preventing of an objection, for it might be
said, If Christ be yours, where is he? Is it likely that he is yours, when he
is so far away? For, the faith of clearness will be assaulted and set upon,
and it is not easily maintained, and unbelief takes the advantage of Christ's
absence from sense, to brangle it; So that unbelief, and temptation especially
sets on then: Therefore, she answers it thus, He feeds among the lilies, that
is, he is kind to his people, and present with them, though now I see him not;
faith may, and will argue from Christ's love to his people in general, and from
the promises that speaks to all, when there seems to be nothing singular in the
believers own condition, from which it can take comfort. By lilies are
understood all believers: the Church was called a lilie, verse. 2. here all
believers are so called, as partaking of that same beauty and savor, and
because planted in the same true garden. Christ was called a lilie, verse. 1.
and here all believers are called lilies, Showing, 1. That all believers have a
conformity to Christ, and partake of the divine nature and spirit that is in
him. 2. That all believers in things that are essential to grace and holiness,
have conformity one to another, they have the same Faith, Spirit, Covenant,
Husband, etc. although in circumstantials and degrees, there be differences.
Next, his feeding amongst them, shows, 1. A special gracious presence in his
Church, and among believers, there he walks among the seven golden
Candlesticks, Rev. 2. 1. 2. A special delight he has in them, and satisfaction
to be amongst them, as a man delights to walk in his garden: It Is his meat
(John 4. 32. 34.) and drink to do them good; so then (says she) he is kind to
all his people, and is so to me, though for the time I see him not: And thus
also she answers the question, Chap. 6. 1, 2. even when Christ is a-seeking,
and she was inquiring after him. Obs. 1. Christ's care of his Church, and love
to his Bride, is no less under absence, than when his presence is sensibly
enjoyed. 2. The consideration of this, tends much to further the consolation of
believers, and it becomes them well to believe this, when under desertion and
absence, and so to ward off tentations.

The solid exercise of faith never wants hope waiting on it, therefore, 2.
verse. 17. that follows, for completing the Brides consolation in these words,
until the day break, and shadows, etc. Though there be shadows (says she) and
vails betwixt him and me, in this night of desertion; yet there is a day coming
when these, by his presence, shall be made to flee away, and I shall see him as
he is. There is a twofold day spoken of in Scripture, 1. A day of Christ's
presence here upon earth, Luke 1. 78. The dayspring from on high has visited
us. 2. The day of his glorious appearing, commonly called the great day; and in
a singular way called here the day, because it has no night of interruption
following thereupon, and because it goes as far beyond what believers possess
now, as day exceeds the night; Therefore it is called the morning, Psalm. 49. 14.
in which the just shall have the dominion; and the dawning of the day, and the
rising of the day star in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. which is there opposed to
the clearest prophesies and ordinances, which are but as a candle in a dark
place, in respect of that day. Now we conceive the last and great day is
signified here, 1. Because that is her scope, to comfort her self in the hope
of what is coming. 2. Because she opposes it to the present means, as to
shadows, even to faith it self, for that she enjoyed for the time; and also to
sensible pre^ence, which in the next words she prays for, till that day dawn.
By shadows is meant, whatever marres the immediate, full and satisfying enjoying
of Christ, which as shadows, hide him from us, or darken him that we do not see
him as he is, or give but small and dark representations of him, (like shadows
of the body) which are very unproportioned unto his own excellent worth. They
are said to flee away, because a glimpse of Christ then, when he who is the Sun
of Righteousness, shall shine at the break of that day, shall dispell and
dissipate them more fully and quickly, than this natural Sun when rising, does
scatter darkness and shadows that go before it. And by until, we understand
the setting of a fixed term, which distinguishes one time from another, as
Genesis 32. I will not let thee go until thou bless me; so says she, until
that day of immediate presence come, let me have love-visits, as is expressed in
the following words. Obs. 1. There is an excellent day coming to believers,
wherein Christ shall be immediately enjoyed and seen, and wherein the soul shall
be comforted with no mediat object, or created excellency, but shall see his
face, and be filled with the fullness of God. 2. While here, there are many
shadows even betwixt Christ and the strongest believers; we see but darkly as
in a glass, 1 Cor. 13. 12. There is, 1. a shadow of desertion, and his hiding
of himself. 2. A shadow of Ordinances, where he is seen, yet but darkly, like a
face in a Looking-glass. 3. A shadow of sinful infirmities, drawing vails
betwixt Christ and us, and hiding his face from us, Isa. 59. 2. 4. A shadow of
natural infirmity; for, not only are we ready through unbelief to slander him,
but by reason of weakness (like narrow or old bottles) we are not capable of
him, and unable to contain him. 3. At that day of his appearing, all these
shadows will instantly be done away: there will not one tear be left on any
believers cheeks, there will be no affliction or desertion to hide him from
them, but they shall be for ever with him: there will then be no Ordinances,
nor Temple, Rev. 21. 22. but the Lord God and the Lamb himself, shall be the
Temple and light of his people: Nor will there be any sinful infirmities then
to interpose betwixt him and them, death, the curse and corruption will be cast
into the lake; no unclean thing accompanies the believer into the new
Jerusalem; nay, no imperfect thing is there, for whatever is imperfect, and
whatever was in part, is then done away, 1 Cor. 13. 10. and what is perfect
will then come; the soul in it is faculties will then be perfected, capacitated
and dilated to conceive, take up and delight in God; and the body perfected,
made glorious and spiritual, like the glorious body of our Lord Jesus, Philip.
3. ult. 4. The hope of that day, and of the fleeing away of all shadows then,
is (and no marvel it be) very refreshful to the Lord's people: and believers in
all their darknesses should comfort themselves and others from the hope of it,
1 These. 4. ult. 5. All that are Christ's, or whoever have faith in Christ, and
fellowship with him by virtue of his Covenant, may expect at that day to enjoy
Christ immediately and fully, and to see him as he is: O that men believed this!
and that many were th^onging in to his Covenant now, as they would not desire
to be cast from his presence in that day! Yet, 6. All shadows are never removed
till then; the believer must, and some way will submit to Christ's way of
ordering it so, and not seek it should be otherwise till then.

In the last place, the Bride falls about the exercise of prayer in the rest of
this verse; faith and hope in exercise always stir up to prayer; for, these
graces do not foster las^nesse and security, but incite and provoke to duty
(it is a good token when faith and hope are so accompanied) therefore she turns
her to prayer, in which she speaks to him as to her beloved: Clearness of
interest, as it helps notably to many things, so to confidence in prayer
especially. The petition (importing still absence) has these two in it, 1. The
suit it self, turn. 2. The enforcing and enlarging of it, be like a Roe, etc.
Turning her, implies, 1. Sense and feeling of his absence. 2. Her serious
desire to have Christ again. 3. That his absence may be removed by his own
returning, and so the change of her case to the better must flow from him. And*
4. That she may ask this from him, and expect by prayer in says to obtain it,
believing prayer being the best mean to effectuat this. Next she enforces and
inlargeth her petition, Be thou like a Roe, etc. that is, seeing (says she) all
shadows will not be removed till that time, what is my suit for the time? It Is
even this, that thou will give me visits of thy presence, and be like a Roe or
young Heart on the mountains of Bether: The word Bether, signifies division, and
so it may be made use of here, so long (says she) as these mountains divide
betwixt me and thee, Lord be not a stranger, but swiftly, easily and kindly (as
the Roes come over mountains to their mates, Prove. 5. 19.) come thou to me, and
comfort me with frequent love-visits, until that time come, that thou take me
to thee, to enjoy thee fully and immediately. Obs. 1. It Is lawful for believers
to desire sensible presence, even here-away: Yea, it is suitable, they should
often long and pray for it. 2. Where the hope of heaven is solid, sensible
manifestations of Christ's love will be most ardently sought for: It will never
prejudge one of their satisfaction and full payment then, that they have gotten
a large earnest-penny here, she knows that will never be reckoned up to her. 3.
Much prayer flowing from, and waiting upon the exercise of faith and hope, is a
notable way to bring the soul to the enjoyment of sense. 4. The believer has a
heartsome life, and a rich inheritance, Christ here, and Christ hereafter, the
lines are fallen unto him in pleasant places. 5. She grounds her suit on the
marriage-relation and tie betwixt him and her, my Beloved (says she) a
Covenant-claim to Christ, is the most solid ground upon which believers can
walk in their approaches before him, and in their pleadings with him. 6. He
allows believers to plead for his company, from this ground, that he is theirs
by Covenant, as he pleads for their company, on that same ground, verse. 10. etc.

CHAP. III.
BRIDE.
Verse. 1. By night on my bed I sought Him whom my soul loves, I sought him,
but I found him not.
Verse. 2. I will rise now and go about the city in the streets, and in the
broad-wayes I will seek him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I found him
not.
THis Chapter has three parts, 1. The Brides sad exercise under the want of
Christ, and in seeking after him till she find him, to verse. 6. 2. The
Daughters of Jerusalem come in, commending the Bride, verse. 6. 3. The Bride
from verse. 7. to the end, returns to discourse of, and commend the excellency
and amiablenesse of Christ.

In her exercise consider, 1. Her case. 2. Her carriage in several steps. 3.
Her success in every step. 4. Her practice when she has obtained her desire:
Or, we may take them all up in these two, 1. Her sad condition, and her
carriage under it. 2. Her outgate and her carriage suitable thereto. Her case
is employed in two words in the beginning of verse. 1. 1. It was night with her.
2. She was on her bed. By night, is ordinarily understood darkness, and
affliction, opposite to light of day and joy; and here her exercise being
spiritual, it must imply some spiritual affliction, or soul-sad spiritual
exercise. So night is taken, Psalm. 42. 8. He will command his loving kindness
in the day, and in the night (while the day come, that his loving kindness be
intimate) his song shall be with me, etc. The scope-shews, that it is a night
of dese^tion she is under, through the want of Christ's presence whom she loves;
His presence, who is the Sun of Righteousness with healing under his wings,
makes the believers day; and his absence, is their night, and makes them droop,
as being under a sad night of soul-affliction; therefore is it, that she seeks
so carefully after his presence. 2. Her being on her bed, is not taken here, as
implying neernesse with him; for, the scope shows he is absent, but a lasinesse
of frame on her spirit, opposite to activenesse and diligence, as it is taken,
Chap. 5. verse. 3. and so it is opposed to her after-rising and diligence, and
therefore it is also called my bed, implying that she was here alone in a secure
comfortless frame, and therefore for this, it is distinguished from our bed,
Chap. 1. 16. and his bed afterward, verse. 7. Where she is allowed rest, and
spiritual ease, and solace in his company; but here on her bed she has no such
allowance, whatever earnal ease and rest she take to her self: Believers have
their own fits of carnal security, when they give their corruptions rest, that
is, their own bed; and it is a heartlesse lair (to speak so) to ly alone and
want the beloved: This is her case, wanting Christ, yet lying too still, as
contented some-way in that condition; though it cannot continue so with
believers, it will turn heavy and perplexing at last to them, as it does here
to the Bride: and sure, the easiest time under security is not so comfortable
as profitable to believers, as is an exercise that takes them more up;
Therefore afterward she prefers rising and seeking, to this woeful rest. It
shows, 1. That believers distance and darkness may grow; for, in the former
Chapter, Christ was absent, yet, as through a window or lattesse, there were
some glimpses of him; but here it is night, and there is not so much as a
twilight discovery of him. 2. Often, distance with Christ, and security and
deadness (as to our spiritual life) go together: When Christ is absent,
believers then usually fall from activity in their duty, Isa. 64. 7. No man
stirs up himself to lay hold on thee, and the reason is, thou have hid thy
face, etc. Matthew. 25. 5. While the Bridegroom tarrieth, even the wise Virgins
slumbered and slept.

Her carriage, or way that she takes in this case, is set out in four steps:
The 1. Is in these words, I sought him, whom my soul loves. Consider here, 1.
The title Christ gets, him whom, etc. Christ got this name before, and now
several times she repeats it; And it holds forth, 1. The sincerity of her love,
it was her soul and heart that loved him. 2. The degree and singularity of it,
no other thing was admitted in her heart to compare with him, he bears the
alone sway there, in respect of the affection she had to him, it is he, and none
other upon whom her soul's love is set, otherwise, this title would not
suitably design him; Christ loves well to have such titles given to him, as may
import the hearts special esteem of him. 3. It shows, that even in believers
lowest conditions, there remains some secret soul-esteem of Christ, and that in
their judgment, he is still their choice and waill above all the world. Yet,
4. That their practice while security prevails, is most unsuitable to their
convictions and judgment. 2. Consider her practice and carriage, while Christ
is absent, her practice is not altogether a laying by, without the form of
Religion; for, (says she) on my bed I sought him, that is, I prayed and used
some means, but in a lazy way, not stirring up my self vigorously in it. Obs.
1. Believers in a secure frame, may keep some form of duty, yet their duties
are like the frame of their heart, lifelesse and hypocritical. 2. There is much
of a believers practice, such as themselves will find fault with, when they
come to look rightly upon it; yea, even much of their way, while they keep up
the form of duty, is but like the sluggard, Prove. 26. 14. turning themselves
upon their beds, as the door does upon the hinges; not lying still, nor
altogether darring to give over the form, yet little better on the matter,
because they make no effectual progress, not can they say their soul is in and
with their service, which they perform. 3. Her success as to this step, is,
but I found him not, that is, I was nothing the better, these sluggish
endeavors did not my business: Every form of seeking will not obtain; and one
may seek Christ long in their ordinary formal way, ere they find him; yet it is
good not to give over, but to observe the form: Life and love is not altogether
gone, when one discerns absence, and their own laziness with discontent.

When this does not reach her design, she proceeds to a more lively step, verse.
2. and that is, to get up, and seek him in a more active stirring way: Which
says, 1. She observed the continuance of her distance, and what came of her
prayers and seeking; which is a good beginning of ones recovery, and wining to
their feet after a fit of security and decay. 2. It says, it is often good for
a believer, as to their rouzing, and their recovering of spiritual life, that
sense is not always easily obtained; this activity had not followed (readily)
had not Christ constrained her to it, by cross-dispensations and
disappointments. In this step we have, 1. Her resolving to fall about a more
active way in seeking him. 2. Her performance. 3. Her success. First, Her
resolution is, I will rise now (says she) and go about the streets, etc. In
which there are these three, 1. What she resolves to do, not to give over (for
that should never be given way to) but to bestir her self more actively in
duty, I will rise and go from the bed to the streets of the city and seek him
there. By city is understood the Church, whereof all members are
fellow-citizens, Ephesians. 2. 19. It Is called so, 1. For it is order and government,
so the Church is as a city, that has watchmen and laws. 2. For it is unity;
it is one Commonwealth and Incorporation, Ephesians. 2. 12. This Jerusalem is a city
compacted together, Psa. 122. 3. 3. For it is privileges, whereof all believers
(who are the burgesses and fellow-citizens) are partakers, Ephesians. 2. 19. and unto
which all others who are without, are strangers. Her going into the city,
suppons a communicating of her case to others for help, and her using of more
public means, opposite to her private dealing within her self on her bed,
verse. 1. even as rising imports a stirring of her self to more activity in the
manner of performing these duties, opposite to her seeking him formerly while
she lay still on her bed: The thing then resolved upon is to this sense, What
am I doing? are there not more means, in the use of which I may seek Christ? Is
there not another way of inquiring after him, than this lazy formal way? I will
up and essay it. There are many means given for a believers help, and when one
fails, another may be blessed; and therefore, believers are still to follow
from one to another; and where true love to Christ is, it will make them do so,
and spare no pains till they meet with him. Again, 2. Ere she gets to her feet,
and goes to the streets, etc. she deliberatly resolves it, I will rise, etc.
Which shows, 1. That her former disappointment did put her to a consultation
what to do, and made her more serious; And this is the use that ought to be
made of disappointments in the duties of religion. 2. That there will be
heart-deliberations in a Christian-walk, when it is serious; and they are the
best performances and duties, that are the results of these. 3. Serious
resolutions are often very useful, and helpful in duty; for, they are
engagements, and spurs to stir up to duty, when we are indisposed for it. 4.
It Is good cordially to resolve upon duty, when the practice of it is somewhat
difficult or obstructed; for, this both speaks sincerity, and also helps to
lessen the difficulty which is in the way of duty. 5. Resolutions to set about
duty are oftentimes the greatest length believers can win at, while under
indisposition; and this much is better than nothing, because it draws on more.

3. This resolution is qualified, I will rise now (says she) that is, seeing
these sluggish endeavors does not avail me, I will delay no longer, but will
now presently fall about it in more earnest. It Is the sign of a sincere
resolution, when it does not put off or shift duty, but ingageth the soul in a
present undertaking of it, Psalm. 119. 59, 60.

Next her performance, or her putting this resolution in practice, does
accordingly follow instantly, I sought him (said she) that is, in the streets,
etc. Obs. 1. It Is not a resolution worth the mentioning, that has not practice
following; for every honest resolution is followed with practice, whatever
short-coming wait upon it. 2. Honest resolutions are often to duty, like a
needle that draws the thread after it; and believers would not star to resolve
on duty from fear of coming short in performance, if their resolutions be
undertaken in the strength of Christ, as this was, as is clear by considering
her former frame, which was such as would give no great encouragement to selfy
undertakings in duties.

Lastly, her success, or rather her disappointment follows in these words, but
I found him not, even then when I was most serious in seeking him, I missed him
still; which is not only spoken, to show the event, but also by way of regrate,
she is deeply affected with it. Obs. 1. When the Lords people have been
formerly lazy, Christ may keep up himself, even when they become more active,
rather hereby chastening their former negligence, than being offended at their
present diligence in duty. 2. It Is sad when Christ is missed even in duty, and
that once and again. 3. She continues to be a distinct observer of the fruits
both of public and private duties, which is a commendable practice, and to be
made conscience of by all the seekers of his face.

Verse. 3. The watchmen that go about the City, found me: to whom I said, Saw
ye him whom my soul loves?
This verse contains the third step of the Brides carriage, being now abroad;
the watchmen found her, and she inquires for her beloved at them: and her
success in this may be gathered from what follows, she does not upon recourse
to them immediately find him, but is put to go a little further. In the words,
there is, 1. An opportunity or mean for finding Christ, met with. 2. Her
improving of it. 3. The success which is employed, as is said.

The mean holds forth these three things, 1. What the Church is; It Is a City,
wherein there is order, and a common-fellowship, as has been said, verse. 2. 2.
The Ministers office is here employed, this City has watchmen; so are
Ministers called, Ezekiel. 3. 17. Isa. 62. 6. Heb. 13. 17. Which word imports, 1.
That the Church is a City in danger, having outward and inward enemies, and
therefore needing watchmen. 2. That there is an office of a Ministry
appointed in the Church for guarding against and preventing her danger; and
that some are peculiarly designed, and separat from others for that purpose;
some who may be called watchmen, which others cannot be said to be; and so
they are here distinguished from believers or private persons. 3. This office
is most necessary, burdensome, and of great concernment to the safety of the
Church, as watchmen are to a city; for so watch they over the souls of the
people committed to their trust.

Again, these watchmen, are in the exercise of their duty, They went about the
city; Which shows their diligence according to their trust; at least, it holds
forth the end wherefore they are appointed. Obs. There is but one City or
Church, and all Ministers are watchmen of that one Church, given for the
edification of that body; and they should watch, not only for this or that Post
(to say so) but for the safety of the whole, as watchmen that stand at their
post, for the good of the whole City.

3. These watchmen found her, that is, (as we conceive) by their doctrine they
spoke to her condition, and by their searching and particular application, made
the two-edged sword of the Word reach her; as if they had discernably pointed
her out, beyond all the rest of the Congregation: Which shows, 1. The efficacy
of the word when rightly managed, Heb. 4. 12. It Is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart. 2. That God can make it find out one in the midst of
many others, when the Minister knows not; and can make it speak to a believers
case, or any other particular persons condition, as if he did know and aim at
them particularly. 3. That Ministers should be searching, and differencing in
their doctrine, as the several conditions, and various exercises of hearers
require: that is, they ought to put difference betwixt the precious and the
vile, and rightly to divide the word of truth or to lay every ones portion to
them so as it be not given in gross, or heaped together to all, but to every
one their own allowance. In sum then, that which she says, is this, When I had
gone abroad, (says she) in heaviness to hear (if so I might meet with Christ
in public) God made some watchmen speak to my condition particularly, as if
one had acquainted them with it.

2. Her improving of this opportunity (coming, as it were, beyond her
expectation) follows in the next words: she cries out in an abrupt manner, Saw
ye him; she thinks they can help her, being acquaint with such cases, and
therefore she will consult them; That is, she follows in, upon the little
experience she had felt of their skill, to seek for help from them, and for
that end to communicate her case to them, as it were after Sermon is done, or
when some convenient time offers. Obs. 1. That believers, that are serious,
will let no fit opportunity for meeting with Christ pass; they are accurat
observers, and frugal managers of them all. 2. She observes and is glad when a
word speaks home to her case, and finds her: And this is indeed the disposition
of a sound and serious believer. 3. Ministers would be well acquaint themselves
with soul-sicknesse, and expert in the various exercises and cases incident to
the people of God, both in order to the finding out their disease, and the
cause of it (who often can scarce make language of their own condition
themselves) and also in order to the making suitable applications for the cure
of it; for, this is to have the tongue of the learned, to speak a word in
season. 4. Believers often can say little of their cases, but in a broken and
confused way; which says, Ministers had need to be the better acquaint with
the spiritual cases and exercises of souls, that they may understand by half a
word what they would say. 5. Believers would advert well to whom they
communicate their case, this would not be done to all. 6. Ministers are suitable
Physicians (though not the sole or only Physician) to whom believers would make
known their soul-exercises and cases, and therefore, there should be much
spiritual sympathy betwixt their people and them. 7. It Is a great encouragement
to a distressed soul, to impart it is case to a Minister, when in his public
doctrine he uses to speak pertinently unto it. 8. It Is not unsuitable for
exercised souls (beside the public hearing of their Minister) to have their
particular queries to him in private. 9. How Christ shall be obtained, is a
suitable subject for Ministers and people, in their converse together, to be
mainly taken up with; and holy anxiety concerning this, is a frame fit for
making adresses to Ministers; they may indeed come to Ministers with such
questions, who are much in longing after him. 10. There may be much tenderness
in affection and love, where there is much weakness in knowledge. He is the
him whom her soul loves, even now when she knows not where he is; and the most
grown believers may be sometimes brought to this low ebb in their condition,
for good ends, and for demonstrating the usefulness and necessity of public
ordinances, even to them. 11. An exercised soul prizeth most a Ministry; and
such spiritual exercises (as are here mentioned) do cherish their esteem of
that ordinance, when other debates among a people, often do derogat from it is
due esteem. 12. Ministers would not cast affection, nor reject zeal in weak
Christians, even though these be joined with some infirmities, and may occasion
some more trouble to themselves; But where sincerity is, there would be an
overcoming condescendence as to both these, and the questions of a tender soul
should be by them entertained, as having learned at their Master, not to break
a bruised reed. 13. Tender exercised souls usually confine their questions to
their own souls case; There is no abstract curious query here, nor for the
fashion proposed, nor any needless debate about extrinsick things, or the
faults or practice of others, but, Saw ye him whom my soul loves? This is the
sore upon which she keeps her finger, and this is the wound which she keeps
bleeding, till he bind it up.

3. The success of her meeting with the watchmen, and of this query she puts
to them, though it be not expressed, yet it is employed in the first words of the
next verse, which being compared with this, holds out two things, 1. That she
did not presently find an outgate from under her sad case, for she behoved to
go further. 2. It was but a little further that she is put to go, till she find
him; which says, that her endeavors were not altogether fruitless. Obs. 1.
Christ will sometimes let believers know, that all means without him are empty,
and that he is astricted to none of them; yea, nor to any fellowship, no not of
the most powerful Minister. 2. Public means do not always bring present ease
unto believers under disquieting cases; yet, (to say so) they dispose and make
way for it in private; and one may get the good of an Ordinance, and of
fellowship with Ministers or Christians, though not in the mean time, yet
afterward even when they are retired at home; and it is as good a time
thereafter, yea, and better for their behove.

If it be asked here, what we should judge of these watchmen, if they were
tender or not? The ground of the doubt is, because chap. 5. 7. watchmen that
are not tender are spoken of, which yet are there said to find the Bride. Ans.
There is a twofold finding, 1. When one searches an exercised condition for
this end, that he may contribute something for the exercised persons ease and
help. 2. When one follows or searches after tenderness in others, that he may
find some advantage against them, thereby to make the heart of the righteous
sad; the one finds, as a friend finds another; the other, as an enemy, or
mocker finds another: The first sort of finding is to be understood here in
this Chapter, for the watchmen here, carry as friends; The second sort of
finding, chap. 5. 7. for there they carry as mockers^ Which will appear by
these differences, 1. Here she propones her case to them for their help, it is
like being encouraged thereto, by their finding out her case before in the
preaching of the Word, but chap. 5. 7. she does no such thing. 2. When they
find her, chap. 5. 7. they smite her and put her to shame, which makes her
silent; but their finding her here, does encourage her. 3. Though here she find
not Christ instantly, yet she says not as in the former steps, I found him
not, she could not altogether say so, and immediately after she finds him; but,
chap. 5. she goes long seeking him, after she meets with the watchmen; yea,
goes from them heavier, and more wounded than when she came: And this Song
being to hold forth the various conditions of a believer, and it being incident
to them sometimes to fall in tender hands, and sometimes, yea, often in the
hands of such as are rough and untender, we judge it safest to understand this
place of the first, and chap. 5. of the last, and especially because this makes
most for the believers instruction and consolation, which is here aimed at, and
this is more suitable to the scope of the Song, than that both should be
underst^^^ one way.

Verse. 4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
soul loves: I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into
my mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me.
The beginning of this verse, contains the last step of the Brides carriage,
and also her desired success, She went a little further, and but a little, and
she finds him whom her soul loves: Public Ordinances and fellowship with
godly men, are very useful and necessary, but not to be rested on; and they who
find not the desired outgate by these, would not immediately give over the
business as desperate and hopeless; for, there is something even beyond these
to be aimed at, a little further must be gone, which is the first thing in the
verse: and we conceive it does import these two, 1. A more immediate going to
Christ himself, (as if the Ministers had said) ye must go over and beyond
means, to Christ himself, and denying these, lean and rest, and that wholly on
him: They go beyond means, that rest not on them, and are denied to them in the
use of them, as that man, Matthew. 17. 14. that brought his son to the Disciples,
to get the devil cast out, and when that did it not, he went not away, but
stayed for Christ himself, and told the case to him: Christ can do when means
fail, and we would trust him, when they seem to disappoint us: How fecklesse
are the best of Ministers, when himself is not present? 2. This going a little
further, does not import the doing of any duties she had not done, but a more
vigorous and lively manner of going about the^e: There had some heartlesnesse,
unbelief and indisposition stuck to her, in all the former steps and
struglings; now she steps further in, and goes forward in the use of the^e same
means; and not speaking to the Minister, when she finds that the moving of his
lips cannot assuage her grief, she looks through to the Master, and vigorously
addresses her self to the exercise of faith in him, of prayer to him, etc. in a
more serious way than she had done before. Obs. 1. Sometimes believers may say
too much weight on outward and public means; they may rest too much there, and
go no further then these. 2. It Is God's goodness, by disappointments in means,
to train his people on to a further length of power and li^e in their practice.
3. It may be when a believer has satisfied himself in going about all external
means, and that in the due order, and has neglected none of them, that there
is still somewhat more to do, as to the bettering of his inward frame. 4. It Is
not a desperate business, nor are believers forthwith to conclude that their
hope is pe^ished, because they have not attained their desire in the use of
means for a time. 5. It Is not a less practique in soul-exercises, to go over
and beyond means and ordinances in sueing for Christ, than to go about them;
and the last is no less necessary than the first. 6. Believers in the use of
means, would join these three together, 1. Making conscience of means; And yet,
2. For the success, looking higher than they; And, 3. Not stumbling when they
find not instantly ease, or satisfaction by them.

The second thing here, is her success, which is according to her desire, I
found him (says she) when I had pressed but a little further, he sensibly and
surprisingly made himself known to me. Obs. 1. Christ is not far off from his
people when they are seeking him, whatever they may think when he hides
himself. 2. They who love Christ, and conscionably follow all means for
obtaining of him, are not far from finding, nor he far from manifesting himself
to them. 3. They who sincerely press forward to the life of O^dinances beyond
the form, and by faith take themselves to Christ himself for the blessing, not
resting on their performances, will not long miss Christ; yea, it may be, he
will give them a sensible manifestation of himself sooner than they are awar;
for, the Spirit is obtained, not by the works of the Law, but by the hearing of
Faith. Gal. 3. 2. 4. A soul that sincerely loves Christ, should not, and when
in a right frame will not give over seeking Christ till it find him, whatever
disappointments it meets with; and sure, such will find him at last. 5. Christ
found after much search, will be very welcome, and his presence then will be
most discernable. 6. Believers would no less observe, and acknowledge their
good success in the means, than their disappointments; There are many who
often make regrates of their bonds, that are deficient in acknowledging Gods
goodness when they get liberty.

Next, In this verse we have her carriage set down, when she has found him;
She does not then lay-by diligence, as if all were done, but is of new taken
up, with as great care to retain and improve this mercy, as before she was
solicitous to attain it: Whether a believer want or have; whether he be seeking
or enjoying, there is still matter of exercise for him in his condition. This
her care to retain Christ (which is the fourth thing in the first part of this
Chapter) is laid down in three steps. 1. She endeavors to hold him, that she
again lose not the ground she had gained. 2. She seeks to have other members of
that same Church getting good of Christ also: and these two are in this verse.
3. When his presence is brought back to the Church and Ordinances, her care is
to admonish; yea, charge that he be entertained well with them, lest they
should provock him to be gone, verse. 5.

The first step then of her care is, I held him and would not let him go, as a
wife having found her husband, whom she much longed-for, hangs on him lest he
depart again, so does she; which is an expression both of her fear, love, care
and faith. This holding of Christ, and not letting him go, imports, 1. A holy
kind of violence, more than ordinary, wherewith the Bride strives and wrestles
to retain him. 2. That Christ (as it were) waits for the believers consent in
this wrestling, as he says to Jacob, Genesis 32. 26. I pray let me go: which upon
the matter seems to say, I will not go, if thou will hold me, and have me stay.
3. It imports an importunat adhering to him, and not consenting upon any terms
to quit him. And lastly, it imports the singular and inexpressible satisfaction
she had in him; her very life lay in the keeping him still with her, and
therefore she holds him, and cannot think of parting with him. Now this
presence of Christ (being spiritual) cannot be understood in a carnal way, nor
can they be carnal grips that retain him; and his power being omnipotent, it
cannot be the force of a frail creature that prevails, but it is here as in
Hos. 12. 2, 3. In Jacob's prevailing, he wept and made supplication, that is,
an humble, ardent sueing to him by prayer, with a lively exercise of faith on
his promises (whereby he allows his people to be pressing) ingageth him to
stay; He is tied by his own love that is in his heart, and his faithfulness in
his promises, that he will not withdraw, and deny them that, for which they
make supplication to him, more than if he were by their strength prevailed
over, and overcome; as a little weeping child will hold it is mother or nurse,
not because it is stronger then she, but because the mothers bowels so
constrains her, as she cannot almost, though she would leave that child; So
Christ's bowels earning over a believer, are that which here holds him, that he
cannot go; He cannot go because he will not. Here we have ground to observe the
importunatnesse of sincere love, which is such, as with a holy wilfulness it
holds to Christ and will not quit him, as Jacob said, I will not let thee go.
2. We may observe here the power of lively ^aith (to which nothing is
impossible) love and faith will stick to Christ against his own seeming
entreaties, till they gain their point, and will prevail, Genesis 32. 28. 3. See
here the condescending, the wonderful condescending of the Almighty, to be held
by his own creature; to be, as it were, at their disposal, I pray thee let me
go, Genesis 32. 26. and Exodus 32. 10. Let me alone, Moses; So long as a believer
will not consent to quit Christ, so long keeps their ^aith grip of him, and he
will not offend at this importunity; ye^, he is exceedingly well pleased with
it: It cannot be told how effectual prayer and faith would be, if servent and
vigorous.

The second step of her carriage, which is the scope of the former, namely of
her holding him, is in these words, till I had brought him to my mothers house,
to the chambers of her that conceived me. By mother in Scripture is understood
the visible Church, which is even the believers mother, Hos. 2. 2. Say to Ammi
(my people) plead with your mother. So chap. 1. 6. this mother has children,
both after the flesh, and after the spirit, the former hating the latter; And,
chap. 8. 5. It Is the mother that has Ordinances, for the Brides instruction.
The Church visible is called the mother, because, 1. By the immortal seed of
the Word, the Lord begets believers in his Church, to which he is Husband, and
the Father of these children, she the wife and mother that conceives them, and
brings them up. 2. Because of the Covenant-tye that stands betwixt God and the
visible Church, whereby she may claim right to him as her Husband (the Covenant
being the marriage-contract betwixt God and the Church) which is therefore the
ground of the former relation of mother. Again, Christ is said to be brought
into the Church, not only when his Ordinances are pure in her, (which is
supposed to be here already; for, verse. 3. there were watchmen doing their
duty, and dispensing pure Ordinances) but when there is life in them, the
presence and countenance of his Spirit going along with them, that they may be
powerful for the end appointed: as it was one thing to have the Temple, the
type of his Church, and another, to have God's presence singularly in it; So
it is one thing to have pure Ordinances set up in the Church, and another, to
have Christ's presence filling them with power: Now (says she) when I got
Christ, I knew there was many fellow members of that same Church, that had need
of him, and I was importunate that he might manifest himself in his Ordinances
there, for their and my good. Church-Ordinances, are the allowed and ordinary
mean of keeping fellowship with Christ, and they are all empty when he is not
there. Obs. 1. That even true believers have the visible Church for their
mother, and it is written of them as their privilege, that they were born
there* Psalm. 87. 4, 5. 2. Believers should not disclaim the Church in which
they are spiritually begotten and born, nor their fellow members therein; but
reverence her as the mother that gave them life, and carry respectively toward
her as such; Honor thy father and thy mother being a moral command, and the
first with promise. See Psalm. 122. 3, 6. 3. When believers get nearest Christ
for themselves, it is then the fit time to deal with him for others, especially
for the Church whereof they are members: It Is Moses only express suit, Exodus
34. 9. when God admits him to his company (in presenting whereof it is said,
verse. 8. he made haste) I pray thee, O Lord, go amongst us. 4. It Is true
tenderness, when one is admitted to more neernesse with God than others, not
to separat from the Church whereof they were members, and as it were to carry
Christ to their own chamber; but to endeavor to have Christ brought also to
the Church, that what is wanting of life amongst her members, or the rest of
the children, may be made up by his presence. 5. They who are tender of their
own comfort, and of retaining Christ's presence with themselves, will be
careful to have others not yet sensible of their need of it, nor acquaint with
it, made partakers thereof also. 6. Believers in their serious applications to
Christ for the Church whereof they are members, may prevail much, and have much
influence for obtaining his presence there, and for the putting of every thing
in a better frame for the good of others. 7. A kindly member of the Church, is
brought up ordinarily in that Church, and by that mother, where they were
conceived, therefore she goes back to her mothers house, for they have breasts
to nourish, who have a womb to bring ^orth in this respect; and yet here were
both children that hated her, chap. 1. 6. and watchmen that smote her, chap.
5. 7. yet to this mothers house she goes. In a word, this is, as a kind spouse
living in her mothers house, having after long seeking found her husband, will
be desirous to have him home with her, not only for their mutual solace, but
for the comfort of all the family; so do believers, living yet in the Church,
desire to improve their credit and court with Christ, for the good of the whole
Church, that where she was conceived, others may be conceived also: Where
Christ's Ordinances are, there ordinarily are children begotten to God; and
where a Church conceives seed, and brings forth to him, it is a token he has
not given her a bill of divorce, nor will disclaim her to be his wife; so much
less, the children ought not to disclaim her as their mother: It Is a shame
that many who profess to be children, either are not yet conceived, or the
mother that conceived them, is despised by them; It Is strange if the Father
will own such as children, who not only cry out against, but curse their
mother, and place a piece of Religion in this.

Verse. 5. I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the
Hindes of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my Love till he please.
The third part of her care is in this verse, when she has prevailed with him,
to give his presence and countenance to her mothers house, then she turns to
the Daughters of Jerusalem, the visible professors and members of the Church,
charging them, that now seeing Christ is returned, they would be careful to
entertain him well, and not to provoke him to withdraw. These words were
spoken-to in the former Chapter, verse. 7. where they have the same general
scope, which is to show her care of having Christ retained; but in this they
differ, there they look to her particular enjoyment of Christ; here they look
(as the scope and connection with the former words show) to his presence in the
Church or her mothers house, lest that should (by the daughters ^ault) be
interrupted: The first shows a believers care, conj^ring all (as it were) that
nothing in her might provoke him: This shows what should be the Churches care
in reference to his visible presence, and blessing (to say so) in his Church:
Now (says she) Christ is amongst you, O ye who are of my mothers house, beware
of putting him away; and in this she deals with them, as considered in their
visible Church State and relation, and not as real believers; the charge being
to all: And therefore in the following verse, and chap. 8. 5. The Daughters
return an answer, which they do not, chap. 2. 7. because here she directs her
words to the visible professors, whereas, chap. 2. 7. her scope was only to
compose her self, seeing the presence she enjoyed, was only to her particular
sense. Here, Obs. 1. As there is more of Christ's sensible presence, and also
of distance from him, in his way with particular believers at one time than at
another* so is there, in respect of his way to his Church, sometime he is not
in the mothers house, sometimes he is. 2. As every believer should endeavor to
retain Christ in his presence with their own souls; so all the members of a
visible Church, should be careful to prevent his departure from his Ordinances.
3. Often it is with Christ's presence in his Church, as it is with the condition
of particular believers in it; if they be secure, and he away from them, then
often he is from the mothers house also; if they be lively, and he with them,
then he is brought back again to the Church with them. 4. As Christ may
withdraw, if provoked and not entertained, from a private believer; so will he
do from a Church, if they hold not fast what they have received, and walk not
answerably thereto. 5. Church Members, by their sins, have much influence on
Christ's removal from amongst them; yea, sometimes it may come to pass (when
the body of a Church turn despisers of the Gospel) that no intercession of the
godly for preventing his departure, will prevail, even though Noah, Daniel and
Job were amongst them, Ier. 15. 1. and Ezekiel. 14. 14. 6. Believers that know the
hazard of provocking Christ, and what a loss the loss of his presence is, would
interpose seriously with new unexperienced beginners, and give them warning
faithfully concerning this their hazard. 7. As a believer, in respect of the
visible Church, stands under the relation of a child to a mother; so in
respect of visible professors, they stand under the relation of brethren and
sisters, and would keep religious communion with them, even as such, that being
an external duty that lies upon them. 8. True love to Christ, will be affected
even with the wrongs that others do to him who is their beloved, and will
endeavor to prevent his being wronged and provoked, as she does here. 9. True
love to others, will not only put to pray and interceed for them, and employ
all the court the believer has with Christ for their good (as the Bride did in
the former verse) but will also manifest it self in giving faithful
admonitions, advertisements, etc. And in doing what else may prevent sin in
them.

Daughters of Jerusalem.
Verse. 6. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, with all pouders of the merchant?
The visible professors having now gotten a serious charge (because they are
not easily engaged; and it mars the good of our fellowship one with another in
admonitions and warnings, when we are not serious even in the manner of our
dealing with others) they are some way put in a little pee^e of warmness, and
admiration more than ordinary (as ordinarily Christ's return to a Church and
his Ordinances in it, after a palpable decay, has some stir and
affectionat-like motions accompanying it, such as was to be found in John's
hearers, John 5. 35.) And in this affected and stirred condition they answer
the Brides charge, O who is this? say they, importing they have more respect to
the godly, and show forth more evidences of it in their expressions, than ever
they used formerly to do.

That these are the words of the Daughters of Jerusalem, may be cleared from
these things, 1. That they are placed on the back of her charge to them; and
when she charges, they use to answer (as Chap. 5. 9. and 8. 5.) and then she
proceeds to speak to them, even so it is here; for, the words hold forth a
mutual conference betwixt her and them, and therefore the words of this verse
will be most pertinently understood as spoken by them. 2. They are the same
words on the matter, and spoken on the same occasion, with these, Chap. 8. 5.
which we will find to be spoken by them. 3. They can agree to none other. To
say, they are the words of Angels, is not warrantable, they not being a
speaking party in this Song: To say, they are the Brides own words, will not
suit with the commendation that is given to her, and of her in them, as by a
distinct party: Neither can they be Christ's words spoken immediately by him;
for, Chap. 8. 5. where these words upon the matter are repeated, she is said to
ascend, leaning on her beloved; and he is spoken of, and looked on as a third,
both from the Bride and the speaker. It remains then, that they must be the
words of the daughters of Jerusalem, wondering at the change that was to be
seen on the Church, her case being now compared with what it was before; and
wondering at believers in her, upon the same account also, as almost mistaking
them, and so they speak as having other affections to them than they had
before. It Is like that wondering expression, Isa. 49. 21. Thou shall say (to
wit, when the sudden change comes) Who has begotten me these? or, as it is,
Rev. 3. 9. where it is promised to the Church of Philadelphia, that others
should fall down, and worship at her feet, as being convinced now, that Christ
loves his Church. And that this verse is spoken of the Bride, the words in the
Original, being in the feminine gener, puts it out of question; for, they are
in the Original, as if it were said, Who is she that comes up, etc?

The words contain a commendation of the Church, expressed both in the matter,
and also in the manner of the expression (being by way of question) and it is
given by visible Professors, some whereof may be more tender than others, yet
both contradistinguished from the Bride. The commendation has three parts or
steps. 1. She comes, or (as it is Chap. 8. 5.) ascends from the wilderness;
It Is like before this manifestation of Christ, the Church was dry and
withered-like, in a wilderness condition, without any beauty or luster; but
now that condition is changed, when Christ is present, she ascends and comes
out of it: And this wilderness (considering her ascent from it) signifies the
World, wherein believers sojourn in the way to Heaven (as Israel did in the
wilderness to Canaan) and wherein there is no true content, nor satisfying
rest sought by them, nor to be found by any, therefore is their back on it,
though formerly they seemed to be settled in it with the rest of the World;
Thus the heavenlinesse of believers in their conversation is set out. 2. She
comes like pillars of smoke; This looks not in all things to ordinary smoke,
but (as the after-words do clear) to the smoke of incense, etc. Now she ascends
like smoke in a calm-day, and like pillars of it together, making heavenward,
as the smoke of incense, which being commanded in God's worship, was acceptable
to him: And as smoke fleeing from kindled fire cannot but ascend, and fire
(especially new kindled) cannot but have smoke, and that in abundance; so now
the Church being warmed, and of fresh inflamed and made lively with Christ's
presence, cannot but send out a sweet savor, which discernably ascends upward
from the world (which is but a wilderness) as smoke does from the earth.

3. She is perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, and all the pouders of the
merchant: That is, as precious pouders are used to make one savoury, so the
believer being replenished with the graces of Christ's spirit, (often in this
Song compared to sweet spices, Chap. 1. 12. and 4. 6. 13. 14. 16. etc.) and
these graces being now quickened by his presence, they cast a delightful savor
to them with whom such believers converse: So it was, Act. 2. ult. and the
ordinances, being powerful and lively, will have such a powerful influence, as
to be a sweet ^avour in every place, 2. Cor. 2. 14, 15. and to leave some
conviction of their amiablenesse and excellency, even upon the consciences of
these who will never get good of them, so that there is no costly ointment or
powder, that will so per^ume a person or place, as the Gospel will do a Church;
especially when immediately on the back of Christ's return, he does in an
extraordinary manner countenance the dispensing of his own Ordinances, so that
even the temporary believer is made in a manner, to receive the Gospel with joy.

Next, the manner of the expression is by way of question, and admiration, Who
is this? say they, we never saw the like of her, she has no match; and so the
question expresses a wonderful beauty and loveliness in her, and a great
conviction and astonishment in them. In reference to which two, these things
are to be learned. 1. That there is nothing more lovely and savoury in it self,
than grace exercised in a believers walk, and Christ's Ordinances beautified
with his own presence in his Church. 2. That where Christ's Ordinances in his
Church, and the graces of his Spirit in the hearts of his people are made
lively with his presence, they will be in their beauty very discernable to
others, and will be much admired, spoken of, and commended by them. 3. That
this beauty is usually most fresh, when Christ returns to his people and
Church, after he has been a while away; for, then tenderness is in life
amongst them. 4. The world in it self, and being compared with Christ's Church
(especially in their estimation, whose eyes God has opened) is but a miserable
wilderness, and cannot give a heartsome being or place of abode to a believer.
5. Believers have a more noble design to compass, than to sit down and take up
their rest in this world, their faces bend upward, and their backs are upon it.
6. Christ's presence gives life to a believers motion, and ravisheth them
upward, as fire put to fuel, necessitats smoke to ascend. 7. A heavenly-minded
believer is a comely sight, and a world-denyed Professor will extort a
commendation, even from ordinary onlookers. 8. As there is more of the exercise
of true grace amongst believers, by Christ's more than ordinary presence with
them, and in his Church; so there is often a more than ordinary warmness and
motion in the generality of Church Members at such a time, whereof yet many may
be unsound, as no question all the daughters of Jerusalem were not sound. 9.
The Church of Christ and believers in it, will look much more beautiful to
Prefessors at one time than at another, and they will be much more taken with
this beauty sometimes than at other times; for, Chap. 1. 5. 6. The daughters of
Jerusalem were in hazard to stumble at her spots; here they are ravished with
her beauty, as thinking her another thing than she was before. 10. Christ's
presence will indeed put another face, both on a Church and person, and make
them every way different (but still to the better) from what they were. 11. The
more active, believers be in exercising their graces, they will have the more
fresh relish and savor; for, her ascending here, makes all her persumes to flow.

BRIDE.
Verse. 7. Behold his bed, which is Solomon's: threescore valiant men are about
it, of the valiant of Israel.
Verse. 8. They all hold Swords, being expert in war: every man has his Sword
upon his thigh, because of fear in the night.
The Bride, being commended in the former verse by the daughters of Jerusalem,
as being jealous that they gazed upon her, to the prejudice of the Bridegroom,
and being ever restless till every commendable thing that is in her, redound
to his praise, to whom she owes, and from whom she derives all her beauty; She
steps in hastily with a Behold, as having a far more wonderful and excellent
object to propone to them, to wit, Christ Jesus, the true Solomon himself,
whose loveliness and glory should take them all up, rather than any poor
perfections they saw in her.

That this is the scope, the matter will clear, especially verse. 11. where,
what she would be at, is propounded in plain terms; and her sudden coming in
with a Behold, as in Chap. 1. 6. does confirm it. That they are the Brides
words also, the scope and connection bears it out; this being her disposition,
that she can suffer no commendanion from Christ, nor from any other to stay or
rest upon her, but is restless till it be turned over to his praise, as, Chap.
1. 16. 2. 3. etc. There is none so tender of him, or jealous of his honor, as
Christ's Bride is: Again, the daughters being spoken unto, and Christ spoken of
as a third person, it can be no other that speaks here, but the Bride: What?
(says she) are ye taken with any loveliness ye see in me? I will propose to
you a far more excellent object. And this short but very sweet discourse, holds
^orth Christ, lovely and glorious in three most excellent steps, wherein by a
notable gradation, Solomon is ever mentioned, his name (who was a special type
of Christ) being borrowed to design him, while his glory is set forth. He is
described, 1. From his bed, verse. 7, 8. Whereby is set forth, the excellent
happiness and quietness that believers have in enjoying him. 2. From his
Chariot, a most stately piece of work, by which is signified that excellent
mean (to wit, the Covenant of redemption revealed and preached) whereby our
Lord Jesus brings his people to his rest, verse. 9, 10. 3. She propounds his own
most excellent self, and that crowned with the stately Majesty and glory of his
love, beyond which there is no step to proceed, but here she ^ists, and wills
all others to be taken up, in beholding him, as the only desirable and
heart-ravishing object, verse. 11.

For opening of the first, in the 7. and 8. verses, we have these five things
to consider. 1 Who this Solomon is. 2. What this bed is. 3. What this guard,
that is about it, does signify. 4. For what end that guard is appointed. 5.
The use of the note of attention, Behold, which is prefixed.

1. By Solomon, David's son, properly is not understood, this scope will not
agree to him (he was indeed a great King, but a greater than Solomon is here)
Therefore, seeing in Scripture, Solomon was typical of Christ, as from Psalm. 72.
and other places may be gathered: Through all these verses, by Solomon, is
understood Christ, the beloved and Bridegroom, who especially was typified by
Solomon in these things: 1. Solomon had a great Kingdom from the river to the
Sea; and so will our Lord have many subjects. 2. As Solomon was, so Christ is,
a powerful, rich King; our Lord Jesus has all power in Heaven and Earth
committed to him. 3. Solomon was a royal, magnificent King, sought unto from
all parts of the earth; and so the name and glory, wherewith the Mediator is
furnished, is abov^ every name in Heaven and in Earth. 4. Solomon was a wise,
judicious King* and singular for that; and so in our Lord Jesus dwells all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge; there is no need to fear that any thing that
concerns his people will miscarry in his hand. 5. Solomon had a peaceable reign
(for which cause he had that name) and his government was blessed and happy to
his people and servants; and so our Lord Jesus is the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.
6. and of his government there is no change; and happy are his subjects, and
blessed are his servants, for the one half of his glory, magnificence, wisdom,
etc. and of their happiness can neither be told nor believed. This is an
excellent person, and a most stately King, who yet is the believers Bridegroom;
Christ's Bride is nobly and honorably matched.

2. By bed here, is understood the same thing that was signified by it, Chap.
1. 16. to wit, that access, and neernesse familiarity that the believer has
with Christ, and whereunto he admits them that are his; and the rest, solace
and refreshment that they enjoy in fellowship with him; Beds being especially
appointed for these two, 1. For refreshing and rest, Isa. 57. 2. and Psalm. 132.
3. 2. For the mutual fellowship of Husband and Wife: So then, by this is holden
forth the excellent refreshing, and soul-ease, that a believer may have in the
enjoying of Christ: There is no bed that can give quietness, rest and solace
like this. Again, it is called his bed, 1. To distinguish it from hers, Chap. 3.
1. There is great odds betwixt the two, as was hinted upon that verse. 2. To
show, that although she be admitted to it (and therefore it is called ours,
chap. 1. 16.) yet it is wholly procured and framed by him alone. 3. It Is called
his, to show the communion that a believer has with Christ in his refreshings.
O sweet! It Is Christ's own bed, if he lie well, they lie well who are married
to him; It Is his peace which they enjoy here, my peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you, etc. Ioh. 14. 27. And it is his glory and throne, that
they are made partakers of hereafter, when they are set down on the same throne
with him. Again, it is called his bed, which is Solomon's: which expression, is
added, to show where the weight of this wonderful refreshing lies, to wit, in
this, that the rest (which he invits them to behold) is no mean man's, it is
Solomon's; yea, a greater than Solomon's, whose curtains and hangings are much
above his, chap. 1. 6. If Solomon's servants were happy that were admitted to
his presence, how wonderfully happy are believers, Christ's Bride, who are
admitted to his own bed: The dignity of believing and union with him, would be
read out of the dignity and glorious Majesty of the person with whom we are
united.

3. There is a guard mentioned here, which in relation to Christ, shows his
stateliness, and in relation to us, shows our safety and security, that as
Kings (and it is like Solomon) used to be attended by guards, for stateliness
and security, that quietly they may rest (their guards watching about them) so
this rest that a believer has in Christ, O it is sure! there is an excellent
guard compassing them about. It is particularly described, 1. In it is number,
they are sixty, that is a competent and sufficient number. 2. They are valiant,
gallant, courageous men, that will not fail to execute orders: They are the
choice men of Israel, that Solomon had to watch his bed, they are choice ones
our Lord makes use of for the security of believers. 3. They are orderly
disposed for their security, they are about it, on all hands, there can be no
approach made upon believers, to the prejudice of the repose they have in
Christ. 4. They are well armed; yea, always at their arms, in a posture of
defense, they all hold swords, none of them wants arms, and they have them
still in readiness. 5. They are not only stout, but skillful, expert men, who
have been tried and well proven: None of his people needs to suspect Christ's
watch over them, dexterous is he in preserving poor souls. 6. Every one has
his sword girt on his thigh, and is standing at his post. All the expressions
tend to show that here, and here only, in Christ's bed may a soul rest secure;
there is no access for wrath to seize upon them that are in Christ, nor to
devils to pull them from Christ; for, He and his Father are stronger then all,
and none is able to pluck them out of his hand. Believers have a notable
security and defense, Christ's bed and his guard, if he be sure, they are sure,
one watch watches both him and her. The same power of God, Isa. 27. 2. the
twenty thousand of Angels, which are his Chariots, Psalm. 68. 17. are for the
believers protection in Christ's company, pitching their tents about them,
Psalm. 34. 8. In a word, they are not only guarded with Angels, but with divine
attributes, the wisdom and power of God, and this makes them dwell in safety.

4. The end of all this, is, for fear in the night; There are no nights to
Christ himself, and so no fear; yea, Solomon the type, having such a peaceable
kingdom, it is not like he had much fear; but the fear is in respect of
believers, who are admitted to Christ's company and fellowship: For preventing
their fears, he has settled all firmly, as if guards were set for their
security. Hence we gather, that the believer is supposed to be in the bed with
him, otherwise there is no use of this guard; and his bed here is a piece of
work that is framed not only for himself, but also for the Daughters of
Jerusalem, as the following Chariot is. By night here is understood believers
darkness and lightlesse conditions (to speak so) wherein fears, doubts,
challenges, etc. are most ready to assault, as afrightments use to befall men
in the night. These words, because of fear in the night, hold forth the use
that our Solomon has of that guard, to wit, for quieting his poor people,
against the doubtings, difficulties, discouragements, etc. and suchlike,
whereto believers are so subject in their drooping, night-conditions; though
when light shines, they are little troubled. These words show, 1. That Christ's
Bride admitted to fellowship with him, may have her black and dark nights. 2.
That believers, who have thought themselves above doubtings and fears, when
things went well with them; yet in nights of temptation, darkness and trial
they may be overtaken with, many sad fears; It Is not always day with them, and
when it is night with them, they are apt to fear. 3. That believers in their
nights, and under their fears, have good security and an excellent guard; yea,
their safety and defense is as good then, as when there is no night nor fear;
how dark soever their night be, Christ's guard will sufficiently preserve them.
4. Christ is tender even of believers fears, and has provided so well for
their peace, as he has appointed means not only to prevent their hurt, but
also to prevent their fears: For, because of fear has he appointed this guard.
5. There is no King or Monarch so well attended and guarded, or who may sleep
so secure and sound as a believer: His guard is still at their post, and they
are valiant men, that cannot fail; for, 1. He is at peace with God; and he that
is within the peace of God, has the warrant, right and advantage of it to
guard the heart and mind, Phil. 4. 7. 2. The believer has all the promises,
and confirmations of Oath and Seals, in which it is impossible for God to lie,
to secure and quiet him. 3. He has the watch of Angels, Psalm. 34. 7. pitching
their tents about him, and chariots of Angels waiting on him. 4. He has God
himself, and his Almighty power for his defense, who alone may make him dwell
in safety, wherefore he may ly down with confidence, and also sleep with
quietness, Psalm. 4. 8. It Is good sleeping in Christ's bed, there is not so
good rest to be found any where in the World: So then, by the guard is
understood, whatever contributes for confirming believers faith, and
strengthening them against their fears of being interupted in their rest, which
(being in Christ) is allowed upon them.

5. A behold is prefixed to all this, and that deservedly. 1. To show the
wonderfulnesse of what she was to say, O how wonderful is it, if believed! 2.
To provoke and stir up to observe and take notice of it; few are acquaint with
believers privileges, and if they had not been recorded in the word, we durst
never have likened or evened our selves to them. 3. It Is to show an holy
impatiency in her affection, in breaking in so with this discourse, as more
servently desirous to fill their mouths and hearts with the commending of
Christ, than what they were about in commending of her: A notable diversion,
and sign of love in a friend of the Bridegroom, who with John the Baptist is
content to decrease, so he may increase: True believers should and will
endeavor more the commendation of Christ, in their fellowship together, than
to commend any grace, gift, or what else they have gotten from him; they will
not conceit, or cry up their graces and gifts as they are theirs, for that were
base ingratitude, but withal they mention what they have received, partly to
indear him to themselves, and partly to commend him to others; and thus they
design to return him his own with advantage, wherein nevertheless they are the
gainers, even while they seem to give what they have received.

Verse. 9. King Solomon made himself a Chariot of the wood of Lebanon.
Verse. 10. He made the pillars thereof of Silver, the bottom thereof of Gold,
the covering of it of Purple; the midst thereof being paved with Love, for the
daughters of Jerusalem.
The second piece of work, mentioned, for the commendation of the Worker, is a
Chariot, described at large verse 9, 10. For clearing of the words, we are to
inquire concerning these three things. 1. It Is Worker or Former. 2. The end for
which it is framed. 3. Concerning this Chariot it self.

The author or maker thereof, is Solomon, and that King Solomon, that is
Christ, as was cleared before, he is mentioned thrice under this name; but
there is a gradation here that is observable. 1. He is called Solomon, verse. 7.
2. King Solomon, verse. 9. 3. King Solomon crowned, or, crowned King Solomon,
verse. 11. The longer she speaks of Christ, and insists in mentioning his
excellency, her thoughts draw the deeper, she sets him up the higher, and
becomes warmer in her apprehensions, affections and expressions concerning him:
Acquaintance with him, would make one speak eloquently of him; He that is the
worker and former of this Chariot, is a most excellent King, it must needs then
be a stately, royal piece of work.

2. There are two ends mentioned wherefore he makes it, 1. It Is to himself,
that is, for his own glory, and that thereby he may in a special way hold forth
himself to be glorious, and that particularly in his grace; for, though he made
all things for himself, yet is he said especially to manifest his glory in
doing good to his people; and what serves for the manifestation of his grace,
is in a peculiar manner made for himself: So Isa. 43. 7. and 21; This people
have I formed for my self (in a far other way than he formed other nations)
they shall (in a singular way) show forth my praise, that is, the praise of his
goodness, wherein his way was peculiar to them: And the paving of this Chariot
with love, and appointing of it for the daughters of Jerusalem, does confirm
this also, that it is the praise of grace that especially shines in this piece
of work. And so the second end, subordinat to the former, is in the end of
verse. 10. in these words, for the daughters of Jerusalem, that is, for their
good that are weak and far short of perfection; it is not only fitted for his
glory, but also, it is fitted and confirmed to them, so as it may procure and
bring about their good. Obs. 1. In the greatest pieces of Christ's workmanship
he had mind of poor sinners yet unglorified, his delight was with them before
the world was, Prove. 8. 31. 2. The glorifying of grace is the great thing
Christ aims at in all his contrivance and way toward his Church and people. 3.
He has knit his own glory and the good of his people together; that same work
which is for himself, is also for them, that if he obtain his end, they cannot
but be well; his glory and their good, ride (to say so) in one Chariot. 4. For
as stately a person as our Lord Jesus is, he disdains not to be occupied in
making works, and as it were framing Chariots, for the behoove of his people:
Rather than they should want what may further them in their way, he will make
and furnish them himself.

3. The third thing is the work it self, which indeed is very admirable, as the
worker and ends are: It Is a Chariot, several ways described, both in it is
matter, form and furniture. The word translated Chariot is no where else in
Scripture, it is translated bed on the margent, it is by the Septuagints
expressed by such a word as signifies, to be carried, and to carry, as
Chariots and Litters (wherein men are carried) used to be carried by horse^: We
think it fitly expressed by Chariot, not only because the word is different
from that which is translated bed, verse. 7. but, 1. The immediate end and use
seems to be different also; for, as stately King's use their beds for repose
and rest, in their chambers, and their Chariots to ride in, when they go
abroad, and wherein their Queens may ride with them; so is it here. As Christ
has a bed for believers quieting, he has also a Chariot for safe convoying
and carrying them through their journey, till they come to their compleet rest,
this being no less necessary for believers (such as the daughters of Jerusalem
are) than the former.

In short, by this chariot we understand the way of Redemption in general, as
it is contrived in the eternal counsel of God, and so called the Covenant of
Redemption, and also as it is preached and manifested to us in the Gospel. The
reasons why we thus apply it, are, not only because there is no other thing
that it will agree unto; for, 1. It Is a work of Christ, and so not Christ
himself. 2. It Is a work of special grace for his own, and that while they are
in the way (for the Elect in heaven are not daughters of Jerusalem) therefore
it is no common work of creation, or providence, or of glory in heaven. 3. It Is
for the Churches good, and therefore cannot be understood of her; for, beside
that the several parts of it is description will not suit her, not only Christ,
but the daughters of Jerusalem are to be born in this chariot: And we know not
a fourth thing imaginable, that can be understood by it, but the Covenant of
Redemption revealed in the Gospel. But, 2. The Covenant of Redemption is that
work of Christ's, wherein most eminently the glory of his grace and love to
sinners does appear, which makes him wonderful lovely and admirable; (to set
forth which is the present scope) It therefore must be here understood. 3. That
work is signified by this Chariot, whereby Christ communicats his love to poor
sinners, and caries them through, therefore it is said to be paved with love for
that end; Now there is no partaking of special love from Christ, but by this
Covenant, nor was there ever another mean made, or appointed for convoying love
to them, or for bringing them through to the partaking of it, but this same
Covenant, therefore it must be understood. 4. All that is spoken of this
Chariot, as it will be applicable to no other thing, so will it well agree to
the Covenant of Redemption manifested and preached in the Gospel. 1. It may
well be compared to a Chariot, because by it poor believers are carried through
as in a Chariot, born up and sustained by it, even in the way: Yea, in it and
by it they triumph, and ride as in triumph, (as he in this Gospel rides
prosperously) and if it be that wherein he rides, it must be that wherein they
ride also, and therefore well compared to a Chariot, because both he and they
triumph by it. 2. It Is eminently and peculiarly Christ's workmanship, he made
this Covenant for their behoove, and entered himself surety, undertaking for
them, when there was none upon their side of the Covenant to undertake but he
the Mediator; and therefore is he styled Jesus and Redeemer, and it is by his
purchase (having procured this unto them) that they are admitted to it, and
carried through in it. 3. It Is in a peculiar way contrived and framed for the
glory of his grace, and the good of his people, as has been said; by it is
manifested in the Church the manifold wisdom of God, and the riches of the
grace of Christ; If ever a piece of work was made for the good of sinners, and
the glory of grace, this is it, without which all the creatures had been
uncomfortable; yea, hurtful to them. 4. It may be said to be of the wood of
Lebanon, that is excellent and durable, for so the wood of Lebanon was, for
which cause it was made use of in building of the Temple; and so all the
materials of this Covenant, and it is properties are excellent and durable, it is
an everlasting Covenant, that fails not, and vanishes not away, but endures for
ever. 5. The form is suitable also, He made the pillars thereof (says she) of
Silver; pillars in a piece of work signify, 1. Decoring. 2. Order-lines. 3.
Stateliness, for which cause when wisdom builds her house, Prove. 9. 1, 2. she
heweth out seven pillars; and Solomon made pillars for the Temple, the
inscriptions whereof signified their end and use, Iachin and Boaz, stability
and strength, 2 Chronicles. 3. 17. And they are as silver pillars to show their
excellency, and so this Covenant has precious promises, as the pillars
thereof, able to support believers, and has all these so well ordered and
contrived that every thing is excellently in it is own place; This Covenant is
therefore said to be well ordered in all things and sure, the pillars will not
shrink, shake, nor bow, 2 Samuel 23 5. 6. It has a bottom and that of Gold: A
bottom is to show it is stability and firmness, to sustain and keep up these
who ride in it, and Gold shows it solidity and preciousnesse, it is a rich
bottom, therefore the new Jerusalem is said to have her streets of pure Gold,
Rev. 21. 22. So this Covenant has a sure foundation, elect and precious; this
Covenant cannot be unbottom'd, and sinners cannot fall through, if once in it.
7. It has a covering, and that of purple: A cover is to preserve and save from
any thing that may fall from above; and Purple or Scarlet (for in Scripture
both are one, as may be seen, Matthew. 27. 28. compared with Mark 15. 17.) sets
out the excellency and efficacy of that cover, it is not of every thing, it is of
Purple; and this in Scripture was made use of to be dipped in the blood of the
Sacrifices, Heb. 9. 14. which was called, verse. 20. the blood of the Covenant,
typifing the application of Christ's blood: This is the cover of the Covenant,
the worth and efficacy of Christ's satisfaction, whereby all in Covenant (as it
were riding in this Chariot) are preserved from the wrath of God, and their
sins hid, and so covered by that blood, that they are never called to a
reckoning for them, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Ier. 50. 20. 8. The midst thereof is paved
with love: What can this be? Gold is much, but love is more; what workman but
Christ can make this pavement? and what piece of work of his, but the Covenant
of Redemption, is so lined and stuffed with love? The midst thereof is the
inward of it, as great men in their Chariots and Coaches, have their pillows
and cushions of Velvets, etc. to repose them; But here there is a far other
thing, to repose and rest upon, love lines all this Chariot, so that there is
none in the Covenant, but love is still next them, the Word speaks good to
them, and all the Promises run like pipes, with streams of love to them; God's
dispensations toward them breath out love, they walk on love, sit on love, rest
on love; it must be good to be here: And love is reserved for the midst of it,
to show, that though it is excellency and beauty may some-way shine, and glister
to these that are without; yet, none knows or can know the heart and bowels of
the Covenant, (to say so) and the love that is there, but these that are
within. 2. Love is put over the bottom of Gold, and made the pavement, 1.
Because love in this Covenant condescends lowest to us, and there can be no
lower stooping imaginable, than that to which the love of Christ has made him
bow. 2. It Is love that makes the riches of Christ applicable to us, we could
not walk on that Gold, if love paved it not, the freedom of his grace and love
makes all refreshful; the believer, even though a sinner, may ride and rest
here. 3. It Is to hearten a sinner to come in and close with this Covenant, and
it shows what fits it to be a Chariot for them to ride in, it is the pavement of
love; a sinner may leap here, there is no hazard to fall, or if he fall, he
falls soft, for it is upon love: There will be no rejecting of a sinner that
would enter and fit down in it, why? they are to fit, stand, and lie on love,
which will cover their infirmities, and not contend, otherwise there would be
no access to it, nor abiding in it, it would cast them out. Thus does grace
shine in the Covenant, as the lineing and inside of all the promises, when they
are seen, therefore is it peculiarly called the Covenant of grace. 9. It Is for
the daughters of Jerusalem; all the work is for them, but especially the
pavement of love; it is for them, who while they are in the way are subject to
infirmities, it is fitted for them to role on, and rest in, even when sense of
sin would otherwise sting and disquiet them; this suits well with that word, 2 Samuel 23 5. Although my house be not so with God, but there are many things
sinful to be found in it; yet, he has made with me an everlasting Covenant
well ordered in all things and sure, This, says he, (when he was to die) is
all my salvation, and all my desire: There needs no more for carrying believing
sinners through, and giving them ease under their challenges and perplexities,
but this, it is so well suited for believers conditions. From all this she
proceeds, verse. 11. to point out Christ as precious, this Covenant putting as
it were the Crown of grace, and loveliness on him.

Obs. 1. The work of Redemption, bringing sinners out of a state of wrath and
carrying them through to glory, is a noble design* a wonderfully excellent
work, and has been deeply contrived. 2. O the excellent wisdom, and wonderful
grace that shines in this Covenant! 3. They who would rest in Christ's bed,
must ride in his Chariot; they who would share in his peace and be admitted to
sweet fellowship with him, must accept of his offers, and enter into Covenant
with him. 4. The weight of all contained in the Covenant lies on Christ,
therefore it is his workmanship alone, as being the surety thereof to the
Father, the Messenger of the Covenant to us, and in effect the sum and
substance of it himself, therefore is he called the Covenant, Isa. 42. 6. 5.
Christ has spared no invention nor cost, to make this Covenant large and full
for the believers consolation and happiness. 6. Love is a main ingredient in
this work of Redemption, and the predominant qualification of this Covenant,
love being the thing which he chiefly intended to make conspicuous and glorious
therein. 7. Every particular of the contrivance of grace will be found more
precious than another, every step thereof proceeds to a greater excellency, and
therefore there is mention made here, 1. Of wood. 2. Of Silver. 3. Of Gold,
etc. The further in we come in the Covenant, we will find it the more rich. 8.
Love is here mentioned in the last place, to show the great excellency of
Christ's love unto redeemed sinners; there is something beyond Gold, but
nothing beyond Love, especially that of the Mediator: It Is left last also in
the description, to leave the daughters of Jerusalem to consider the more of
it, as being the great attractive commendation of this work, which should make
it amiable and desirable unto them; Love has the last word, and there is
nothing beyond it, but himself, whose glory and loveliness is spoken to in the
following verse. Lastly, her scope is, 1. To commend Christ, for they will
never esteem of him that are not acquaint with his Covenant. 2. To engage both
her self and the daughters to fall more thoroughly in love with him; The right
uptaking of the Covenant is a most forcible argument for drawing souls to
Christ: For, 1. It has all fullness in it, for the matter. 2. All wisdom, for
the manner. 3. All gracious condescending, in the terms. 4. It Is most engaging
in respect of it is end, being made for this same very purpose, and designed for
this very end, that it may bring about the peace and salvation of sinners;
which considerations exceedingly commend it, and may much strengthen a sinner
in applying himself to it. 5. It Is most necessary in regard of the salvation of
sinners, there is no riding or journeying to Heaven, but in this Chariot; No
other name by which men can be saved, but the Name of Christ, that is
manifested by this Covenant.

Verse. 11. Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the
Crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the
day of the gladness of his heart.
She proceeds in this verse, to hold forth the worker of this great work, and
although all the pieces of the work be admirable, yet has he much more glory,
in as far as the builder is more glorious, and has more honor than the house;
and because his commendation is her scope, therefore she propounds him in his
beauty and glory, with an exhortation filled with admiration: If (says she) ye
would wonder, O daughters, etc. here is a wonderful object, Christ himself, on
whom all eyes should be fixed; up therefore, come forth and behold him. There
are four things in the verse, 1. The parties spoken unto. 2. A glorious object
propounded to them. 3. This glorious object being Christ, is qualified and set
out in his most lovely and wonderful posture, by three qualifications. 4. A
duty in reference to him so qualified, is called for, and pressed upon the
daughters.

1. The parties excited and spoken to here, are the daughters of Zion: By Zion
oftentimes in Scripture is understood the Church, wherein Christ is set as
King, Psalm. 2. 6. and elsewhere: and so by daughters of Zion, we are to
understand members of the Church; They are the same with the daughters of
Jerusalem mentioned verse. 5. and her scope being to speak to them who spoke,
verse. 6. and they being the same to whom she spoke, verse. 5. does confirm it;
for, the words run in one context. They are called here daughters of Zion. 1.
Because it was for Zions sake that the Lord so much prized Jerusalem, Psalm. 87.
2. his Temple and Ordinances being especially there. 2. To put the daughters of
Jerusalem in mind, what was the especial ground of the relation which God owned
in them, namely their being incorporat into his Church, whereby they had
access to his Ordinances: And that so they might know whoever was deficient,
yet this duty called for, did exceedingly become them, Christ being King of
Zion; for which cause elsewhere, Zech 9. 9. the exhortation runs in these
terms, Tell the daughter of Zion, behold thy King comes, etc. It Is no little
thing to get professors taking up the relation they stand under to Christ, and
engaged to walk accordingly.

2. The object proposed to these daughters, is King Solomon, even the King of
Zion the King of Peace, and King of Saints, in a word, their King: This
relation makes him lovely to them; yet, it is not Christ simply that is here
proposed to their veiw, but Christ with a Crown, in most stately magnificence,
such as Kings use to be adorned with, when they are in great state, or on their
Coronation day. While it is said, he has a Crown, hereby is not signified any
material Crown, but majesty and glory, as Psalm. 21. 3. Thou set a Crown of pure
Gold on his head, etc. And so Christ conquering on the white horse, Rev. 6. 3.
is said to have a Crown: And, Rev. 19. 12. it is said, he has on his head many
Crowns, To show his great and manifold glory, such as becomes the Prince of the
King's of the earth: Every look of Christ is not enough, many thinks not much
of him; This shows how Christ's glory is to be seen, and how for that end he is
to be considered by on-lookers; He is to be looked upon as he does discover and
hold forth himself, otherwise his glory will never rightly be taken up: And
therefore to help us in this, and to prevent an objection which carnal sense
might make against her scope, she qualifies this Crown and glory of his three
ways, 1. It Is the Crown wherewith his mother crowned him: Where we are to
inquire, 1. What different Crowns Christ may be said to have, and what this is.
2. Who this mother is. 3. How she is said to Crown him.

Christ may be said to have a fourfold glory, or crown, 1. As God co-essential
with the Father; this crown is not put on him, being natural to him, who is the
brightness of the Fathers glory, and the express Image of his person, Heb. 1.
2, 3. 2. He has a crown and glory as Mediator, in respect of the power,
authority and glory wherewith he is invested, as God's great deputy, and
anointed upon the holy hill of Zion, having power and a rod of iron, even in
reference to enemies; and seeing this is not of his mothers putting on, it is
not that which is here understood. 3. He has a crown and glory in respect of
the manifestation of his glory in the executing of his Offices, when he makes
his Mediatory -power and glory apparent in particular steps; thus sometimes he
is said to take his power to him, Rev. 11. 17. and is said to be crowned, when
the white horse of the Gospel rides in triumph, Rev. 6. 2. The last step of
this glory will be in the day of Judgment: In short, this consists in his
exercising his former power, committed to him as Mediator. 4. There is a crown
and glory which is in a manner put on him by particular believers, when he is
glorified by them, not by adding any thing to his infinite glory, but by their
acknowledging of him to be so, especially their acknowledging his rich and free
grace, and by believing, putting their seal thereunto. Ioh. 3. 33. and giving
him glory, as Abraham did, Romans 4. 20. in which respect he is crowned, as on
the contrary, when he meets not with this, he is despised, and it is a saying
upon the matter, this man shall not reign over us: Now this last is to be here
understood. Again, by mother here, is not understood his natural mother, but it
must be taken in a spiritual sense for one of two, either, 1. For the Church
Catholic, which being mother to Christ mystical, may be said to be mother to
him, as Rev. 12. 5. the Church is said to bring forth a man-child, who is
taken to Heaven, and has ascribed to him the properties due to Christ, and yet
Christ mystical is there understood; Or, 2. For a particular believer, who may
be said to be Christ's mother in these respects, 1. For the near relation that
is betwixt Christ and particular believers, and the account he has of them;
for which reason they are called his sister, his spouse, Chap. 4. 10. and
Matthew. 12. ult. He calls them his brother, his sister; ye^, mother. 2. Because
Christ is formed and brought forth in them, being as it were conceived in every
one of them, Gal. 4. 19. Christ (as it were) getting a new being in them, which
he had not before. We conceive both may be understood here, and the last
especially, as serving most to the scope of commending Christ to them; and if
the first be included, to wit, the Church universal, then particular believers
(being homogeneous parts of the whole) cannot be excluded; for, the Church
crowns Christ, when she brings forth children to him, which is, when by the
Ordinances Christ is begotten in them. Now they are said to crown Christ and
glorify him, not by adding any new degrees of glory to him, considered in
himself; but this his being crowned by them, does especially appear in these
three, 1. Their high estimation of him, beyond what others have, and what
themselves were wont to have; Now he is highly esteemed who before was despised
by them, and whereas to them he wanted a crown and dominion, now he has it. 2.
Their acceptance of him as their King, when by their consent, they ratify (as
it were) God's donation of the crown to him, and in acknowledging thereof, they
submit to his Scepter and Government: Thus he is crowned by them, when he is
expressly with full consent of the soul acknowledged as King and Lord: Even as
David formerly crowned, anointed and made King over Israel by the Lord, is said
to be made King by Judah, when they accept of him to reign at Hebron; and
afterward by the ten Tribes in their submission to him, and consenting to the
former appointment: Even so believers submission to Christ, is a crowning of
him, as to themselves: And so there are particular Coronations (to say so) of
Christ, even as there are particular espousals betwixt him and believers. 3.
This is in respect of the glory, that results to Christ from their submission
and acknowledgment, even as sinners despising him, put (as it were) a blot on
him, put him to open shame, and says we will not have him to reign over us; so
believers, yielding up themselves to Christ, do in a manner put honor and
glory upon him, Isa. 62. 2, 3. The married Church or people, are said to be a
crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, when the grace of Christ has it is
native effect amongst them; as the conversion of souls proves to faithful
Ministers their crown and joy, 1 These. 2. 14. so does it to the great Bishop
and Shepherd of souls: And, as Prove. 12. 4. A virtuous woman is a crown, or
ornament to her husband, whereas if she be not so, she makes him ashamed: So
are believers some-way a crown to Christ, because all the glory and beauty
which is to be found on them, is his, and from him. This then is the meaning,
Consider Christ in the beauty wherein he appears to believers, and with the
esteem they have of him, as full of grace and truth, when they acknowledge him,
and subject to him, and he will be seen to be exceeding flately and lovely.

The second qualification confirms this: This crown is put on him in the day of
his espousals; Now Christ's general espousals are not yet come, and so the
crown in that respect is not yet put on him; it must be therefore the day of
his espousals with partilar believers (which is here understood, there being no
other before his second coming) who are, 2 Cor. 11. 2. espoused to him, by
their consenting to accept him* for their husband, as he is king to them, by
their submitting to his dominion. His being crowned here, is mentioned with
respect to this day of his espousals, because as bridegrooms used to be most
glorious in their marriage-day, so Christ has at the time of espousals, a
special loveliness to the new married believer, what by the more kindly and
tender manifestations of his love, and what by the fresh relish it has then
to them, when their spirits are broken with the sense of their sin, and warm
with a deal of holy joy and fainnesse which uses then to abound in their
heart, in reference to so good a bargain; so Christ is then to believers
wonderfully lovely: And although the effects of his kindness may be enlarged
afterward, and their esteem of him may also grow, yet readily then as it is most
sensible, so their admiration is most in exercise, and their thoughts of
Christ's excellent worth, are most affectingly, and overcomingly ravishing; and
when in their after-thoughts they are taken up with him, the remembering of that
day of espousals, when he took them by the hand, puts still a loveliness on
him to them, that in his love he so wonderfully condescended unto them.

The third qualification confirms the same (for, it is in effect one
qualification in three expressions) and it is in these words, and in the day of
the gladness of his heart; What is it (says she) that chears Christ, and
makes him heartily glad? It Is even this, when poor sinners accept of him, that
is Christ's marriage-day; and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride that
day, so does he rejoice: and as the good Shepherd rejoiceth when he recovers
his lost sheep, or the father his prodigal son, Luke 15. 32. so does Christ
when sinners are brought in to him by the Gospel: And this joy is called the
gladness of his heart, to show the reality of it, Christ (in a manner) can
enjoy no such satisfying thing as a marriage with a poor sinner, then he sees
the travel of his soul and is satisfied, Isa. 53. 11. that chears him and makes
him smile (if I may say so) and this looks to that glory which shines in
Christ, and is expressed by him when he is well satisfied with poor sinners,
and that is mainly when he gets welcome by them. This signifies not joy in
Christ, as it is in us: But, 1. It shows how acceptable a sinners believing in
him, is to him. 2. What confident welcome they may expect from him, when they
come unto him. 3. How kindly he uses them, by manifesting himself to be well
pleased, as one that is cheerful does on his marriage-day to his bride.

3. The duty pressed upon the daughters is in two words, holding forth two
duties, the one whereof is the mids or mean to the other, and the other the end
of this. The first is, Behold, which points at the great scope and thing called
for; And it imports, 1. A wonderful object, and indeed Christ is so, being
considered in his most royal posture, as a crowned King upon his
coronation-day; and in his most loving posture, as a beautiful Bridegroom on
his marriage-day. 2. It imports a dullness in the daughters, needing upstirring
to take up Christ in this lovely and glorious posture. 3. A difficulty rightly
to take him up under this consideration, yet a necessity of it, and that it be
done with attention. 4. It implies an intensnesse or benfill of spirit in the
act of beholding; so rare an object, calls for greatest intention of heart, and
gravest consideration of mind in the beholder: It Is not every look or glance of
the eyes that will discern it; But, 1. There must be attentiveness and
steadiness, an stayed looking, and as it were dwelling on the object with
their eye. 2. The exercise of says must go along with this their looking,
reading his worth by faith exercised on him, as Isa. 45. 19. look unto me and
be ye saved; Beholding of him, as the stung Israelits did the brazen serpent.
3. Also the exercise of love; an affectionat look is here necessary, delighting
in him, and being taken up with him, as one with that wherein they take
pleasure, the eye of the seer here, cannot but affect and inflame the heart. 4.
This looking is attended with wondering at this glorious object, as one
beholding a wonder, and ravished with the admirablenesse of it: All these are
comprehended under this expression, Behold him. The second word (which has in
it another piece of their duty) is, go forth, and this is a help to the other:
And (beside what has been hinted at in the former expression) it shows, it is
not in every posture that they will take up Christ thus, but there is a
necessity they must come out from under the natural condition they were into:
We take it to be the same with that precept, Psa. 45. 10, 11. Forget thine own
people and thy fathers house, so (and no otherwise) shall the King greatly
desire thy beauty. Christ manifests not himself, as reconciled and pleased,
till former lovers be given up with; and this beholding of his smiling and
glorious countenance, cannot be obtained till then, even as one fitting in the
house cannot discern a flately fight going by, except they go forth: Thus the
similitude is borrowed, to show a necessity of rousing of affections within;
but not to signify any local mutation. This then is the sense and scope, O
Professors (says the Bride) would ye see a stately sight? then get up, and set
your selves to take up Christ, more glorious than Solomon either on his
coronation or marriage-day (to which there is an allusion here) And because few
sees great comeliness and beauty in Christ, why he should be desired;
Therefore she adds what a sight it is she understands. Endeavor (says she) to
behold him as he is discernable to believers, when they close with him, and
accept of him; if so ye will exercise faith in him, so as ye may perfect
espousals with him, and satisfy him by resting on him, ye will then have a
stately and soul-ravishing object to look upon, otherwise Christ is not always,
and to every one pleasant and cheerful company.

Obs. 1. Christ, when rightly conceived and taken up, is a most ravishing
satisfying fight, and a most glorious stately person to look upon. 2. Though
Christ Jesus be so stately a person, yet he condescends to espouse and marry
himself to the believer: Thus Christ by faith becomes theirs. 3. This marrying
has it is day, and men are not born espoused to Christ, but by their accepting
of him, their espousals with him are consummat. 4. Christ is never taken up
aright but by the believer, nor does his glory ever appear as it is, but to the
believer: others that are not spiritual cannot discern it. 5. Christ's
condescending to marry sinners and accept of them, is as the Crown and Diadem
of his glory; and that which makes him most singularly admirable, is that he is
full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1. 18. 6. Christ accounts believing on him by a
poor sinner, a singular piece of honor done unto him; It Is as the putting of
crown on his head, when they make use of his grace; as he accounts it the
greatest dishonor can be done to him, to refuse and slight him; and therefore,
misbelief (when Christ calls) is a most heinous sin, it is as it were the
taking of Christ's crown from him. 7. There is no such pleasure that a sinner
can do to Christ, as to believe on him; and Christ is ever cheerful then, when
sinners are thronging on him by faith, and he is never discontent with that;
for, that is the day of the gladness of his heart, as other days in the
Church are sad, when this design of his, is (as it were) obstructed and
disappointed. 8. Usually the sight and sense of Christ's grace are most fresh
and sensible to the soul, about the time of their closing with Christ, or of
their being clear that they have closed with him. 9. Every lazy looking on
Christ, or wishing for him, will not be acceptable to him, nor solidly comfort
a sinner; but there must be a going forth, and a beholding of him. 10. This
being spoken to the daughters of Zion, says, many may have much of a
profession and a name, yea, they may have a kind of high esteem of gracious
people (as the daughters had, verse. 6.) and yet be such as have not rightly
taken up Christ, but are exceeding ignorant of him, as these are, Chap. 5. 9.
11. Considering these words as spoken by the Bride, who was so much commended,
verse. 6. we may observe, that no particular esteem or commendation will
satisfy a sincere believer, so long as Christ gets not his due: his honor
will still be nearer them than their own.

CHAP. IV.
CHRIST.
Verse. 1. Behold, thou art fair, my love, behold, thou art fair, thou have
Doves eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of Goats that appear from
mount Gilead.
THat these are Christ's words spoken to the Bride, is at the first clear; He
continues speaking from the beginning unto verse. 16. and then verse. 16. the
Bride speaks by prayer to him, for the influences and breathings of the Spirit.

In Christ's speech there are two parts; the first to the eight verse, wherein
he gives both a general and particular commendation of the Bride. The second,
from that foreward to the last verse, wherein he begins with a sweet
invitation, and then shows how he was affected toward her, and so breaks out
in another commendation of her. The matter in both is sweet and comfortable;
wonderful to be spoken by such a one as Christ, of such a one as a believer;
but there is nothing in his love, but what is wonderful and like himself. The
scope of the first part of Christ's speech is twofold. 1. More general, to
intimate his love to his Bride, on the back of so much darkness; Chap. 3. 1.
2. (in the midst of which, notwithstanding her love did appear in her
commending him;) and it is subjoined to the commendation that she gives of him
to others, in the preceding Chapter, to show, 1. That when believers slight
their own esteem, to have it accreassing to Christ's commendation, it is never
loss but gain to them; for, here Christ comes in to commend her himself,
whereas it was but the daughters of Jerusalem who commended her, Chap. 3. 6. 2.
It shows, that time taken, and pains bestowed for the edification of others,
and their instruction in the excellency of Christ, is acceptable to him, and
proves often useful for attaining sensible fellowship with him; yea, it proves
often to be some way as useful in reference to this as their own particular
praying for themselves, the Lord does so return their pains taken this way in
their bosom. That to commend the Bride is the scope in general, is clear from
verse. 7.

More particularly we take the scope to be, his giving her an answer to her
prayer, chap. 2. 17. where she prayed for his fellowship until the day break,
etc. Here he does not only materially answer, but verse. 6. formally repeats her
words, that she may know what he speaks is a direct answer to her prayer:
until that day come (says he) it shall be so as thou desires (as the words
will make it clear) Showing, 1. That a believers prayers may for a time lie
beside Christ, (as it were) and yet he not forget a word of them, but mind well
the answer and performance of them. 2. That sometimes he will not only give
what is sought by his people, but make them know that he respects their prayer
in the giving of it; and so he not only hears their prayers, but lets them know
he has heard them.

This commendation, whereby he intimats his respect to her, has four steps. 1.
It Is done in general, verse. 1. Then, 2. He insists on particulars, from verse.
1. to verse. 6. 3. He shows how his respect to her affected him, verse. 6. 4. He
sums all particulars up in an universal commendation, verse. 7. lest any thing
should be missed, or being left out might vex her; whereby he shows, what was
his scope in that which preceeded.

The general commendation in the beginning of verse. 1. is the same that was
given her, Chap. 1. 15. yet here it is repeated with the two beholds: The
reasons why he repeats it, are, 1. That Christ might evidence to her the
reality of his love, and that he varies not, nor changes in it, even though
sits of security on her side had interveened, Chap. 3. 1. Christ's love and
thoughts to his people, are still the same, whatever changes be upon their
frame and way, which may occasion sad changes in his dispensations toward
them. 2. That she might the more be persuaded of his love to her and esteem of
her; Christ would have his own thoroughly persuaded that he loves them, 1. Ioh.
4. 16. and would have others to know that he respects them, more than the most
mighty in the world. 3. It Is because often believers from all other hands,
whether the men of the world, or from themselves, have but little comfort,
therefore Christ renewes his intimations to support and comfort them: Believers
consolation hangs most on his kindness to them, and they who depend most on it
are no losers. And further, We may here observe, that even a believer,
especially after sad challenges, will need renewed intimations of Christ's love.

The more particular explication and commendation of her parts follows; where
we would advert, 1. That bodily members or parts, are not to be here looked
unto, but believers have a inner-man, as well as an outward, a new man as well
as an old; and so that inner-man has, as it were, distinct parts and members
as the natural body has, which act in reference thereto, with some analogy to
these members in the natural body. 2. As the new or inner-man sets forth the
new natural and habitual grace in the believer; so the particular parts, eyes,
lips, etc. signify distinct graces of faith, love, etc. which are parts of
that new nature. 3. These parts may be looked on as useful in the new man, as
the external members are in the body, or as they are evidences of something in
the renewed disposition. 4. They set forth the disposition, as they are
qualified in the commendation, and not simply. 5. Although we cannot satisfy
our own, or others curiosity, in the particular application of these parts, yet
there is a particular meaning of every several part here attributed to her, as
well as of every part attributed to him, Chap. 5. 11, 12 etc. and he gives no
idle words, nor uses any vain repetitions: We would therefore beware of
thinking all this needless, seeing he knows best what is needful. 6. Being
clear of the scope, that it is to commend graces, and to evidence the beauty of
her several graces, we must regulatall the application by that scope, and what
is subservient thereto, cannot be impertinent. Yet, 7. There is much need of
sobriety here; therefore, we shall be short and not peremptory in particular
applications. 8. There being a connection amongst all the graces of the Spirit,
it must not be thought absurd that some of these graces be signified twice in
different respects, and that one part respect more graces (which are nearly
linked) especially when the commendation gives ground to infer it. 9. We take
this commendation to set forth especially the invisible Church, or true
believers, which are the members thereof, as the scope and application do clear.

If it be asked, why he insists on particulars in this commendation? I answer,
for these reasons; 1. That he may show, that whoever has the new nature, and a
lively work of grace, has also particular graces in exercise. 2. That it may
be known that the new nature is not a dead body, but a living; and exercises
it self by putting forth these particular graces in exercise. 3. That he may
show, that where ever one grace is, all are there, and as it is ordinarily with
one grace, so it is with all; where believers are in a good and commendable
case, it will not be one grace or two that will be in exercise, or one duty or
two in which these graces are exercised, but it will be universally, all
graces, and in all known duties. 4. To show, who may expect Christ's
commendation; these who have a respect to all his commands, and make conscience
to exercise all graces. 5. To show what particular notice he takes of believers
graces, he can tell how it is with every one of them; and takes this exact
notice of them, because it is very acceptable to him, when he finds them in good
case.

There are seven parts particularly mentioned, every one having it is own
distinct commendation. The first two of them are in the rest of verse. 1. The
first thing commended is her eyes, which here have a twofold commendation. 1.
That they are as Doves eyes. 2. That they are within her locks. Eyes are the
organs of seeing in the natural body, whereby we discern objects that are
visible; and so our understandings are thereby set forth in Scripture; That the
eyes of your understanding may be enlightened, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 18.
By eyes also the affections are set forth, because the affection sets the eye
on work to look here or there, (Hence is the phrase of a single and evil eye,
Matthew. 6. 21, 23.) and because it is some way the seat of these, and somewhat of
love or hatred will be, and may be gathered from the eye. Here we understand,
1. A spiritual, sanctified and enlightened understanding in the things of God,
taking up Christ and spiritual things spiritually, 1 Cor. 2. 15. that is, by
faith, it being the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. And therefore
looking is frequently put for believing in Scripture, which presupposes
understanding. 2. Kindlinesse, or a spiritual, kindly and affectionat carriage
to Christ; in a word, it is the exercise of love upon this spiritual and
wonderfully excellent object Christ, a having respect to him, as it is, Isa. 17.
7. his eyes shall have respect to his Maker, it is such an uptaking of Christ
and spiritual things, as works love and delight in them.

The commendation will confirm this, which is twofold, 1. They are doves eyes:
This was opened, Chap. 1. 15. and it signifies, 1. What is the great object
they behold, and are taken up with, it is Christ; and they are chaste to him,
and seek to know no other at all but h^^ ^ Cor. 2. 2. 2. It imports that the
act of faith whereby they behold him, is simple, single and sweet, their
understanding is not subtle, nor politic, nor are they pust up with it, but
it is taken up in studying Christ and him crucified, opposite to the vain wisdom
of the world, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 2. 2. These eyes are within her lo^ks. Locks are
that part of the hair that hang about the face, handsomely knit, and was then in
stead of a vail to women, 1 Cor. 11. 7. and so the word in the Hebrew will
bear; and it is differenced from that word translated hair, in the words
following, which is that part of the hair that covers the head: It implies
here, that the believers knowledge is not used for frothy ostentation (as the
knowledge that puffs up) but is kept within it is right bounds, and that they
are wise unto sobriety, and that their knowledge is not at the first obvious,
but seasonably vents it self and looks out, as eyes that are within the locks.

These things are sure, and may be observed from the words, 1. That a believer
should be filled with spiritual knowledge and understanding. 2. Knowledge is no
less necessary to a believer, that he may go right in the way of God, and not
err, than eyes are to guide a man in a journey; and this necessity extends
both to faith and practice. 3. A believer without knowledge, or weak in
knowledge, is very far defective in spiritual beauty, he is as a man without
eyes, it is not decent that a believer should be so; from this it is, that many
are called weak in faith. 4. That knowledge of spiritual things, should ever
have faith, love and singleness going along in the exercise thereof; for,
every knowledge will not be commendable to Christ, more than every eye will be
useful in a body; Believers eyes must be as doves eyes. 5. A believers eyes, or
knowledge, is different from the knowledge of all others, 1. In respect of it is
object, which is Christ and spiritual things. 2. In that it is joined with love,
it respects him. 3. In that it is chaste keeping the soul for him alone. 4. It
works delight in him. 5. It Is denied to other things. Obs. 6. Often the most
subtle in worldly wisdom, knows least of Christ truly; whereas the most
simple that have doves eyes, take up most of him. 7. Christ respects not how
much a man knows, but how he is affected with it; It Is not the eagles, but the
doves eyes, which he commends. 8. It Is good to know and to think little of our
knowledge, and (...) to be puffed up with it. 9. Christ loves it well, when his
people seasonably use, and improve their knowledge and parts; then the new man
becomes lovely, as the eyes are within the locks. 10. There are extrems in the
use-making of knowledge, which are to be shunned, we would neither altogether
obscure it that it be not seen, nor by ostentation make show of it; It Is good
when it runs in the right mids, then it gets the commendation, and is as eyes
within the locks.

The second thing commended is her hair, having a twofold commendation also.
The hair is no integral, or essential part of the body (to say so) yet in all
ages a great part of men's decoring, has ever been placed in it: It Is the most
conspicuous thing of the body, being highest and most discernable, especially
in the way it used to be dressed; and this conspicuousnesse of it, by the
commendation, seems mainly to be aimed at. By hair we understand the ornament
of a Christian godly, and sober walk, having the right principles of saving
grace within, and the fruits thereof in a well ordered conversation, and
suitable profession appearing without in the practice We take it so, not only
because it is a main piece of a Christians or believers beauty, but also for
these reasons, 1. Because as hair sets out and adorns the natural body, though
it be no substantial part thereof; so a well ordered conversation commends
grace within, and makes it lovely. 2. Because as hair is upmost and most
conspicuous, and therefore seen when the natural body is hid (therefore it was
to women a cover, 1 Cor. 11. 5.) so a suitable practical profession, is (as it
were) the cover of holiness, through which it shines, and by which it is
conspicuous, which otherwise would not be discernable. 3. And especially,
because in Scripture this adorning with good works, and with a meek and quiet
spirit, is put in the place of decking of the hair, and other external
decorements, (1 Timothy 2. 9, 10.) as that wherein Christians beauty should shine
before men, (Matthew. 5. 17.) and which should be to a believer, as decking of
the hair is to these who take pains to adorn the body. For sure these do make
them beautiful before God and men, more than hair and it is decorements can make
any person in the world appear beautiful to the men thereof. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10.
whose adorning (says the Apostle, speaking of b^lieving women) let it not be
in costly apparel, broidered hair, etc. but (what then should be in the place
thereof?) shamefastness, sobriety, and good works, so 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5. Whose
adorning let it not be the platting of the hair, but in the place thereof, let
it be a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price. And
this is also mentioned by the Apostle, as that which is exceedingly engaging to
the husband, for which Sarah there is commended. Next, the commendation of her
hair, in both it is parts, will confirm this, 1. It Is like a flock of goats:
Goats are stately and comely in going, and a flock of them must be very
flately, as they were especially in these parts, Prove. 30. 21. and 31. And so
this ornament of a good conversation, is an amiable, gaining and alluring
thing; by it, says Peter, the husbands affection may be won (and that both to
Christ and to his wife in the Lord) more than by any outward decoring, and this
puts them to glorify God, when it shines before them, Matthew. 5. 16. 2. It Is
commended from this, that it is like a flock appearing from mount Gilead: This
was a fruitful place, and it is like the goats that fed thereon, were more
excellent than others in their beauty: And being seen afar, and discernable ere
men came near them, were pleasant and stately to beholders; and so good works,
showing forth themselves in a well-ordered conversation, do also as from a
mountain appear to others, and sets believers up as lights shining in a dark
place, Philip. 1. 15. and also makes them lovely and desirable in the
consciences of on-lookers and beholders. Observe then, 1. That practice should
wait upon knowledge, for, it is the end thereof, and without it all men's
knowledge is void and vain. 2. Grace and holiness appearing in a Christians
practice, will shine, and be in some measure very discernable. 3. This is a
thing that makes the believers conversation very beautiful and lovely. 4. It Is
not enough that believers be tender, and conscientious in secret before God;
but there ought to be a shining, even in their outward conversation before men.
5. This does exceedingly adorn a believers walk, and make it stately to
beholders, when the fruits of holiness visibly appear in his conversation.

Verse. 2. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, that are even shorn, which came
up from the washing: whereof every one bear twins, and none is barren among
them.
The third particular commended, is verse. 2. and it is her teeth, which have a
fourfold commendation given them. The teeth properly taken, are useful for
furthering the nourishment of the body, they being the instruments that fit
meat for digestion; and what comeliness is in them, is not every way obvious,
they are not seen or discerned in their proportionablenesse or
disproportionablenesse, but by the motion of the lips, otherwise they are hid
by them. 2. Again in Scripture they are used to evidence and signify these
three things, 1. They are used to signify the nature and disposition of a
person, as good or evil; Hence evil men are said to have lions teeth, and that
their teeth are as spears, Psalm. 57. 4. And that beast, Dan. 7. 5, 7. is said
to have three ribs in his teeth, pointing out it is cruel disposition. 2. They
evidence good or ill food, that the person feeds on. 3. A healthful or
unhealthfull complexion, which depends much on the former: Hence Judah's good
portion and healthfulnesse is set out by this, Genesis 49. 12. His teeth shall be
white with milk. According to the first, by teeth in the new man may be
understood two things; first, ^aith, believing being often compared to eating,
because it furthers the souls nourishment, and is the mean by which the soul
lives on it is spiritual food. This says, 1. That the inner man must have food,
as the natural body has, for it is sustaining. 2. That the believer actually
eats, and makes use of that food, he has teeth for that end, and should not
only look on Christ, but feed on him. Secondly, Meditation also may be here
understood, that serving much to the feeding and filling of the soul, as Psalm.
63. 6, 7. My soul shall be filled as with marrow and fatness, how? While I
meditate on thee on my bed, and think of thee in the night watches; Meditation
is as it were (...) soul's ruminating and chewing it is cude, feeding upon, and
digesting what is understood and eaten, as the clean beasts did; which may be
one reason why her teeth are in the first part of their commendation, compared
to a flock of sheep, which were among the number of clean beasts by reason of
this property: Meditation is exceedingly useful for a believers life, and they
who are strangers to it, are not like Christ's sheep.

Again as the teeth evidence first the nature and inward disposition, so we
conceive they are also made use of here (as the commendation also clears) to
show, 1. The zealous nature which is, and ought to be in believers, they have
teeth, and ought not always to be soft, when the Lord's honor is concerned:
Zeal though it bite not, and devour not, yet it is not senseless, but easily
touched with the feeling of that which reflects upon the glory of God. 2. The
similitude here is to show what a meek and quiet spirit believers have, they
have not such teeth as lions or tigers, but such as sheep have; not tusks like
dogs and ravenous beasts, but even shorn, showing a moderation, and
equablenesse in their way, being first pure, then peacable, gentle, etc. Iam.
3. 17. This will agree well to teeth, as they appear by opening the lips; for,
the new nature within is expressed and does appear in words, which afterward
are spoken of under the similitude of lips. Now this christian moderation which
keeps the right midst, is a notable piece of spiritual beauty (as is clear from
the second piece of the commendation) for it is as a flock of sheep even shorn,
and not unequally, and unhandsomely clipped; so true zeal will not upon
by-respect or interest be high or low, up or down, but keeps a just equality in
it is way: And this speaks out a well constituted frame, that is, neither too
soft, nor too sharp, in biting and devouring one another (as is said, Gal. 5.
15.) which carnal zeal sets the teeth a work to do.

2. This similitude does evidence and signify a good subject they ^eed on, to
wit, Christ and his promises; and a good subject they meditate on, the same
Christ and what is most precious in him: Hence in the third part of the
commendation, they are likened to sheep coming up from the washing, white and
clean: Neither mixture of humane inventions, nor of carnal passions or worldly
delights, gets place and entertainment with them; their zeal is (...), their
ends are single, their affections are chaste and clean, being purged from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, and they appear so.

3. Not only their healthfulnesse is hereby evidenced, but further also their
fruitfulness; whereupon their inward meekness and zeal, moderated by pure and
peaceable wisdom, have great influence, as is clear by the fourth part of their
commendation, every one of these sheep bear twins, and none is barren amongst
them: The scope whereof, is to show their abundant fruitfulness; thus their
sweet nature is a pleasant possession, like a flock of sheep that inriches
their owner, they are so fruitful and profitable. Obs. 1. Feeding on Christ, is
ever fruitful to the soul that makes him it is food; whereas other meats profit
not them that are occupied therein, Heb. 13. 9. 2. Zeal moderated with
meekness, has also a deal of fruits waiting on it, Iam. 3. 17. but bitter
zeal (as it is there in the Original) or strife, has confusion, and every evil
work following on it. Ibid. verse. 14, 15, 16. It Is much to be zealous always in
a good thing, and no little piece of a spiritual commendation, to keep the
right midst with our zeal.

Verse. 3. Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet, and thy speech is comely: thy
Temples are like a piece of a Pomegranate within thy locks.
In this 3. verse. we have the fourth and fifth particulars that are commended
in the Bride. The fourth thing commended is her lips: The commendation given
them is, that they are like a thread of Scarlet, that is neat and lovely, and
of an excellent color, as Scarlet, which (being of the richest dye) was made
use of under the (...) to represent the blood of Christ, as Heb. 9. 19. Next,
this is amplified, as we conceive, in the following expression, ( and thy
speech is comely) which is added for the explication of the former, and
therefore is joined thereto with a copulative ( and) which is added to none of
the other parts here commended; and it may be here added, to show, 1. A way of
opening the other expression; for, speech is expressed by lips, because they
are the organs (to say so) whereby it is formed and uttered. And 2. To show,
that under lips comes in both our words to God in prayer and praise, and also
our words to others, whatever is spoken or comes out of the lips, as often the
phrase is used for both. Also it shows, that in a special way he takes notice
of believers speech (when it is savory) as a main part of their spiritual
beauty, which makes them lovely.

The commendation of her lips and speech is twofold. 1. More general, it is like
a thread of Scarlet. 2. That is expounded by another expression more clear and
particular, namely this, that her speech is comely: The meaning of both which,
may be comprehended under these four, 1. That her speech is profitable for it is
matter, as a Scarlet thread is precious and useful: The subject of a believers
discourse is not common, but good to the use of edifying, Ephesians. 4. 29. 2. It Is
pleasant and delightsome for it is manner, like a sweet, comely and pleasant
voice, opposite to some kind of voices that are harsh and unpleasant; It Is by
prudence and love sweetened, and made savory, and therefore is said in Scripture
to be seasoned with salt, Col. 4. 6. and to minister grace to the hearers, Ephesians.
4. 29. and it is called a giving of thanks, Ephesians. 5. 4. 3. It Is articulat and
distinct, therefore called speech, and not a sound, having honest ingenuity in
it, speaking as they think in their heart, Psalm. 15. 2. and opposite to lying,
dissembling, etc. whereby one speaks to vail or hide his mind from another. 4.
Hereby is also signified, that they hazard not even the best of their prayers
on their own bottom and worth, but their work is to have them all dyed in the
blood of the Lamb, and to put them up in his Name, Heb. 13. 15. They are all
offered up by him. Now these are special qualifications, commendations and
characters of a believer; showing, 1. That a believer, as a believer, is not
dumb, but has renewed lips, whereby he can speak to God in praise (...) his
honor, in prayers for his own good, and also to others for their edification:
A believer that can speak nothing to a good purpose, or if he can, does it not,
is not like Christ's Bride; much less these whose discourses tend quite
another way. 2. That words are in an especial way taken notice of by Christ,
and are special evidences of the frame of the heart, according to which we may
expect commendation or reproof from Christ, for by our words we shall be
justified or condemned, Mat. 12. 37. 3. That there is nothing more commendable
in it self, beautiful in a believer, or acceptable to Christ, than the well
ordering of the words; He who can rule the tongue, is a perfect man, Jam. 3. 2.
4. That believers prayers are all dyed in Christ's blood, and put up in his
Name: And we conceive prayer, or the believers speech to God, is especially
here understood; partly, because prayer gets this same commendation to be sweet
and comely, Chap. 2. 14. and partly, because mutual communication in words
among believers, is expressed afterward more clearly, verse. 11. though it is
not to be excluded here.

The fifth part of her commendation (or the fifth character or property of the
Bride) is in these words, Thy Temples are like a piece of a Pomegranate within
thy locks. The temples are that part of the face, that are betwixt the ears and
the eyes; and sometimes the signification is so large, as they take in the
cheeks; they are a special part, wherein the beauty of the face consists, and
are the proper seat of shamefastness and modesty, wherein blushing appears. The
commendation is two sold, 1. They are like a piece of a Pomegranate: They who
write of it say, it is a fruit, which when broken (as here the mentioning of a
piece thereof signifies) is pleasant with red and white spots, not unlike
blushing in a pleasant face. The second commendation is, that these temples are
within her locks, of the color of a Pomegranate, but not discernable fully (as
the eyes also were, verse. 1.) yet something observable; As sometimes modesty
will make blushing, and again will seek to cover it, when hardly will it be
gotten done. Here we take tenderness, shamefastness, modesty in spiritual
things, and blushing before God to be understood; Christ's Bride has a
tenderness that is soon affected with wrongs done to him, she easily resents
them; and this is opposite to affrontednesse and a whores forehead, which
cannot be ashamed, than which nothing is more displeasing to Christ, and
unbecoming to his Bride; here the temples are not hard, (as the brow that is of
brass) but like a piece of a Pomegranate, opposite to it; here it is not
stretched out impudently, but covered within the locks, and not shameless and
affronted that cannot blush, but colored (to say so) with shamefastness and
blushing, which though they seek to hide, yet it appears in them. And this
application being safe in it self, and agreeable to the scope: (which shows
what Christ is delighted with in her) And this being a main piece of her
beauty, and also suitable to the commendation, there is no hazard to fix on it;
for, without this she would not be so lovely. Now we may easily conceive, that
this tenderness, modesty or blushing, is not any natural indowment, which
appears in the carriage of man to man; but it is a saving grace, which
especially is to be found in believers carriage before Christ, as being their
Lord and Husband: and it evidenceth it self in believers in these, or the like
steps. 1. In their being soon challenged, for any thing that looks like sin. 2.
In their being affected easily with challenges, and with the infirmities that
are in them. 3. In their thinking shame of them, as of things that are
disgraceful. 4. In their not being tenacious of them, or of their own will, nor
disputing with Christ in any thing, but passing easily from their compearance,
as it were, and thinking shame to be taken in any sin, or to be found in
mistakes with him. 5. In being sparing to speak of any thing that tends to
commend themselves, or in seeking their own glory. These are commendable things
in a believer, and makes him look like the piece of a Pomegranate, spotted with
red and white: And it shows the result of a believers looking on their own way,
when they take it up, and see that wrong, and this right, and even that which
is right, wrong in so many things, and so many ways; whereupon as there is
ever some sincerity, so there is ever some shame, and holy blushing; and this
is constant, and (as it were) native to them, still to blush when they look
upon themselves.

2. This commendation, that her temples are within her locks, Imports, that
Christ's Bride blushes when none sees, and for that which no other sees: And
also that she seeks not to publish her exercises, but modestly covers them; yet
the evidences of all these in a tender walk, appear and are comely. Obs. 1.
Shamefastness or sobriety becomes a believer, or Christ's Bride exceeding
well, 2 Timothy 2. 9. 2. Inward heart-blushing, when we look upon our selves
before God, is the best trial of true tenderness. 3. A believer will have many
shameful representations of himself, and will think much shame of what he
sees, which the world will never be acquainted with. 4. This grace of
self-loathing and holy blushing, is much taken notice of by Christ, and most
especially recorded by him, however it be much hid from others.

Verse. 4. Thy neck is like the tower of David builded for armory, whereon there
hang a thousand bucklers, all Shields of mighty men.
The sixth thing commended in the Bride, is her neck: The neck being comely and
straight, adds much to the beauty of a person, and is placed by nature, as a
more eminent and essential part of the body than the eyes, legs, lips, etc. or
any other part here mentioned; for, it is that whereby the head and body are
joined together. The commendation thereof is, that it is like the tower of David:
What particular place this has reference unto, it is hard to say, possibly it is
that mentioned, Neh. 3. 16. 19. 25. called the tower of the mighty, or the
armory; It Is like, that some strong hold built by David, eminent for beauty and
strength, is hereby signified; which might have been employed for keeping of
arms, for times of danger, as the words following seem to bear.

2. This tower is more particularly explicat, 1. From the end and use for which
it was intended, It was built for an armory, that men (...) be furnished with
arms in time of need. 2. The store of arms there laid up, is here set down,
whereupon hang a thousand bucklers, all Shields of mighty men, that is, It Is
furnished especially with defensive arms (the believers war being most
defensive) as shields; but with abundance of these, for number a thousand; and
for quality excellent, and such as mighty men make use of.

If we consider the neck here, in respect of it is use, it holds forth the
vigorous exercise of the grace of faith; for, it is that by which a believer is
united to Christ the head: It Is that which strengthens them, and is their
armory furnishing them with shields, because it provides them out of Christ's
fullness, which is contained in the promises; which promises, or rather Christ
in them, being made use of by ^aith, are for a believers security, against
challenges, tentations, discouragements, etc. as so many excellent shields:
Therefore, Ephesians. 6. 16. it is called the shield of faith, and for their safety it
is commended above all the rest of the spiritual armor: And this being the
believers great defense, and specially tending to their commendation when it is
in lively exercise, this similitude cannot be so well applied to any other
thing.

Obs. 1. Faith in exercise is a notable defense to a believer, against all
assaults and temptations; there is no such shield as ^aith is, every promise,
and every attribute in God, is as a shield to these that exercise this grace of
says thereupon. 2. Faith exercised on these, is exceedingly well pleasing to
Jesus Christ. 3. That all believers have their arms out of one armory, there is
but one storehouse for them all, to wit, faith acting on Christ's fullness. 4.
Faith will never want a buckler, there is a thousand laid up in a mag^zin for
the believers use. 5. He is the most mighty and valiant man, who is most in the
exercise and use-making of faith. 6. Faith is the grace that makes a man
valiant and victorious, as all the cloud of witnesses, Heb. 11. proves.

Again, if we consider the neck, as it is commended here, as being like a tower
for uprightness and straightness; it signifies a quiet serene mind, and a
confident boldness in doing and suffering; in which sense, it is opposite to
hanging of the head, which speaks discouragement: And as a stretched out (...)
in a carnal sense, Isa. 3. 16. signifies haughtiness and pride; so here in a
holy and spiritual sense, it implies ch^^rfulnesse of heart, and confident holy
boldness, which proceeds from the spirit of adoption; and this waits upon, and
follows after the exercise of faith, being fixed and stayed upon the Lord and
his word against all events, Psalm. 112. 6. Bold in duties, and valorous in
sufferings, and in undergoing any difficulties. So then, this is no small
commendation which Christ gives his Bride, and it is well consistent with that
holy blushing, sh^mefastnesse and sobriety, for which she was commended in the
former verse.

Verse. 5. Thy breasts are like two young Roes that are twins, which feed among
the Lilies.
The seventh and last part that is commended in the Bride, is her two breasts
or paps. For clearing of this similitude, we are to consider, 1. That the
breasts in nature are a part of the comeliness of the body, Ezekiel. 16. 7. 2.
They are useful to give suck and food to others. 3. They signify warmness of
affection, and lovingnesse, as Prove. 5. 19. let her breasts always satisfy
thee; and Chap. 1. 13. the Bride expressing her affection to Christ, says, he
shall lie all night between my breasts; and so the wise of the bosom is the
chaste and beloved spouse: And thus Christ is called the Son of God's love, or
of his bosom. For this cause, we conceive these things are here understood, 1.
A believers fitness to edify others, and that believers are in a condition
suitable to a married wife, or mother, that brings forth children, and has
breasts to nurse them: and so to have no breasts, Chap. 8. 8. is opposed to
this; a believer is, as it were, a nurse with breasts, fitted to edify others.
2. That believers being in case to be useful to others for their edification,
is a special ornament to their profession. And the third thing that is here
understood, is believers warmlinesse and kindlinesse to Christ, and these that
are his, taking him and them (as it were) in their bosom; the believer has
warm affections to receive them into. And two breasts are mentioned, to show
there is no defect as to the extent, but both her breasts are in good case, and
always ready in love to communicate their furniture, for others edification.

The commendation is in two steps, each whereof is qualified for the further
enlarging of the commendation. The 1. is, They are like two R^es, that are
lovely and kindly, Prove. 5. 17. (often mentioned before) and like young Roes,
because these are most lovely, and suit best to be a similitude to set ^orth
the comeliness of that part of the body; they are like young Roes, not too
big; for, when breasts are too big, it is a deformity: And so when private
edification exceeds it is true bounds, it is not approvable or lovely. And these
Roes to which her breasts are compared, are twins: Which shows, an equality and
proportionablenesse in their love to God and to others, giving each of these
their own place, and keeping their love to creatures in the right
subordination; and also their communicating their love to others, in
admonitions and rebukes, etc. equally, keeping a proportionablenesse in all.

The second part of the commendation, is, they feed among the Lilies: As Roes
would not maintain their pleasantness long, if they did not feed; yea, if the
pasture were not good: So, these must needs be pleasant and useful, because
they feed, and that not in a wilderness, but amongst the lilies; Which shows,
that believer in fitting and furnishing themselves; that they may be
forthcoming for others edification, do not neglect their own advantage and
edification, but feed on good pasture, whereby they are yet more fitted for
being useful to others.

By feeding in this Song, is understood, 1. To be present in such a place, as
Chap. 2. 16. 2. To make use of that which is food for the intertaining of life.
3. To delight in a thing for satisfying of the affections. Next, by the Brides
breasts (being like Roes that feed amongst the Lilies) three things may be
understood. 1. As this expression respects Christ's feeding, (so to speak) for
he is said to feed amongst the Lilies, Chap. 2. 16. and so it says, that the
believer loves to feed in Christ's company, and where he is. And, 2. That this
makes believers breasts run to others, when they are much with him, and in his
company. 2. As it respects believers, who are called Lilies, Chap. 2. 16. and,
6. 2. And so it says, 1. That all believers have one pasture, they feed
together as a flock does. 2. That one believer loves and delights in the
company of another, they are the excellent and the lilies of the earth, their
delight is with them. And, 3. That this helps a believers growth, and fits him
to be useful for others edification, and to improve well the spiritual
fellowship of other believers. 3. As it respects Christ himself, who is called
a lilie, Chap. 2. 1. and his lips are said to be like lilies droping, etc.
Chap. 5. 13. Whereby is holden out, his Word, Promises, Ordinances, etc. And so
it says, 1. That Christ and his word is the great and main ^ood, upon which
believers ^eed, that is their proper pasture; to be much drinking-in the
sincere milk of the word is their meat and drink. 2. That much acquaintance
with Christ in the word, inables one for being very useful to others. In sum,
it says, 1. That a believer is no bare novice, but has breasts that yields
milk and nourishment to others. 2. That a believer has a good pasture to feed
on. 3. That believers breasts run to others, according as they feed themselves;
If they hunger themselves, others will not be edified by them; if they feed on
wind and empty notions themselves, it will be no healthful food that others
will receive from them. 4. That it is a pleasant thing and acceptable to Christ,
when a believer so communicats what he has received to others, as he is still
feeding on Christ himself, and not living on the stock he has already received.

Verse. 6. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the
mountain of Myrrh, and to the hill of Frankincense.
The words in this ^ixth verse, express the second way, how Christ evidenceth
his respect to his Bride; he is so affected with her beauty, that he tells her,
he cannot but haunt her company, and answer her prayers. For, comparing this
verse with verse. 17. chap. 2. we find it a clear answer of her petition she
puts up there. The words contain, 1. A promise. 2. A term set to the
performance of it, showing the continuance of his performance. The promise is,
I will get me to the mountain of Myrrh, and to the hill of Frankincense: By
this in general, (...) understood no withdrawing of Christ's, or shutting of
himself up in heaven from her; for, that will not agree to the scope, which is
to show how he loves her, and comforts her; nor will that be an answer of her
prayer, but the contrary: It must then hold forth some comfortable act of
Christ's, evidencing his respect to her for her consolation; which we conceive
to be a promise of his presence with her to the end of the world. By mountain
is often und^^stood the Church (as Isa. 2. 1. and Mic. 4. 1.) called so for her
endurance and stability; for typifying of which, the Temple was built on mount
Mor^ah. And it is called a mountain of Myrrh, and hill of Frankincense, to
difference this one mountain (which is in the singular) from the mountains, or
excellencies in the world, after mentioned, verse. 8. which are many: It Is a
sweet mountain, not of Leopards, but of Myrrh and Frankincense; these were
spices much used in ^he ceremonial services, Exo^. 30, 23. 24. and signified
the preciousnesse, and savourinesse of the graces of Gods people, and of their
prayers, Psalm. 141. 2. Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, etc.
Here then is understood that place of the world (namely the Church) where the
graces of Gods people flow, and their prayers (as acceptable sacrifices) are
put up to him; And so it answers the scope, and is opposed to the mountains of
the world, mentioned in the eighth verse. The Church is called the mountain of
Myrrh, and hill of Frankincense, 1. Because it is the place, where the graces
signified by these are to be found: It Is only in Believers they do abound. 2.
Because there they abound in prayers and praises, which ascend before him, as
incense from an high place. 3. Because he accepts so kindly of their duties,
that they are pleasant to him, and he delights to rest amongst them beyond all
other places, as being a mountain of Myrrh; In which respect, the house of God
is called the house of prayer, because of the exercise of that duty frequently
performed there.

The second thing is the term he sets to the performance of this promise, in
these words, until the day break, and the shadows flee away: I will get me
(says he) to the mountain of Myrrh, till that day; The sense is, amongst all
places of the world, the Church is the place in which I will choose to reside,
and with believers abounding in the exercise of grace and prayer; they shall
not want my presence, for there will I abide, until the everlasting day of
immediate fellowship with them break up: And so this makes for the Brides
comfort, thou may my spouse (says he) expect my company, and the acceptance
of thy prayers (which are as incense to me) until that day come, as thou
desired: Where we may see, (beside what was spoken upon this expression, chap.
2. 17.) 1. That Christ conforms his answers to our suits, and makes the one as
extensive as the other; the term she proposed, is that he accepts of. 2. His
hearing of one prayer, gives ground to his people to expect that he will hear
all their prayers, and so he is called the hearer of prayer indefinitly, Psalm.
65. 2. and this is the reason why he says not, he will turn to her: (which
would look to that one prayer, Chap. 2. 17.) but he says, he will get him to
the hill of Frankincense, which looks to all her prayers, and so his answer is
more extensive, than the particular sought; which shows, 3. That as Christ will
not mince his answers to believers, and make them less than their prayers, so
he will often enlarge them, and make them more extensive than their prayers.

Next, from this that he gives believers such a name, as the hill of
Franckincense, which is in a special way, with respect to their prayers, Obs.
1. That believers ought to be very frequent in prayer, like an hill that
abounds in incense. 2. That Christ's presence is ever to be found, where these
spiritual sacrifices of prayers and praises abound: For, where ever he has an
Altar built to himself, and records his Name, there he will come and bless his
people, Exodus 20. 24.

Again, that ^e sets down this by way of promise, it gives us ground to
observe, 1. That even our sense of Christ's presence, is in, and by a promise;
and it is the promise thereof that should comfort and satisfy the believer,
even when sense is removed, and is not for the time enjoyed, as Ioh. 14. 21,
23. 2. Christ limits himself to no other term-day, for continuing of the
fulfilling, and performing of his promises, than that very time when believers
shall be entered into the possession of what is promised; for, I will grant thy
desire (says he) until the day break, etc. that is, un^ill the great day
come, I will keep this course with believers. 3. Christ's promise of coming,
and his making that sure, is one of the greatest evidences of love which he can
bestow on his people. 4. There is no society or place (to speak so) but the
Church, nor any person in the Church, but such as abound in spiritual
sacrifices, who have a promise of Christ's presence. 5. Christ would have the
thoughts of eternal life, and of immediate enjoying of himself, entertained in
his Bride, and would have her confirmed in the faith of it; and therefore is
there here a particular repetition of the term which had been mentioned, Chap.
2. 17. 6. He would by this repetition also express, that (some way) he longs
for that day of the consummation of the marriage, as well as she does, and that
he would gladly have all shadows gone betwixt him and her; which serves much to
confirm her in the faith of it, and comfort her till it come.

Verse. 7. Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee.
This verse contains the last piece of the commendation which Christ gives to
his Bride, and it is the scope of all; whereby, having spoken of some
particular parts, he now sums up all in a general, 1. Positively expressed, Thou
art all fair, my love. Then, 2. Negatively, There is no spot in thee. The
reason why, thus in a general, he closes up her commendation, is to show that
his forbearing the enumeration of the rest of her parts, ^s not because of any
defect that was in her, or that his touching of some particulars was to commend
these parts only, but to show this in general that all of her parts, as well
not named as named were lovely. This universal commendation is not to be
understood in a popish sense, as if she had had no sin; for, that will not
agree with other express Scriptures, nor with this Song, where she records her
own faults, as Chap. 1. 6. and 3. 1. and 5. 2, 3. And also this commendation
agrees to all believers, who yet ^^cknowledged by themselves not to be perfect.
Neither is it to be taken in an Antinomian sense, as if their sins and failings
were no^ sins to them, and did not pollute them; for, 1. That is not consistent
with the nature of sin. Nor, 2. With the Brides regrates and confessions in
this Song; Nor, 3. With the present scope, which is to show the Brides beauty:
And he does thus highly commend her beauty, not because her sins were not sins
in her, as they were in others, but because her graces were more lovely, which
were not to be found in others: Hence the particular parts of the new creature,
or inherent holiness, are insisted on for proof of this; Further, this
commendation did agree to believers before Christ came in the flesh; And this
love-assertion, thou art all fair, holds true of the Bride, in these four
respects, 1. In respect of Justification and absolution she is clean, though
needing washing in other respects, Ioh. 13. Ye are clean by the word that I
have (...), yet they needed to have their ^eet washen. Thus a believer is in a
justified state, and legally clean and fair, so as there is no sin imputed to
him, or to be found in him to condemn him, because the Lord has pardoned them,
Ier. 50. 20. 2. It Is true in respect of Sanctification and inherent holiness,
they are all fair, that is, they are wholly renewed, there is no part but it is
beautiful in respect of God's grace (though in degree it be not perfect.) Thus
where grace is true, it is extended through the whole man, and makes an
universal change. 3. It Is true in respect of Christ's acceptance; and so where
there is sincerity in the manner, he over-looks and passes by many spots* thus
thou art all fair, that is, in my account thou art so, I reckon not thy spots,
but esteem of thee as if thou had no spot: Christ is no severe interpreter of
his peoples actions; and where there is honesty, and no spots inconsistent with
the state of children, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. he will reckon of them, as if there were
none at all. 4. It Is true of Christ's Bride that she is all fair, in respect of
Christ's design, He will make her at last without spot, or wrinkle or any such
thing, Ephesians. 5. 25, etc. And because of the certainty of it, it is applied to her
now, as being already entered in the possession thereof in her Head, in whom
she is set in heavenly-places. Hence we may see, 1. The honest believer ere all
be done, will be made fully fair and without spot. 2. Christ often expounds an
honest believer, from his (...) of heart-purpose and design; in which respect
they get many titles, otherwise unsuitable to their present condition; and
believers themselves may someway reckon so also. If all were put together, it
were a great matter for a believer to conceive and apprehend these words as
spoken to him in particular from Christ's mouth, thou, even thou art fair: And
without this, they will want their luster, for certainly Christ speaks so upon
the matter to some, and he allows that they should believe that he speaks so
unto them.

Verse. 8. Come with me from Lebanon (my Spouse) with me from Lebanon: Look from
the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir, and Hermon, from the Lions dens; from
the mountains of the Leopards.
From this 8. verse. to verse. 16. follows a second way how the Bridegroom
manifests his love to his Bride, in other three steps, 1. He gives her a kind
invitation and call, verse. 8. 2. He shows her how he was taken with her love,
and in a manner could not want the enjoyment thereof, verse. 9, 10. 3. Upon this
occasion, he proceeds to a new commendation of her: And all of these are
wonderful, being considered as spoken by him.

The invitation, in this 8. verse. beside the title (...) gives her (which we
take in as a motive) has three parts. 1. The state wherein the Bride was, is
set down; and this is contained in the term from which she is called. 2. The
duty laid o^ included in the term to which she is called. 3. The motives
pre^^^g and persuading her to give obedience thereto.

First, The term from which she is called, gets diverse names, 1. Lebanon. 2.
Amana. 3. Shenir and Hermon. 4. The Lions dens and mountains of Leopards, which
are added for explication of the former. Lebanon is a ^ill often mentioned in
Scripture, excellent for beauty, and therefore Christ's countenance is compared
( Chap. 5. 5.) to it: Moses desired to see the goodly Lebanon, Deuteronomy. 3. 25. It
was profitable for Cedar-wood, and sweet in smell by the flowers that grew on
it, verse. 11. and Hos. 14. 6. It was on the north-side of Canaan, a stately
place, Isa. 35. 1. Therefore Solomon built his dwelling for pleasure there in
the forest of Lebanon, as some conceive, though others think it was built at
Jerusalem, and gets the name of the forest of Lebanon, for the pleasantness
thereof. As for Amana, we read not of it, except it be that which is mentioned,
2 King. 5. 12. called Abana, but on the margent Amana; It Is like that river
there spoken of, flowed from it, which being pleasant and stately, is preferred
by Naaman to Jordan, in which the Prophet appointed him to wash. Next, Shenir
and Hermon, were two hills (or two tops of one hill) mentioned, Deuteronomy. 3. 9.
beyond Jordan, pleasant and fertile, and from which they might see the land of
Canaan before they crossed Jordan; and which were conquered from Og King of
Bashan. The tops also of these are mentioned, to show their height, and she is
here supposed to be on the top of them. Lastly, it is added, from the Lions
dens, from the mountains of Leopards, not designing any new place, but showing
that Lions and Leopards often used upon hills, and it is like upon these,
notwithstanding all their beauty: therefore mountains, are called mountains of
prey, Psalm. 76. 4. because wild beasts that used to make prey, often lurked in
them. There is somewhat, Hab. 2. 17. that confirms this, where the violence of
Lebanon, and the spoil of beasts, is mentioned, supposing that there, beasts
used violently to spoil.

By these mountains here, we conceive are understood the most excellent,
eminent and choice satisfactions that are to be found amongst the creatures,
wherein the men of the world delight, who are often compared to ravenous
beasts: and the reason is, it is something that is conceived to be excellent,
that is here employed by the description, yet such as has no true excellency in
it; therefore the Bride is called from it, and commanded to look over it, even
at it is height, and to leave it to the men of the world, whose portion properly
these heights and excellencies are, for they have not another to enjoy or look
after. By Lions and Leopards, we understand covetous, worldly men, who pursue
the world to the destruction of themselves and others; So they are often called
in Scripture, as Psalm. 57. 4, etc. 1. For their devouring, insatiable nature,
that can never have enough, but use always to prey on others. 2. For their
unreasonable, brutish nature, being in their way like bruit-beasts, rather than
men, Psalm. 49. ult. 3. For their malicious nature, that are always hurting the
godly that are amongst them. Again, these heights and excellencies of the
world, are called the dens and mountains of these beasts, 1. Because often
ungodly men have the greatest share of those, and have no more to claim unto;
their portion is in this life, Psalm. 17. penult. 2. Because they rest in them,
and seek after no more, as Lions do in their dens. These mountains then are the
excellencies of the creatures; for the enjoyment of which men often use great
violence, therefore they are called, Psalm. 76. 5. mountains of prey, as having
such beasts, as cruel men lurking in them, above which God (who is the portion
of his people) is there said to be far more excellent; and thus these mountains
here are opposed to the mountain of Myrrh, verse. 6. where Christ has his
residence. Next, the Church, (whose state and case is supposed to be the same
naturally with the men of the world) is called from this her natural state, and
from the remainders of such a frame, in two words, 1. Come, quite it, says he,
and come with me, which is the same with that command, Chap. 2. 10. Rise up and
come away, implying the exercising of says in him, and the delighting of her
self in communion with him (as the Spouse should do with her Husband) and a
withdrawing from these created concernments, wherein men of the world sought
their happiness. The second word is, look from the top of these, which word
sets out faith also, so Isa. 45. 19. Look unto me, etc. and looking from these,
signifies her elevating and lifting of her affections higher than the highest
excellencies of the earth, even toward heaven and the enjoyment of Christ,
Col. 3. 1, 2. And so it says, she is not to look to what is present, but to
what is not seen, and coming, which is by faith only to be discerned and
apprehended: And this is to be done, by looking over the tops of the highest of
created excellencies. Now this word being added to the former, does show, that
when they cannot come, they are to look; and that their looks are not to be
fixed on created things, as their objects, but must ascend higher, as the
Israelites from these mountains, Hermon and Shenir, beheld Canaan, with desire
to be there,

Obs. 1. The world has it is own taking excellencies, it is heights and
mountains, whereby it looks very pleasant to many. 2. The most beautiful
created excellency has a palpable defect in it, the most pleasant hill has a
wild Lion lodging in it, that marrs all the satisfaction that can be found
there to a believer; and God has wisely so ordered, that every gourd to them
has a worm at it is root. 3. Often the men of the world are much taken with
these created excellencies, they love to live in them, and dwell in them, as
beasts in their dens, and know no higher design to drive, then their
satisfaction in created excellencies: Yea, 4. Believers are in hazard to fall
in this sin, when things go well with them in the world, they are ready to sit
down there; Therefore are they here called upon, that this hazard may be
prevented. 5. Addictednesse to the world, when men excessively pursue after
either it is gain, honor, applause, or pleasure, transforms men into beasts,
and makes them irrational, brutish and violent, forgetting what should be their
main work and end. 6. Often violence toward others, and oppression with much
cruelty, is the fruit of addictednesse to the things of the world: If he profit
himself, such a man cares not whom he undo. 7. There is nothing more
unreasonable, bitter and cruel, than a worldly Atheist, whose designs are only
after things that are within time; they are Lions and Leopards. 8. Carnal men
are often by their neighborhood to the Saints, exceeding troublesome, even as
Lions in a mountain. 9. Addictednesse to the world, and a surfeit with it is
contentments, can hardly stand with fellowship with Christ, and is most
unbecoming his Bride; therefore he calls her from it. 10. Believers have, and
ought to have a more high, noble and excellent design, than the greatest
Conqueror that ever was in the world; The believer in this is beyond Alexander
the Great, who desired more created worlds, but he looks over from the highest
top of all these, as undervaluing them, and longing to be at something else.
11. Believers should have their looks directed toward heaven, and their
thoughts and affections (even before hand) should be fixed there, Col. 3. 1.
Philip. 3. 20, 21. their face should be set that way. 12. It Is faith that looks
toward Christ, as coming, when he is for the time absent; and when believers
cannot win to walk and move toward him, they may look to him; and sure, Christ
who calls for this, will accept of it, till the other be attained. 13. Often in
the most excellent parts of this world, such (...) Le^^non, Hermon, etc. men
are most cruel and carnal; and the Bride of Christ has manyest enemies, and
sewest friends. 14. The most excellent of created contentments, for profit,
honor and pleasure, should be denied and forsaken when Christ calls. 15. There
is nothing a believer would watch more against, (as that which marrs fellowship
with Christ) than taking excessive contentment in created things. 16. Often a
condition which abounds in worldly contentments and delights, is very scarce of
Christ's company; therefore when he allows her his presence, he calls her to
leave them, in her affection at least.

3. Because he knows the world is most bewitching, and the affections of his
Bride are not soon weaned from it (though this be most necessary) therefore
three ways he presses her to deny her self in these, and follow him (which is
the sum of the call,) 1. Says he, thou art my Spouse, that is, my Bride: It Is
the same word which ( Ier. 2. 32.) is translated Bride, Can a Bride forget her
attire? This title is frequently given her in this Chapter, and verse. 1. Chap.
5. Importing, 1. A marriage-tye and relation betwixt him and her. 2. Love in
him, owning that relation, and claiming thereby an interest in her. 3. A duty
in her to own him as her Husband, and to forsake all her lovers, that she go
not a-whoring after any other, as a wife should cleave to her husband: It Is the
same with what is pressed, Psalm. 45. 10, etc. My Spouse (says he) thou have
not thy portion in the world, therefore come away from it. 2. He presses it
from the advantage of his own company, which she should enjoy upon her obeying
his call: Come with me (says he) my Spouse, and this is repeated, come with
me, that is, thou art mine, and I am thy Husband, will thou not then come with
me, with me? This is a weighty argument, and none will prevail, if this do not;
Christ's company should have more weight, and be of more force to engage a
believer to Christ, than all the pleasantness of the world can have to divert
them: He is more excellent be far than the mountains of prey, Psalm. 76. 4.
therefore is his company to be preferred to them all. 3. He presses it, from
the heartless condition which she could not but have in the most excellent
things in the world without Christ, they were but dens of Lions, not for her to
stay with, nor yet any way agreeing with her state and case. Hence observe, 1.
When Christ and the most excellent things in the world are opposed, there will
be great odds, and a vast difference seen betwixt them. 2. All the defects that
abound in created excellencies, should necessitatethe believer to take himself
to Christ; there is no satisfaction for him till he come there. 3. Men have no
great loss that loose their affections from the world, and set them on Christ;
It Is but leaving the dens of Lions, etc. and coming to him, who is more
excellent then all the mountains of prey.

We may also read these words, by way of promise, Thou shall come with me: And
the scope will not be against this, it being no less an evidence of Christ's
love, and no less comfortable to the Church, to have his promise, than to have
his call; and all his calls having promises employed in them, both will well
agree. And so that which is set down by way of precept, Romans 6. 12. Let not sin
reign in your mortal body, is set down by way of promise, verse. 14. of that
Chapter, Sin shall not have dominion over you.

Verse. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse: thou have ravished
my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.
Verse. 10. How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse! how much better is thy
love then Wine! and the smell of thine Ointments, then all Spices!
Although what Christ has spoken in the former verse be wonderful, yet these
expressions, verse. 9, 10. being spoken by Jesus Christ to a poor sinful
creature, passes admiration: They may be looked on as the reason of his former
call and promise, he thus seriously invites her to come to him, because he
cannot want her company; for, his heart is ravished with her. The scope in both
verses is the same, but is more clearly expressed, verse. 10. Not so much setting
forth the Churches loveliness (though that is not to be excluded) as his loving
kindness, who is admirably affected toward her, as every word in matter and
manner of both, shows. In them consider, 1. The titles given her, which are the
same in both verses. 2. What is asserted, and that is, that his heart is
ravished. 3. The manner how this is expressed, in a sort of holy passion,
doubling the expression. 4. Wherewith it is his heart is so ravished, it is
(says he) with one of thine eyes, etc. In the end of the 9. verse. and more
fully amplified, verse. 10.

The titles are two; one of them, namely that she is his Spouse, has been
spoken of; but his repeating of it, shows a kind of glorying in it, as being
very much delighted therewith. The other title, my sister, is added, and it
does import these five things, 1. A condescending upon Christ's part to be thus
joined in kindred to the believer, and so it takes in his incarnation, whereby
he was made in all things like to his brethren, Heb. 2. 17. Our blessed Lord
Jesus is man, believers are his brethren and sisters, they are bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh; and for his Brides consolation this is asserted.
2. A privilege whereto she is advanced upon her part, and that is, that by
Adoption believers are become sons and daughters to the Lord God Almighty, not
only friends but children, and so heirs and joynt-heirs with Jesus Christ, Romans
8. So as now they are his brethren and sisters, which is an unspeakable
advancement. 3. It imports a change of nature, as well as of state in
believers, so that they partake of the divine nature and Spirit with Christ
Jesus, as it is, Heb. 2. 11. He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified,
are of one; which is a special ground of his sibnesse and kindred to believers,
not common to others, but special to them, and founded on their sanctification.
4. It implies sympathy, friendlinesse, and a kindly esteem in him, that takes
her up, and speaks of her, and to her, in all the most sweet relations of
mother, sister, spouse, etc. Matthew. 12. ult. 5. It shows, his owning of all
these relations, he is not ashamed to call believers, sisters and brethren,
Heb. 2. 11. Obs. 1. There are many wonderful, near and sweet relations betwixt
Christ and the believer. 2. Christ is the most faithful owner of them, and is
in a most friendly way forthcoming to them, according to them all.

2. The thing asserted here, is, Thou have ravished my heart: The word in the
first language is one, and it signifies, Thou have hearted me, or so to speak,
Thou have unhearted me: It Is no where else in Scripture, but here; Christ's
unspeakable love, as it were, coins new words to discover it self by, it is so
unexpressible: The word is borrowed from the passionatnesse of love, when it
siezes deeply on a man, it leaves him not master of his own heart, but the
object loved has it, and (as it were) possesses it, and commands it more than
the man himself; so the Gospel says, where a man's treasure is, (that is, the
thing a man esteems most of) there (as it were) his heart is, and not in the
party that loves, Mat. 6. 21. So the common phrase is, such a man has my
heart, when he is dearly beloved; and thus in a subtle way, Absalom is said to
have stolen away the hearts of the people from his father. It Is in sum, my
spouse thou have my heart, thou have won it, and as it were by violence taken
it away, I am not master of it, I cannot but love thee.

It Is hard to draw observations, that may suitably express the thing here
spoken of; only we may hint at these things. 1. Love in Christ to a believer,
has strong and wonderful effects on him, in reference to them. 2. The believer
has Christ's heart, he has a seat in his affection, he possesses his love
(for no other thing has his heart) and he may promise himself from Christ,
wh^^ever he can desire for his good, even as if he had his heart under his
command; for (so to speak) he can refuse believers nothing, which they seek,
and which he knows to be for their good. 3. Love in Christ to a believer, it is
at a height, or, it is a love of the highest degree: There is no greater
intensnesse thereof imaginable; for, to have the heart ravished, is the
expression of the greatest love.

3. The manner how he expresses this, is by doubling the expression, Thou have
ravished my heart, thou have ravished my heart: And this is to show, that this
word ^ell not rashly from him, but was drawn out by the vehemence of affection
in him. 2. That he allows believers to believe this great love and affection
he has to them, and would have them dwelling on the believing thoughts of it;
and therefore, he doubles the expression while he intimats his love unto them:
Only remember there are no disorderly passions in Christ, as in us; yet, that
there is sympathy and love in him, and passionat effects of love from him,
cannot be denied.

The fourth thing is, wherewith it is his heart is so ravished: It may be
thought to be some great thing that thus prevails over Christ: Now what it is,
is set down in two expressions, which are joined to the former, to make this
love of his the more wonderful; that which was conquered, or ravished, was his
heart; that which does it, is her eye, the eye or look of a poor sinful
creature, even of such a person, as may be despised in the world, and like
Lazarus full of sores, and not admitted to men's company. 2. It Is not with both
her eyes, but (says he) with one of thy eyes, that is (as it were) with a
squint-look; a side-look of the Bride prevailed thus with him. One eye is not
here mentioned, as preferring the beauty of one of her eyes to the other; but
to show what excellent beauty is in her, and much more what infinite love is in
him, that he could not (because he would not) resist a look of one of her eyes
cast toward him. We show what is understood by eyes, verse. 1. and it is explicat
in the following verse, to hold forth love especially here (lovers using to
signify affection by their eyes) yet it takes in knowledge, as being
presupposed; and faith as going along. The second expression is, with one
chain of thy neck: These chains were spoken of, Chap. 1. 10. Whereby we show
was signified her inherent holiness, with imputed righteousness, which by
faith she possessed; and so here also it signifies her graces, especially her
exercising faith on him, for so the neck was expounded, verse. 9. to be
understood of faith, which joineth the believer to Christ as his head: And it
is said to have chains, because it never wants excellent fruits, wherewith it
is adorned, when it is exercised. One chain is spoken of, not as if she had not
had more, or as if he did not respect them all, but to hold forth this, that one
of her chains (as it were) did overcome him; and so it may be gathered, what
will both eyes do, and more chains, when one so prevails. The scope then here
does show, 1. That Christ is easily prevailed with by his people, O how easily
is he overcome by them, who have love to him, and faith in him! 2. That Christ
stands not on the degree of his peoples graces, nor does he suspend his love
and acceptance of a person, upon such or such a degree; but where ever reality
and sincerity are, if it were in the meanest degree, and but one look, or one
chain, he will yield to it, and accept of it. 3. It Is to provoke and encourage
believers to cast a look to Christ, when they find their faith to be so weak
that they can do no more; and to confirm them in the expectation of good from
him freely, without any rigid reckoning: It Is not only the strong believer, and
the strong acts of faith and love, that prevail with Christ, but he condescends
to be overcome, even by the weakest, with whom the sincerity of these graces is
to be found.

This is further followed and explicat, verse. 10. and that two ways, 1. By an
indefinite question, How fair is thy love! 2. By two comparative questions,
whereby in two similitudes, her love is preferred to the most excellent things,
How much better, etc. The thing commended, is her love, that is, the love
wherewith she loves him, wherewith her heart breathes after him, delights in
him, esteems of him, and is zealous to please him, etc. The commendation he
gives her love, is, that it is fair. And by the way we may observe, that this
clearly shows, that by all the former parts of her beauty, are understood
spiritual graces: Now (says he) thy love is fair, that is, it is lovely and
acceptable to me: as beauty and fairness are much esteemed amongst men: So
this grace of love is a beautiful thing in Christ's Bride. The manner of the
expression is by way of question, and admiration, How fair! I can get nothing
(says he) to compare it with: a wonder, that Christ should be so taken with
the love of sinners, as to admire it, or think that their love exceeds all
expression; for, so men use to express what they cannot express: But this
does indeed show, that the height and depth and length and breadth of that
love, which Christ has to believing sinners, passes all knowledge, and is
beyond all words. Obs. 1. That a believer is one that loves Christ, and true
faith has always this grace of love joined to it. 2. That love where it is
sincere and true, is a property of Christ's Bride and Spouse; there are no
other in the world who love him, but these who are espoused to him. 3. Where
love to Christ is, there Christ loves; he cannot but love them, that love him;
and there is nothing more acceptable to him, than the faith that is working by
love. 4. Our Lord Jesus takes special notice of the frame of the heart, and
what seat he has in the affections of his people; he lays more weight on
their love, than on their work, though true love can never be without works.

The second way how he explains and illustrates this, is more particular, by
two comparisons, yet keeping still the former manner of expression, by way of
question and admiration: The first is, how much better is thy love then Wine!
Wine may be looked on in two respects, 1. As it is useful in man's life, and
refreshful, Psalm. 104. 15. It makes glad the heart of man, and Eccl. 10 19. It
makes the heart merry: Wine is one of the most comfortable creatures,
therefore she calls his love better then Wine, Chap. 1. 2. Thus observe, 1.
Christ will not be behind with his people, neither in kindness nor in the
expressions of it; for, this is beyond hers, Chap. 1. 2. Not that he has a
better object to love, but because the love wherewith he loves her, is like
himself, and more excellent then hers. 2. There is no such refreshful thing in
all the work of creation of Christ, no such feast, as the warming of a sinners
heart with love to him is: This ( Luke 7. 47.) is thought more of by Christ in
a poor woman, than all the great feast he was invited unto by the rich Pharisee.

Again, we may look on Wine as used in the ceremonial services and
drink offerings, Levit. 23. 13, etc. Thus the meaning is, thy love is
preferable to all outward performances and sacrifices, as Hos. 6. 7. Love being
the principle within, from which all our performances should flow, it is not
opposed to sacrifice simply, or to obedience; but, 1. Supposing these to be
separate, he prefers love; if it were to cast in but a mite of duty out of
love, it will be more acceptable than the greatest bulk of duties without love,
as is clear in the case of the widow, Luke 21. Yea, if men would give their
bodies to be burnt, without this, 1 Cor. 13. 3. it will avail nothing. 2. It
says, that where both the inward principle, and the outward fruit or work are,
the Lord respects that more than this, and he respects this in a manner but for
that.

The second comparison is to the same purpose in these words, and the smell of
thine Ointments then all spices! Ointments typified the graces of the Spirit,
the pouring out whereof, is called, the unction, Joh. 2. 20. and the oil of
joy, Psalm. 45. 7. The smell thereof signifies the acceptablenesse of these
graces, when in exercise; our Lord Jesus finds a sweet ^avour in them, as
ointments cast a smell that is refreshful to men (as was said upon Chap. 3. 6.)
the grace of love mentioned before is here included; but under Ointments there
is more comprehended, to show, 1. That where one grace is, there are all the
rest of the graces of the Spirit to be found. 2. That love to Christ, and zeal
for him, holds believers stirring, and makes them send forth a sweet and savory
smell. This smell is preferred to all Spices, not to one or two, but to all:
Spices were either used as gifts, because they were precious and costly; So the
Queen of Sheba propined Solomon with them, 2 King. 10. 2. and the wise men
offered such to Christ, Mat. 2. 11. And so it says, there is no such propine
can be offered to Christ, as love, and the graces of his Spirit, when they are
in exercise. Again, spices were used in the Levitical services, and holy Oil,
Exodus 30. 23, 24. and so they are to be considered as Wine was in the last
sense formerly spoken of, and it shows how preferable the inward exercise of
grace, is to all external duties. Lastly, they are not only prefered, while he
says, thy love is better, etc. but as passing comparison, they are extolled
far above all these things with which they are compared, How fair, or how much
better is thy love then Wine! etc. O my Spouse (says he) it is not to be
wondered that thy love ravishes my heart; for, there is no created thing so
precious, nor any external service so acceptable to me, as it is. Hence
observe, 1. That inward love, or the inward exercise of grace, and outward
performances are separable. 2 That when outward performances are separate from
the inward exercise of love and other graces, the Lord respects them not. 3.
That love is a good and necessary principle of all duties, and especially of
the duties of worship. 4. These who have any thing of the lively exercise of
love to Christ, want never a propine that will be acceptable to him; if it were
but a mite, or a cup of cold-water, or a look to Christ, if love be the
principle from which these flow, they will be very acceptable with him.

Verse. 11. Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb: honey and milk are
under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.
Having thus expressed his affection to his Bride, he breaks forth in a
positive commendation of her (which may be looked upon as the ground of the
comparative commendation in the former verse) and he describes and commends her
at once, these two ways, 1. Touching, as it were, at some particulars (which
are indeed generals) wherein her loveliness appears in actual fruits, verse.
11. 2. In seven comparisons he holds forth her fruitfulness from the 12. to
the 16. verse. wherein he not only commends her by the fruits which she brings
forth, but from her fitness or aptitude to bring forth these fruits, so that
she cannot but be fruitful; As if one commending an Orchard from the fruit,
Apples, Pomegranates, etc. or whatever other fruits are in Orchards, should
then fall upon the commendation of the Orchard it self in it is situation,
fences, waters, or kinds of the plants, etc. So is it here. And this last
commendation, is to be looked upon as the cause of the former.

In this 11^ verse. there are three particulars commended: under which we
conceive much of the series of a believers walk is understood. The 1. Is her
lips: which are commended from this, that they drop as the honey comb: By lips,
as verse. 3. and frequently in the Song (and so in the Proverbs, a man of lips
is taken for a man of talk) is understood her speech, words or discourse,
especially to others. These her words, (or her speech) are compared for the
matter, to honey or the honey comb, that is sweet, nourishing, healthful and
pleasant; as Prove. 16. 24. Pleasant words are as the honeycomb, sweet to the
soul, and health to the bones: And by honey in Scripture, is often understood
that which is excellent, and useful for the life of man: And therefore it was a
property of Canaan, that it flowed with milk and honey, which are put together
in the following piece of her commendation. 2. Her speech or words, are
commended from the manner or qualification of them, They drop as the
honeycomb, etc. Droping words signify, 1. Seasonable words, which are like
dew, droping for the edification of others, as dew by it is droping makes the
fields fruitful. 2. Prudence and moderation in discourse, and so droping is
opposed to floods, that with violence overflow. 3. ^his phrase ^ignifieth a
continuance in seasonable, prudent and edifying discourse, as Job, 27. 22. My
words droped on them, and Deuteronomy. 31. 2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain: Thus
the lips of the wise feed many, Prove. 10. 21. Obs. 1. A believers words tend to
edification, and are for the true benefit and advantage of others. 2. Every
subject is not the matter of their discourse; but, as the honey, it is excellent
and choice, and that which ministers grace to the hearers. 3. Men's words give
a great proof of what is in them; and when rightly ordered, they are a good
evidence of their love and respect to Christ. 4. A well ordered tongue is a
most commendable thing before Christ, and every word that proceeds from the
mouth, is observed by him. 5. Christ's spouse should be observably different,
as to her words and discourse, from all others. Thy lips, O my spouse (says
he) drop as the honeycomb: Implying, that whatever be the way of others, it
becomes the spouse of Christ, to have her words seasonable, savoury and
edifying.

The second thing here commended, reaches more inwardly, and it is in these
words, honey and milk are under thy tongue: There will be sometimes smooth
words as butter, when there is much venom within; it is not so with Christ's
Bride. By under the tongue, which is the part commended, we understand the
heart or inward-man, as it is distinguished from the bare expression of the
tongue or words, which are only spoken (as we say) from the ^eth forward: So,
Psalm. 66. 17. He was exalted under my tongue, (as it is in the Original) is
expounded in the following verse, by heart-regarding: There was an agreement
betwixt his words and his heatt, without which God would not have accepted his
words. And seeing when it is said of the wicked, that mischief and vanity are
under their tongue, Psa. 10. 7. Romans 3. 13. whereby their deceitful rotten
heart, and the venom that is within is signified; So here must be understood
inward sincerity, and a good frame of heart within, as well as good words
without. The commendation is, that there are milk and honey under her tongue:
It Is almost the same with the former; As her words were edifying, so there was
much edifying matter in her heart, or under her tongue, the honeycomb (as it
were) was there, and it by words droped to others. Milk is added, because it is
also sweet and nourishing. In a word, that which he here points at, is, that
her inward constitution and frame is like a Canaan, flowing with milk and
honey; so fertile and fruitful is Christ's Bride. Here, observe. 1. That Christ
takes not only notice of words, but of what is under the words; the disposition
and frame of the heart, and the thoughts thereof are observed by him. 2. There
is a suitableness often betwixt the heart within, and the words without; when
there is honey under the tongue, then the tongue cannot but drop; for, out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. 3. It Is a most commendable thing
in the believer, when the inner-man is right, in a lively and edifying frame,
and when the heart is watched over, so that no thought enters in, or word goes
forth, but what is edifying. 4. The heart would be furnished with edifying,
profitable purpose and thoughts, as well as the mouth with pertinent and useful
words; and that is as the fountain, from which this must run and flow. 5. They
will feed and edify others best by their words, who feed best upon the most
healthful subjects, and savoury thoughts themselves.

The third thing commended, is, the smell of her garments: Garments are that
which covers our nakedness, and are for decorement externally put upon the
body; sometimes by them is understood Christ's righteousness, whom we are said
to put on, Gal. 3. 27. Sometimes our own inherent holiness, which makes our
way comely before others, and hides our nakedness from them; So, Job. 29. 19.
says, I put on righteousness, and it clothed me. Now here it is to be taken
especially in the last sense (though not only) as setting forth the outward
adorning of her walk with holiness; and this is the third part of her
commendation, distinguished from the other two, which pointed at her words and
thoughts. And so it is the practice of holiness that is here commended, which
is compared to garments, because good works are called the clothing of such as
profess godliness, 1 Timothy 2. 9. and 1. Pet. 3. 3, 4. The smell of them, is
the savor and relish of these good works to others, and also to him; even as
it is said, that Jacob's garments did smell to his father (to which this may
allude) so our holiness being washen in the blood of the Lamb, is very savoury
to him, and is also savoury to others; yea, the smell thereof is as the smell
of Lebanon, which was an hill that abounded with trees and flowers, exceeding
savoury and delightsome: whereas a corrupt conversation, is exceeding
unsavory, as rottenness, and dead men's bones. In sum, this compleats
believers commendation, when their words are edifying, their heart answerable
to their words in true sincerity, and their outward walk adorning to the
Gospel, so as their natural nakedness and pollution appears not in it. Obs. 1.
Where there is true honesty within, it will appear in the fruits of holiness
without. 2. There is no garment or clothing that can adorn or beautify men,
as holiness does a believer. 3. Though outward profession alone be not all,
yet is it necessary for completing the commendation of a believer. 4. Although
good works be not the ground of our relation to Christ, but follows on it, and
though it be not on the account of our works, that the Lord is pleased with us
to justify us; yet are the good works of a believer and of a justified person,
when done in faith, acceptable to God, and an odor and sweet savor to him,
Phil. 4. 18.

Verse. 12. A Garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse: a Spring shut up, a
Fountain sealed.
Having thus summed up her carriage in the former threefold commendation, now
he proceeds both to describe and commend her, by a sevenfold comparison,
wherein (to say so) the rhetoric of our Lords love abounds: Each of them may
point out these three things, 1. They describe somewhat the nature of a
believer, or Christ's Bride. 2. They evidence Christ's love and care, which he
has toward her. 3. They hold forth her duty in reference to her self. We shall
shortly explain them, as they relate to this scope.

In this 12. verse, we have three of these comparisons, whereby she is
described and commended. 1. She is compared to a garden enclosed: A garden is a
plot of ground, separat from other places, for delight and recreation of the
owner, having many flowers in it, and much pains taken on it: So believers are,
1. Set apart by God beside all others in the world, and much pains is taken on
them; The trees in Christ's garden are dug about and dunged, Luke 13. 8. 2.
They are his delight, being separat from others for his own use, with whom he
dwells, in whom he takes pleasure, and amongst whom he feeds, Chap. 6. 2. 3.
They are furnished with many excellent graces, fruits of the Spirit, which are
planted in them as flowers in a garden, Gal. 5. 21. Next, this garden is
enclosed: It Is a special property of gardens to be so; To be enclosed, is by a
wall or hedge to be fenced from the trampling and eating-up of beasts, and also
from the hazard of winds: So, Isa. 5. 2. the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts
(which is his Church) is said to be fenced, a wall is built about it, to defend
it from the danger of beasts, and storms. And this shows, 1. His care of her,
in watching over her, Isa. 27. 23. And, 2. Her watchfulness over her self,
whereby she is not common or accessible to every one; but as she is defended by
his care, so also she has a watch her self at the door of her lips, of her
eyes, of her ears, etc. she is not like a city without walls, obnoxious to
every assault and temptation, but has a hedge of divine protection, which is
as a wall of fire about her to defend her; and also a guard of watchfulness
and holy fear, in the exercise of which the believer has rule over his own
spirit, which ( Prove. 25. 28.) is employed to be as strong walls about a city.

The second similitude wherewith she is compared, is a spring shut up: Springs
were of great price in these hot countries, and served much for making Gardens
fruitful, as is employed, Isa. 58. 11. where it is promised to the Church, thou
shall be as a watered Garden: Hence the righteous is called, like a tree
planted by the rivers of water, Psalm. 1. 3. And on the contrary, the barren
condition of his people is described, Isa. 1. 30. by the similitude of a
Garden, that has no water. In a word, she is not only a Garden, but a spring,
that is furnished with moisture and water, for making her fruitful. More
particularly, by this may be set out the graces of the Spirit, compared to
waters, Joh. 7. 38, 39. and said to become a well of water in these that
believe on Christ, Ioh. 4. 14. for, these graces of the Spirit, and his
influence on them, does keep all things in the believers souls case fresh and
lively, as a spring does make a Garden green and fruitful. Next, this spring is
shut up, for so were springs in these countries, where they were rare, as we
see by Jacobs rolling the stone away, Genesis 29. 8. And this kept the waters from
being corrupted by the Sun, and also from being bemudded by beasts: This
signifies the preciousness of the graces and influences of the Spirit,
wherewith believers are furnished. 2. Pureness and clearness in them, as in
waters that are not bemudded. 3. A care she has to keep them pure from carnal
passions, or fruits of her own spirit, that would bemudd all.

The third comparison is on the matter the same, but adds a further degree to
the former; She is (says he) a fountain sealed: A fountain may signify waters
springing in greater abundance; and sealing does signify not only shuting up,
but securing it by a seal, after it is shut up: So the den of Lions was sealed,
after Daniel was cast into it, Dan. 6. 17. And the stone was sealed, that was
put on Christ's grave, that so it might not be opened by any, but by these that
sealed it. And though there be other uses of sealing, yet we conceive that
which is aimed at here is, 1. To show the Church is not common, but well kept
and sealed, so that none can trouble believers peace without Christ's leave,
who has sealed them by his Spirit to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30, etc.
2. To show Christ's particular right to the Church and her graces, and his
owning of her and them, she bears his seal (as the 144000. Rev. 7. are sealed)
there is none but himself, that has access to these waters; her graces and
fruits are all reserved for him, Chap. 7. 13. 3. It shows (to say so) her
closeness, and resolute watchfulness, so that there is no gaining upon her to
bemudd her condition, without advertancy and observation, more than waters can
be drawn from a sealed fountain, the seal not being broken: Like that phrase,
Prove. 5. 15. Drink out of thine own cistern, let them be thine own, etc. She
has her own distinct fountain, from which show draws influences, and that she
preserves and secures to her self. 4. It shows a kind of sacredness in this
fountain, so that nothing may meddle with it, more than that which is marked
and separate by a seal. In sum, the first comparison shows, that Christ's Bride
or the believer is to be fruitful. The second, what makes her fruitful, the
spring of the Spirit. The third shows her care to keep it clear, and to have it
running and flowing, that she may be fruitful.

Verse. 13. Thy plants are an Orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits,
Camphire, with Spikenard.
Verse. 14. Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cinnamon, with all trees of
Frankincense, Myrrh, and Aloes, with all the chief spices.
The fourth comparison follows, verse. 13, 14. wherein she is compared to an
Orchard (as before to a Garden) planted with diverse and excellent plants. Now,
this includes these three things, which he adds to the former commendation, 1.
That the believer has many graces, he is an Orchard that is planted with many
trees and plants. 2 That the believers graces, as they are many, so they are
various; and therefore trees and spices of diverse sorts are reckoned here. 3.
That the believers graces are excellent for kind, as well as many for number
and variety, they are as Spikenard, Saffron, etc. with all the chief spices.
And as it commends an Orchard, to have many plants, and great variety, and to
want none; so to have them of the best kinds, adds much to the commendation,
when it is fruitful of these. Thus the believer is furnished with many various
graces of the Spirit, as plants planted in his soul, and these of the best
kind, rising from the most excellent seed that can be, the Spirit of Christ.
And so the graces of believers are rare and precious, in respect of any thing
that natural men have, which are but like shrubs in a dry wilderness.

Besides these; we may further observe, 1. That to have fruit and abundance of
fruit, will not prove one to be a believer, except it be choice fruit which he
brings forth. 2. Believers fruits, and the graces that are in them, differ from
the most excellent parts and gifts that can be in natural men, or most refined
hypocrites. 3. It Is excellent and commendable, when all the graces of the
Spirit flow and increase together in the believer.

It Is like, the Holy Ghost may here signify the effects and properties of
diverse graces, by these several spices and fruits; and it may be Solomon
understood the particular signification of every one of them; for, having so
great an insight in natural and spiritual things, it is like he did not
conjecturally, but on knowledge, mention such spices and no others; but we must
hold on the general: They are precious, physical, savory and delectable fruits,
and so are the graces of the Spirit to one that has them, to others they
converse with, and to Christ in respect of his acceptance; they are like an
Orchard or Garden, that abounds with these: This is the scope, wherein we rest.

Verse. 15: A fountain of Gardens, a well of living-waters and streams from
Lebanon.
The fifth, sixth and seventh similitudes, are contained in this verse, wherein
the Lord, following the same scope, further insists and explicats what manner
of fountain this is, which makes the believer so fruitful. 1. She is a fountain
of Garden: A fountain was spoken of, verse. 12. whereby is signified an inward
principle (to say so) or spring, which from within sends forth and furnishes
waters: Here she is called a fountain of Gardens, she was called a Garden,
verse. 12. here a fountain of Gardens in the plural number. By this is holden
forth, 1. The end of grace in a believer, it is given him not only for himself,
but also for the use of others, as the gifts of the Spirit are given to every
one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 11. 7. 2. It shows that believers act and
exercise their graces for others edification, as a fountain that someway is
common for the use of more Gardens, and so it points out what public spirits
they should have, intending the edification of all to whom they can
conveniently communicate their gifts and graces. 3. It shows the abundance of
spirit and life (to say so) wherewith Christ's Bride is furnished, so as she
may communicate for the admonishing, strengthening and edifying of others with
her self, as it is, Romans 15. 14. where believers are said to be full of
goodness, filled with all knowledge, and able to admonish one another.

The sixth similitude is, A well of living waters: This is not only to
difference her from a cistern, that has water, but has no spring in it, but
also to show the nature of the Spirit of grace in believers, it proves
quickening and healing to these that have it: Both these are held forth, Ioh. 4.
14. He that drinks of this water shall never thirst, for it shall be in him a
well of living-water, springing up to eternal life. So is it also, Ioh. 7. 38,
39. where the Spirit of grace is, it will be springing; and grace will never
dry up, where it is true.

The last similitude is, And streams from Lebanon: Which says, that Christ's
Bride is not only a fountain, but also she is a stream: and it holds forth,
1. That grace in her has it is rise from another, though it beget a spring in
her, as if Lebanon sent a stream to a Garden, which did become a spring by it is
constant flowing there. 2. By a stream also is set forth the abundance of
grace in believers, it is in them not as a brook, but as a stream.. Next,
Lebanon was a hill much commended, it is like sweet streams issued from it: It Is
written, that Jordan which watered much of the land, had it is rise and spring
there. In the 5. Chapter, verse. 15. Christ's countenance is compared to
Lebanon, and so here, while the flowing of grace in her is called a stream from
Lebanon, the derivation of grace, and of the Spirit from Christ Jesus is holden
forth; which though it have a seat, and becomes a fountain in the believer, yet
it has it is rise from him, and is kept flowing and springing by him; It Is as a
fountain derived by a stream from Lebanon, and otherwise any spring of grace,
that is in a believer would soon run dry. All these being put together, and
compared with what is before, show, 1. That the believer is fitted by Christ
not only with spiritual life, and a stock of habitual graces, but also with
every thing that may make him lively and fruitful in the exercise of these. 2.
This contrivance of spiritual influence that makes believers fruitful, is a
most lovely and excellent thing. 3. The great commendation of believers is
grounded upon the graces of the Spirit that are in them, and upon the
influences of the same Spirit that comes from Christ to them. 4. Where grace
is, it will have fruits, and be savory in the conversation, in the exercise
thereof. 5. It Is the best evidence of grace, and of Christ's influence and
Spirit, when it appears in the fruits; These prove the believer to be an
Orchard, and a fountain. 6. These graces that make a believer fruitful, have
not their rise in, or from a believer, but from Christ, and the fountain that
is in them, is but a stream that comes from him.

BRIDE.
Verse. 16. Awake, O North Wind, and come, thou South, blow upon my Garden, that
the spices thereof may flow out: let my beloved come into his Garden, and eat
his pleasant fruits.
Christ having now been large in commending the Bride, she steps to in this
verse (as it were, taking the opportunity of his neernesse) and puts up her
desires to him, briefly in two suits, which are grounded on the commendation
that he gives her, and shows what is the great design that she aims at now when
she has Christ's ear; and she follows these suits so, as she acknowledges all
her fruitfulness (for which she is commended) to flow from him, and to depend
on him, who is therefore so much the more to be commended and extolled himself.
In sum, the sense is this, Though I be a garden (says she) and have good
plants, habitually in me, yet will they not bud nor flow, nor can they be
fruitful except the spirit (which is as the stream from Lebanon) blow to make
them so: Therefore, O Spirit come, and let me partake of thy influences and
breathings, that my beloved may have an invitation thereby, to come; and when
come, may be entertained upon his own fruits.

The first petition is, for liveliness and fruitfulness: The second is, for
the beloved's presence, which is the end of the former. And these two, life and
sense, are (as it were) the air that kindly-believers love to breath into. That
both these are the Brides words, may thus be collected, 1. Because they look
prayer-like, and it is more suitable for her to say, come, than for him: yea,
the Spirit being invited to come to the garden, it is clear the party that
speaks has need of his presence: And that it is not said, go, but come, with
reference to the necessity of the party that speaks, does make it evident, that
it cannot be spoken by the Bridegroom, but by the Bride; for, so the phrase
every where, and in the next words, Let my beloved come, Imports, 2. That the
last part of the verse is her suit, none can deny; and there is no reason to
conceive two different parties, seeing both the matter of the suits, and the
manner of speaking, will agree to the same party.

In the first petition, we may consider these two, 1. The thing sought. 2. The
end wherefore that which she seeks and prays for, is held forth, as it were,
in three steps or degrees, in three expressions, awake, O north wind, come thou
south, blow upon my garden. For understanding whereof, we are to look, 1. What
these winds signify. 2. What this garden is. And, 3. What these act, of
awaking, coming and blowing are. By winds often in Scripture is understood the
Spirit of God in his mighty operations, as Ezekiel. 37. 3. and 14. And the special
work and operation of the Spirit is compared to wind, 1. For it is purifying
nature. 2. For it is cooling, com^orting, refreshing power and efficacy. 3. For
it is fructifying virtue, winds being especially in these hot countries, both
exceeding refreshful, and also useful to make trees and gardens fruitful.
Lastly, for it is undiscernable manner of working, as, Ioh. 3. 6. the wind blows
where it lists, etc. yet has his operation real effects with it. And it is
clear that the Spirit, is here intended, because it is the Spirit's blowing that
only can make the spices or graces of a believer to flow, as the wind does the
seeds and flowers in a garden. Next, by north and southwind, are understood the
same Spirit, being conceived and taken up in respect of his diverse operations
(as it is, 1 Cor. 12. 6, 7, 8. etc. and therefore called the seven spirits of
God, Rev. 1. 4.) sometime cooling and in a sharper manner nipping, as the
Northwind, sometimes working in his people more softly and warmly, and in a
still and quiet manner like the South Wind; yet, as both winds are useful, for
the purging and making fruitful of a garden; so are the diverse operations of
the Spirit, to the souls of believers. In a word, hereby is understood, the
different operations of the Spirit, whether convincing and mortifying, or
quickening and comforting, etc. Both which contribute to make her lively and
fruitful, which is the scope of her petition.

2. By garden, is understood the believer, called a garden, verse. 12. and an
orchard, verse. 13. because the believer does abound in diverse graces, as a
garden does in many flowers. And she calls it my garden, as he calls the
plants her plants, that were planted there, verse. 13. and as she called the
vineyard hers, Chap. 1. 6. and 8. 12. which also is his, verse. 11. as also this
garden is called his in the following words, Chap. 6. 1. It Is his by propriety,
as the heritor and puchaser; as also, all these graces in her are hers, as
being the servant that has the oversight of them, and who has gotten them as
talents to trade with for the Masters use. All that we have, viz. a soul,
gifts, graces, etc. are given to us as talents, which we are to d^esse for
bringing fo^th fruit to the owner, as the following words do clear.

3. The actings and workings of the Spirit, are held forth in three words,
which are as so many branches of her petition. The first is, awake. This word
is often used by God's people in dealing with him, awake, put on strength, O
arm of the Lord, etc. Isa. 51. 9. It is not as if the Spirit were at any time
sleeping, but she desires that by some effects, sensible to her, he would let
it be known he is stirring. The second word, come, is to the same purpose: the
Spirit considered in himself, cannot be said to come or go, being every where
present; But this is to be understood, in respect of the effects of his
presence, and so he is said to come and go: Thus while she says, come, the
meaning is, Let me find some sign of thy presence, quickening and stirring my
graces. The last word is, blow upon my garden: Blowing holds forth the
operation, whereby the Spirit produces his effects in believers; It Is not the
Spirit himself, nor the fruits of the Spirit that are in believers, that are
here understood, but the operation of the Spirit, whereby he influenceth, or
(if we may so speak) infuseth them (as God breathed in Adam the breath of life)
and whereby he stirrs, excits and quickens them for acting. The prayer then, is
directed to the Spirit (as, Rev. 1. 14.) considering the Spirit essentially as
the same God with the Father and Son, (in which respect, to pray by name to one
person of the Godhead, is to pray to all the three, who in our worship are not
to be divided) that he would by his operations (which are diverse and various
for believers good) so stir and quicken his own graces in her, that seeing she
is a garden wherein the beloved takes pleasure, her graces for his satisfaction
may be exercised, and made to savor, to the end that he may the more manifest
himself in sweet communion with her.

Next, the end wherefore she presses this suit so much, is, that her spices
may flow out: In a word it is, that she might be fruitful; for, though there
were many graces in her, yet, without the Spirit's breathings and influences,
they would be as unbeaten spices, that did not send forth their smell.

Obs. 1. Although a believer have grace, yet it is not always in exercise;
yea, it may be, and often is interrupted in it is exercise. 2. That the
believers great desire is to be fruitful, and to have grace in exercise, that
they may be delighted in by Christ; It Is not only their desire to have grace
habitually, but actually to have it in exercise. 3. There is nothing can make a
believer lively and fruitful, but the influences of the Spirit: and that same
Spirit that works grace, must quicken it and keep it in exercise. 4. There may
be an interruption of the influences of the Spirit, so as his blowing may in a
great measure cease. 5. The same Spirit has diverse operations, and diverse
ways of working and manifesting himself: sometimes as the South Wind, more
smoothly; sometimes as the North Wind, more sharply. 6. All his operations, how
rough soever some of them may appear, are always useful to believers, and tend
to make them fruitful: And to this end, the most sharp influences, contribute,
as well as the more comfortable. 7. Believers would walk under the conviction
of their own inability to act their graces, and of the necessity of the
Spirit's influences, for drawing them forth to acting and exercise. 8. They who
are thus sensible, may seek after the Spirit for that end: and it is a good
frame in order to the obtaining of life and quickening by the Spirit of Christ,
when the sense of their own inability, their love of fruitfulness, and the
faith of attaining it by his Spirit, puts them to seek after it. 9. Prayer is a
necessary and excellent mean for stirring up one in a secure frame, and for
attaining the Spirit to revive and quicken the work of his grace. 10. Believers
may beg the Spirit to quicken them, when they find themselves lifelesse; as
well as they may ask pardon, when they find themselves under guilt. 11.
Believers will be, and should be as desirous of livelin^sse and fruitfulness,
as of sense: yea, this is the order by which they must come, and should seek to
come to the obtaining of sensible presence. 12. No commendation of any
atainment in believers, nor any clearness of interest, should make them sit
down on their seize, or become negligent; but, on the contrary, should
stir them up to aim at the more liveliness and spiritualnesse, that they may
be answerable to that interest they have in him, and to the commendation he
allows upon them: For which cause, this petition follows immediately upon the
former commendation.

The second petition, which goes along with the former, is for the beloved's
presence, Let my beloved (says she) come into his garden, and eat his pleasant
fruits: Her desire here, is twofold, 1. That Christ would come: This does
respect a greater degree of neernesse, notwithstanding of any thing she
enjoyed. 2. That he would eat his pleasant fruits, that is, familiarly, and
friendly delight in his own graces; and therefore it was she prayed for the
influences of the spirit, that there might be abundance of fruits for his
satisfaction. The way she presses this petition is very kindly, though the
words be short. 1. She presses it from the relation she had to him, Let my
beloved (says she) come: This makes her request and invitation warm and
kindly. 2. From the kind of the fruits; they are pleasant fruits, that is,
delectable in themselves, and acceptable to him. But, 3. Lest this should
derogat from him, and arrogat to her self, she adds his pleasant fruits; they
are his, and that makes them pleasant, so that he cannot but accept them: they
are his being purchased by him, wrought by him, kept in life by him; though
he has made me the garden (says she) wherein they grow (and the garden, as it
has weeds, is hers) yet all the good fruits, in so far as any of them are to
be found in me, are his: In sum, all all my desire is this, 1. To be fruitful,
Then, 2. To have Christ's company, showing himself pleased and present with me.
Obs. 1. Whatever believers have, they neither will, nor can rest upon it; nay,
not in the most eminent measures of holiness attainable hereaway, without
Christ's presence and company. 2. Fruitfulness and livelinessehelp and
contribute much to the enjoyment of Christ's manifestations, Ioh. 14. 21. 23.
3. Believers that aim seriously at the exercise of grace in themselves, may
confidently invite Christ to come, and may expect his presence. 4. All
believers fruits, even when quickened by the Spirit, are Christ's. 5. This would
be acknowledged, and when we are most fruitful, we would look on our fruits,
not as our own, but as his still. 6. Christ will seed or delight in nothing,
but what is his own, and is acknowledged by his people to be so: And there can
nothing, which he will accept of, be set before him but such. 7. Believers end
and design in pursuing liveliness and fruitfulness, is not, and ought not so
much to be their own satisfaction, and the seeding of themselves, as the
satisfaction of Christ, and the pleasing of him; for, that is his eating his
pleasant fruits; which is the Brides great desire and design, when she calls
for the North and South Wind, to blow upon her garden.

CHAP. V.
BRIDEGROOM.
Verse. 1. I am come into my Garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my
Myrrh, with my spice, I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey, I have drunk my
wine with my milk: eat, O Friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O Beloved.
THis Chapter has four parts, according to the parties that successivly speak.
In the first part, verse. 1. Christ speaks: And that it is he who speaks, does
at the first reading appear, they are kindly words, well becoming him, and are
the answer of her suit in the former words: And so depend on them (for the
division of this Song, as also of other Scriptures into Chapters, not being
done by the Penmen of the Holy Ghost, but by the Translators, is not to be
stuck on where there is no question in the matter) she desired him, verse last,
of the former Chapter, to come, and now in this verse, Behold I am come, says
he, etc. In it we have, 1. His yielding to come. 2. His carriage when he is
come, as to himself: And also his intimation of both. 3. His invitation to
others, which may be also a part of his carriage when come, taken up in three.
1. He makes himself welcome; and, 2. Others, 3. He intimats it.

The title being spoken of formerly, the first thing is, I am come into my
Garden (as thou desired) my sister, etc. Hence observe, 1. Christ has
particular and peculiar ways, of coming to his people, and of nearness with
them, even as he has of withdrawing from them. 2. There are some peculiar
times, wherein he is more near than at other times. 3. Sometimes he will not
only draw near to his people, but let them know he is near, and put them out of
doubt that he is come.

Again, if we look to this as the answer of the former prayer, we will see, 1.
Christ is easily invited and prevailed with to come to his people; and
sometimes there will not be long betwixt their prayer and his answer, it is the
very next word. 2. Few words may be an effectual prayer to Christ (as the
former suit was) a breathing or sigh will not be rejected by him, where
sincerity is. 3. Christ will sometimes not only answer prayer in the thing
sought, but he will intimate, and let his people know that he has answered it.

More particularly, we may consider the answer, 1. As it agrees with her
prayer, 2. As it ^ems defective. 3. As it is beyond it.

First, It agrees fully to her last suit, she prayed he would come and eat, he
comes and eats. Obs. Christ will carve and shape out sometimes his answer, even
according to his peoples desires, as if they had the power of prescribing their
own answers. For, when our prayers make for our good, Christ will alter nothing
in them, but will grant them in the very terms in which they are put up.

Again, I say there seems to be somewhat defective, there is no return recorded
of the first suit for liveliness; and her drousie, lazy case, verse. 2, 3.
gives ground to think, that that petition was not as yet answered. Obs. 1.
Christ may be particular in answering one petition of the same prayer, when yet
he may for a time suspend an answer to another, in it self as acceptable to
him. Yea, 2. He may answer the last prayer, and seem to pass over somewhat
formerly sought for.

Finally, compare this answer with her last suit, he does more than she
required; for, she desired him only to come and eat, but he comes, eats,
gathers, etc. Christ will often stuff in more in the answer, than was in the
desire of his people; and will do above what they asked or thought, Ephesians. 3. 20.

Next, his carriage (as to his own satisfaction) is in three steps, 1. I have
gathered my Myrrh, with my spice: Myrrh and spice signify (as has been often
said) the graces that grow in believers, who are this Garden: His gathering of
them is his pulling (to say so) and dressing of them, as Gardeners do their
herbs and fruits, for making them useful; Here ere he eat he gathers,
signifying, that as the spices are his, so he must prepare them for himself;
She cannot prepare what provision Christ gives her, till he do it: She cannot
put forth to exercise the grace she has received, till he breath on it.

2. I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey: When he has prepared, he eats:
By honeycomb and honey, is signified the same thing (as Chap. 4. verse. 11.)
because as that was savory and wholesome food in these days and places, so are
believers graces a feast to Christ.

3. I have drunk my wine with my milk: Milk was for nourishing, wine for
refreshing; Christ mentions drinking of both, to show, how abundantly he was
satis^^, (...), and fully feasted, both for meat and drink; and how heartsomely
he entertained himself on it, as a friend that thinks himself very welcome.
Consider here, 1. Meat and drink are mentioned; Christ will not want
entertainment where he is, he will invite and treat himself, where he gets
welcome: Where Christ gets welcome, he will never complain of the want of fare,
he has there a feast. 2. He accepts all heartsomly; as Christ is easily
invited, so is he cheerful and pleasant company: where he comes, he takes what
there is to give him, he is not sour and ill to please. 3. There is Myrrh and
spice, milk and honey and wine; which is not only to show that there are
diversities of graces, but that Christ casts at nothing of grace that is found
in his people, he takes the milk as well as the wine; he makes much of the
weaker grace, as well as of the most lively. 4. He gathers and eats; As Christ
provides food for himself, so (to speak with reverence) he is his own Cook,
none can dress dishes for Christ, but himself. 5. Where he gets the most
serious invitation to come, there may be much unpreparednesse for him when he
comes, until he right it, and prepare his own entertainment himself. 6. Though
things be not prepared for him, yet sometimes he will not suspend his coming on
that, nor will it ma^^ his cheerfulness in his carriage, when he comes and is
made welcome, He dresseth and eats. 7. He intimates all this: Sometimes
Christ may be well-pleased with believers, and be feasting himself on their
graces, and yet they not discern it, nor believe it, until he intimate it and
make it known to them: And therefore that their joy may be full, he graciously
condescends now and then to put them upon the knowledge of it, and persuades
their hearts of it.

The last thing, is his invitation to his Friends to eat with him, which is
pressed, 1. By kindly compellations, Friends and Beloved. 2. By three words,
eat, drink, and that abundantly. By Friends and Beloved, are understood
believers, there are none other capable of these titles, and it was she that
prayed, that is here understood by Friends and Beloved, and so he answers her.
Hence we see, the believer is (...) Friend, as Abraham, Jam. 2. 23. and
Lazarus, Joh. 11. 11. were called. It imports, 1. A privilege on the believers
part, to be admitted to special league of friendship with him, when others are
slaves or enemies. 2. A special friendlinesse in Christ's carriage to them;
familiarly, freely telling them all his mind, so far as is needful for them to
know, Ioh. 15. 15. and lovingly manifesting himself to them, as one does to his
friend. 3. It holds out a duty lying on the believer, to carry friendly to
Christ and them that are his, Ioh. 15. 14. A man that has friends must show
himself friendly (Prove. 18. 24.) to them: And seeing he trusts them, and expects
no ill from them, they would be like Christ's friends, answerable to their
trust. They are also beloved, the title that the husband gives the wife, for
evidencing special love: All Christ's friends are beloved, and believers are
(whatever they be as to their desert, or in the eyes of men) both friends and
beloved: No friend has such bowels for his friends, as Christ has for his
friends. Friends and beloved are in the plural, 1. To show he excludes no
believer, but includes all, and that with the same seriousness he invites and
makes them all welcome to feast with him, whether they be strong or weak. 2.
Because his mercy to one may be cheering to many, and he allows and would have
others of his people to be cheerful, because of his kindness and mercy
manifested to one.

His intertaining of them is held out in three words. 1. Eat, that declares his
desire to have believers partaking with him in the soul-refreshing blessings of
his purchase, by their reflecting act of faith comforting themselves in the
privileges, promises and mercies allowed on them. Obs. 1. The same feast, is a
feast to Christ and believers both. 2. Where he is cheerful, they should be so
also. The second word is, drink: He drinks, that is, satisfies himself as fully
feasted, to wit, with the graces of his people (such is the complacency he has
in them, when he stirs them up to any liveliness of exercise) and he allows
them in this case to be refreshed, satisfied and feasted also: It becomes them
to drink when he drinks, and bids them drink. The third word is, drink
abundantly: that shows the largeness of his allowance, and the heartinesse of
his welcome, as a gladsome Host, so cherishes he his ghuests; and all this is
(...) be understood spiritually, of the joy and comfort which he allows on his
people, even to be filled with the Spirit, in opposition to wine, Ephesians. 5. 18.
which is more satisfying, cheering and refreshing to the inner-man, than wine
is to the body. The scope and dependence, points out these things. 1. There is
much notable soul-refreshing to be had in Christ's company; wherever he is,
there is a feast, Rev. 3. 20. 2. He allows his people largely to share of it;
yea, it is his will that all should liberally improve this allowance, he
wills it. 3. If our joy run in a spiritual channel, there cannot be excess
in it, if it were to be drunken with it, so as to forget our proverty, and to
remember our misery no more. 4. Christ is never fully satisfied at his own
feast, till he get his friends feasted and cheered also: He eats not his
morsels alone, but is desirous to communicate his good things, according as they
are communicable. 5. Christ's preparing and dressing is rather for the
welcoming of his friends, than for himself I have gathered, eat ye, says he.
6. Christ is a most heartsome distributer to others, and intertainer of his
friends: There needs be no sparing to eat where he invites. 7. Believers, even
Christ's friends, needs invitation, by reason of unbelief, sense of
unworthiness (which makes them sinfully modest) and the dullness of their
spiritual appetite; and therefore they will need (to say so) bidding and
entreaty oftentimes to eat their meat, and to cheer themselves in him, and he
will not let them want that. 8. Wherever Christ is present, there is a feast
with him for them that are in his company, he sups with them, and makes them
sup with him; and all is his own, and of his own dressing. 9. It Is a gift of
Christ's mercy, not only to have grounds of consolation, but to be enabled to
comfort our selves in these grounds; (as in outward things, it is one gift to
have, and another to have the cheerful use of that which we have) for, the
believer may have the one when he wants the other; and when he has the one, to
have the other added is a double mercy, as the exhortation, eat, drink, etc.
imports: 10. It is not every one who is Christ's friend, nor every one that
has that honor to comfort and feast themselves with him; it is a privilege
that is peculiar to them who are his friends indeed.

BRIDE.
Verse. 2. I sleep, but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that
knocks, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my
head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.
From verse. 2. unto the ninth (which is the second part of the Chapter) the
Bride speaks, and sets down a very complex piece of her condition, which we
take up in these three. 1. Her condition is shortly set down. 2. The mutual
carriage of the Bridegroom and Bride are recorded; wherein (as it were) grace
and loving kindness in him, and unkindnesse in her, are wrestling together for
a time. 3. The out-gate, and the way how she attained it, by several steps on
his side, and hers, are particularly insisted on from verse. 4. with what
followed thereupon.

Her case is in short, I sleep, but my heart waketh, or (as it is in the
Original) I sleeping, my heart waking: It Is made up of contraries, and seeming
paradoxes; she is distinguished from her heart, and the sleeping of the one is
opposed to the waking of the other: Both this sleeping and waking are
spiritually to be understood; The first signifies a ceasing from spiritual
duties, or a suspension of the acting of spiritual life, by arising of some
inward corruption, that dulls and binds up the spiritual senses, as in natural
sleep the external senses are dulled and bound up: So 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. and Romans
13. 11. Let us not sleep, but watch and be sober. This is a further degree of
spiritual distemper, beyond what was Chap. 3. 1, 2. where she was on bed, and
yet seeking, but here she sleeps and lies still, as we see, verse. 3. It
imports, 1. An interruption of liveliness and actual exercising of grace. 2.
An indisposition and laziness in the frame of the spirit, added to that. 3. A
sort of acquiescing and resting securely in that indisposition, with a
loathnesse to stir and be interrupted, such as uses to be in the bodily sleep,
and such as appears to be here from the following verse: It Is sleepiness, or
to be given to sleep, such as the sluggard is subject unto, who sleeps
excessively, and out of due time. This I that sleeps, is the believer, but
considered in so far as unregenerat; as, Romans 7. 18. I know, that in me (that
is, in my flesh) there dwells no good thing: For, as the believer has two
different natures, which have opposite actings; so are they considered as two
different persons. Hence in that, Romans 7. 1, yet not I, etc. by which Paul as
renewed, is distinguished from himself as unrenewed. By waking, is understood,
some liveliness and sensiblenesse, or at least life, in opposition to the
former deadness and dullness, as, Romans 13. 11. It Is high time to awake: And, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. Let us watch, and be sober; which is opposite to that spiritual
drowsiness, wherein we are scarce at our selves. My heart, looks to the
renewed part, which is often called the Spirit, that lusts against the flesh,
as, Gal. 5. 17. and the law in the mind, Romans 7. circumcision in the heart,
Romans 2. 25. the new heart in the Covenant, Ezekiel. 36. In sum, it is this, Things
are not right with me, and indisposition to duty or lifelessnesse in it, is
great (as it is with one that is in a sleep) yet even then there is some inward
stirring of life, appearing in conviction of judgment, challenges, purposes,
protestations of the inward-man, against this dead and lazy frame, as not
delighting in it, but displeased with it, etc. wherein the new nature wrestles
and yields not, nor gives it self leave to consent to it, although it can act
nothing, at least in a lively way, under this condition: Thus she is sleeping,
because she acts nothing; yet, the heart is waking, because it is kept from
being involved in that security, though it be bound up, and overpowered with
corruption, that it cannot win to act according to the light and inclination
that it has within. Hence observe, 1. That the believer has two different and
opposite natures and principles within him, leading him diverse ways; the
carnal and sleeping I, and the renewed and waking heart. 2. They may be both at
one time acting oppositly, the one lusting against the other, Gal. 5. 17. 3.
Sometimes corruption may prevail far over believers that have grace, and lay
them (though not quite dead, yet) fast asleep for a time, and mar in a great
measure the exercise of their grace. 4. Believers at their lowest, have life in
them, and (by reason of their new nature) are not totally and fully involved in
their security and backsliding conditions. 5. There may be some inward
apprehending of our hazard, and dangerous condition, when it is very sad and
low, so as believers may know it is not right with them, and yet (as it is here
with the Bride) may continue under it, and lie still. 6. Spiritual laziness
and security is incident to the strongest believers: The wise virgins may
slumber, and sleep, Matthew. 25. 7. Yea, after the greatest manifestations, and
often on the back of the fullest intimations of Christ's love, and the most
sweet invitations they have from him, and most joyful feastings with him, they
may be thus overtaken, as the words preceding bear out: The Disciples ^ell in
this distemper, that same night after the Lord's Supper. 8. Believers may fall
over and over again in the same condition of sinful security, even after they
have been rouzed and raised out of it, as this, being compared with chap. 3.
will clear. 9. The more frequently believers (or any other) relapse in the same
sin, they will go the greater length readily in it, and by falling more
dangerously, be more hardly recovered than formerly: Now she sleeps, and when
put at, will not rise, but shifts, which is a further step than was chap. 3.
10. Lazy fits of indisposition and omissions of duty, do more frequently steal
in upon believers, than positive out-breakings and commissions, and they are
more ready to please themselves in them, and to ly still under them. 11.
Believers should be so acquaint with their own condition, as to be able to tell
how it is with them, whether as to their unrenewed or renewed part; So here, I
sleep, but my heart waketh. 12. Believers in taking up their condition, would
advert both to their corruptions and graces; and in their reckoning, would put
a distinction betwixt these two, otherwise they will misreckon on the one side
or other: They would not reckon themselves wholly by the actings of nature,
lest they disclaim their graces; nor yet their renewed part, lest they forget
their unrenewed nature; but they would attribute every effect in them to it is
own cause and principle, where-from it proceeds. 13. It Is good for a believer
when overcome with corruption, and captivate by it, to disallow and disown it
from the heart, as not allowing what they do, and to present this to God, as a
protestation entered against their prevailing lusts. In some sense a believer
may both condemn himself as sinful, and absolve himself as delighting in the
law of God, at one and the same time; and where he allows not his corruption;
but positively dissents from it, he may disclaim it as not being his deed.

This being her case, follows the Bridegrooms carriage: Which is expressed in
the rest of verse. 2. and her carriage (employed only in this verse) is more
fully expressed, verse. 3. His carriage holds out the great design he drives,
and that is to have access to her, and to have her roused up: for attaining of
which, 1. He does something, and that is, knocks at the door. 2. He endures and
suffers dew and drops in the cold night, and yet does not give over. 3. He
speaks, and uses many persuasive arguments for that end: All which she
observes, and yet lies still. It is in sum, as if a loving husband, that is
shut out by a lazy, yet a beloved wife, would knock, call, and waiting on
still, use many arguments to persuade her to open; so does our Spiritual
Bridegroom, wait upon believers whom he loves, to have them brought again to
the lively exercise of faith in him, and to a frame of spirit meet for
communion with him. To take the words as they ly, there is, 1. The Brides
observation (as it were in her sleep) of the Beloveds calling at the door. 2.
There is set down his call. 3. The arguments he uses for prevailing with her.
By knocking is understood the inward touches of the Word upon the conscience,
when the efficacy of the Spirit goes along, which raps at the Brides heart,
as knocking does at a door, and is the mean of awaking her from spiritual
sleep, as knocking at a door is a mean of awaking from bodily sleep: So it is,
Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock: In which sense the word is
compared to a hammer, Jer. 23. 29. It takes in these three, 1. A seriousness
in him that so knocks. 2. A power and efficacy in the word, that some-way
affects the heart, and moves it. 3. It implies some effect it has upon the
heart, as being somewhat affected with that touch; Therefore it is his voice or
word that not only calls, but knocks, implying some force it had upon her:
By voice is understood the Word, as Chap. 2. 8. 10. yet, as backed with the
Spirit and power, and as commended thereby to the conscience, 1 Cor. 2. 4. and
convincingly demonstrated to be the very voice of Christ; yet, so as rods
inward and outward, and other means may have their own place, being made use of
by him, yet still according to the word. His great end for which he knocks, is
in that word open; which, as it implies her case, that her heart was in a great
measure shut upon him, and that by some carnal indisposition he was kept out of
it, and was not made welcome; So it requires the removing of all that stopped his
way, and the casting open of the heart by says to receive his Word, and by
love to receive himself: and in these two especially, this opening does
consist, 1. In the exercise of faith, Act. 16. 14. The Lord opened the heart of
Lydia, and that is expounded, she gave heed unto these things which Paul spoke.
2. An enlarging and warming of the affections toward him (which ever
comprehends the former) as, Psalm 81. 10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill
it: What that is, the refusal following declares, my people would not hear,
(that is, believe) Israel would none of me, or loved not me (as the words in
the Original import) they cared not for me, they desired me not, and would not
quite their Idols, as in the foregoing words, verse. 9. is mentioned. 3. There
resulteth from these two a mutual familiarity, as Rev. 3. 20. If any man will
open, I will come in and sup with him, and he with me. This opening then,
imports the removing of every thing that marred fellowship with Christ, and the
doing of every thing that might dispose for enjoying of it, as awaking, rising,
etc. all which follows in the 4. verse. and while he commands to open, he calls
for the entertaining of fellowship with him, which now is by her drowsiness
interrupted: Which two parts of the verse put together, hold forth, 1. That
Christ's own Bride may shut the door on him, and so make a sad separation
betwixt him and her. 2. Christ's word is the great and ordinary external mean,
whereby he knocks at men's hearts, and which he makes use of for begetting faith
in them. 3. That in a believers secure condition, there will be sometimes more
than ordinary convictions, stirrings and motions by the Word. 4. That the Word
of God, backed with power, will reach the securest heart and affect it. 5. That
believers will discern Christ's voice and call, when their condition is very
low. 6. It will be refreshful to them to have him knocking; she looks on it as
a kindly thing, even to have his knock bearing-in convictions, challenges, or
somewhat else on her; though it please not her flesh, yet in as far as she is
renewed, it will be the voice of her Beloved to her. 7. Christ has a way of
following his own, even when they are become secure; and sometimes then, will
make his call, challenges or convictions pursue more hotly and pressingly than
at other times. 8. When Christ knocks and presses hardest, it is for our own
good, and it is a token of love in him to do so; for, there is nothing more
deplorable, than when he faith to one under indisposition, and in an evil case,
let him alone. 9. When Christ calls by his Word, it is then our duty to open to
him, and to receive him; and this can no more be slighted without sin, than
prayer, mortification and other commanded duties; can be neglected or slighted
without sin. 10. Christ may call very pressingly, and his Word may have some
work on the conscience and affections of hearers, and they be some-way affected
with it, and yet the Word be rejected, and the heart not made open to Christ;
as here she sleeps still notwithstanding; and the following verse confirms it.
11. There are some operations of the Spirit, which though they be more than a
common work on the generality of hearers, yet are not saving, and may be, and
often are, even by believers frustrate for a time, and by others for ever; for,
this knocking gets a refusal, verse. 3. So deceiving, beguiling and dangerous
are common motions to rest on, when the finger of gracious Omnipotency is not
applied, as verse. 4. 12. Christ's design when he knocks fastest, is friendly,
and yet it sometimes says, things are not right: This is the end of all his
knocking and speaking to a people, and then it is plainest when he speaks most
powerfully.

2. The way how Christ presses this, is, 1. By showing who he was, it is me,
open to me: There can be no greater commendation given to Christ, nor weightier
argument used for him, than to make it known that it is he, the Husband, Lord,
etc. whose the house is, and to whom entry by right from the wife ought to be
given. 2. By giving her loving titles, and claiming her as his in many
relations, as my sister, love, dove; and (which was not mentioned before)
undefiled is added, that is, my perfect one, or upright sincere one, as it is
often rendered. These titles given now, and so many at once, show, 1. That
believers when secure, have very much need of the Spirit to rouse and stir them
up: Souls are not easily persuaded to receive Christ. 2. There is wonderful
love in Christ, that condescends so to entreat his people when in such a secure
case: even then he changes not her name, no more than if all things were in
good case; for, our relation to him, depends not on our case. 3. Christ will
sometimes very lovingly deal, even with secure souls in his way, for obtaining
entry, and persuading them to open to him, and sometimes will apply the most
refreshful Gospel-offers and invitations, and use the most kindly compellations
for that end. 4. Christ sometimes will overlook the lazy distempers of his
people, and not always chide with them for these, but give them their wonted
styles notwithstanding. 5. The kind dealing of Christ to his people, will ever
prove love to be on his side, but will not always prove that the persons so
dealt with are presently in a good condition; for, he may accept their persons,
and speak comfortably as to their state, although he approve not their present
condition, as here. 6. We may see that Christ's love is not founded on our
merit, nor is up and down according to our variable disposition, but he
prevents both in his dealing with his people. These titles being made use of as
a motive to answer his call, and to open to him, show, 1. That the persuasion
of Christ's love in souls, is a main thing to make way for their entertaining
of him. 2. That it is a shame for a believer so beloved of Christ, to hold him
without at the door, when he knocks to be in. Grace would make a heart to
blush, and in a manner look it out of countenance, that would refuse his
kindness.

The third and great argument, is, for my head is filled with dew, and my locks
with the drops of the night: Very shame might prevail with the wife, when the
Husband uses such an argument as this: It Is even as if a husband, standing
long without doors in a tempestuous night, should use this motive with his wife
to persuade her to let him in, it will be very prejudicial and hurtful to my
health, if thou open not unto me; for, I have stood long without: This may no
doubt be presumed to be a very strong and prevalent argument with a loving
wife; yet, it gets but a poor and very unsuitable answer from the Bride. By
dew, drops and nightime, are understood, afflictions, external crosses and
lowness: So, Daniel 4. that King is said to be wet with the dew of heaven in
his low condition, as having no house to shelter himself in, but being
obnoxious to all changes and injuries of weather: and Jacob mentions it as a
part of the toilsome labor, that he had with Laban, I did endure the heat of
the Sun in the day, and the cold in the night, that is, he was ever watchful,
and spared not himself for the hurt of either day or night: Here Christ's
spiritual sufferings also may come in, whereby he made himself obnoxious to the
Fathers wrath and curse, that he might have access to communion with his
people; and the account that he has of being kept out by his people, as a new
piece of his suffering, or as a painful reviving of the remembrance of his old
sufferings. The scope is to show, that as a kindly husband, will so deal with a
beloved wife, and expect to prevail, being put to this strait; so does Christ
with his people, being no less desirous of a room in their hearts, and being
as much troubled by their unbelief, as any man is when put to stand in the cold
night, under dew and rain at his own door. This way of arguing says, 1. That
the believer, as such, loves and respects Christ, and would not have him
suffering, as a kind wise would be loath to hazard her husbands health. 2. That
Christ expounds her so, even when she is lazy and keeps him out, otherwise this
argument would be of no force, nor would he have used it; He will see much evil
(to speak so) ere he notice it in a believer; and is not suspicious, even when
occasions are given. 3. Believers are often exceeding unanswerable to the
relation that is betwixt Christ and them, and may suffer Christ to stand long
waiting without. 4. It affects Christ much (and is a suffering to him, and a
kind of putting him to open shame, and a crucifying again of the Son of God) to
be kept out of hearts by unbelief, and there can be no pardonable sin that has
more and greater aggravations than this; for, it is cruelty to kind Jesus
Christ. 5. Believers, even when Christ is in good terms with them, may fall in
this fault. 6. Christ is a most affectionat suitor, and patient Husband, that
thus waits on even when he is affronted, and gives not over his kind suit: Who
would bear with this, that he bears with and passes by, and continues kindly
notwithstanding? Many strange and uncouth things are comported with, and
over-looked betwixt him and believers without hearing, that the world could not
digest. 7. Out Lord Jesus has not spared himself, nor shunned sufferings, for
doing of his people good: Jacob's care of, and suffering for Labans flocks, and
Nebuchadnezzar his humiliation was nothing to this. 8. The love of Christ is
manifested in nothing more for his people than in his sufferings for them, and
in his patient on-waiting to have the benefits thereof applied to them. 9.
Christ's sufferings, and his affectionat way of pleading from them, should melt
hearts in love to him, and in desire of union with him, and will make the
refusal exceeding sinful and shameful* where it is given; O so strong arguments
as Christ has, to be in on the hearts of his people! and how many things are
there, to plead for that?

Verse. 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet,
how shall I defile them?
The Brides answer is here set down, but O! how unsuitable to that which was
his carriage? He stands, she lies; He without, she within; He calls friendly;
she ungrately shifts it, at best: As if a wife should answer her husband so
calling, I am now in bed, and have put off my clothes, and washen my feet, and
so have composed my self to rest, I cannot rise, it would hurt me to rise: So
does the Bride thus unreasonably, and absurdly put back this fair call, upon a
twofold shift, both which are spiritually to be understood, as the sleep and
opening, formerly mentioned, were. In it consider, 1. The answer. 2. The manner
of it. 3. The particular grounds which she lays down to build it on. And, 4.
The faults of this reasoning of hers, which at first may be concluded to be
unsound. The answer in general, is a denial, as the event clears; and it is like
that, Luke 11. 7. I am in bed, and my children with me, trouble me not, etc.
Yea, how can I put them on? These words (being the interrogatinonot of one
doubting, but of one shifting) imply a vehehement denial, as if it were a most
unreasonable and impossible thing for her to give obedience to what was called
for: which shows, that Christ may get most undiscreet refusals to his fairest
calls: Which refusal is thus aggreged, 1 It was against most powerful and plain
means: The most powerful external Ordinances may be frustrat even Christ
himself in his Word, when he preached in the days of his flesh, had not
always success. 2. It was against her light, she knew it was Christ's call:
Even believers may fit challenges against their light, and sin wittingly
through the violence of tentations, though not wholly willingly. 3. She had
invited him by prayer, Chap. 4. 16. yet now lies still: Which lets us see, 1.
That believers in their carriage, are often unsuitable to their prayers: There
may be, and is often a great discrepancy betwixt these. And, 2. Often believers
may be more desirous of an opportunity of meeting with Christ, or any other
mercy, when they want it, than watchful to make the right use of it, when they
have gotten it.

Her way is to give some reasons for her refusal, as if she could do no
otherwise, and were not to be blamed so much for her shifting of Christ, as
the words how can I, etc. import. Observe, 1. The flesh will be bruidy and
quick in inventing shifts for maintaining of it self, even against the clearest
convictions and duties. 2. It Is ill to debate or reason a clear duty, often
Satan and the flesh gets advantage by it. 3. Folks are oft-times very partial
in examining their own reasons, and are hardly put from their own grounds once
laid, although they be not solid; and the most foolish reasons will be
convincing to a spiritual sluggard, who in fostering his ease, seems wiser to
himself, than one who can render the most concludent arguments, and strongest
reasons to the contrary, Prove. 26. 16. The opening of the particular reasons
will clear this; The first is, I have put off my coat, and the conclusion is,
how can I put it on? Putting off the clothes is an evidence (...) betaking
themselves to rest, as keeping them on, is a sign of watching, as in Nehemiah
4. 23. None of us put off clothes, (...) to washing; Hence keeping on of the
clothes is borrowed, to set out spiritual watchfulness, and hiding of
spiritual nakedness, as Rev. 16. 15. Blessed is he that watches and keeps
his garments, lest he walk naked: And on the contrary putting off of clothes,
signifies not only a spiritual drowsiness, but a high degree of it; as having
put off, and fallen from that tenderness and watchfulness in her walk,
wherewith she was clothed, Chap. 4. 11. and is now somewhat settled in her
carnal ease and security. From this she argues, how shall I put it on? The
force of the reason may be three ways considered, 1. As it imports a
difficulty in the thing, how shall I do it? O it is difficult! 2. As it imports
an averseness to it, in her self: It stands against her heart, as a seeming
unreasonable thing, as Genesis 39. How shall I do this great wickedness, etc.? 3.
A sort of shame may be in it, I am now out of a posture, and I think shame to
rise, and to be seen: Which shows, 1. That it is hard to raise one that has
fallen into security. 2. To lazy souls every thing looks like an insuperable
difficulty, their way to duty is as an hedge of thorns, Prove. 15. 19. and there
is a lion in their streets, and sometimes, as it were, even in the house-floor,
when any duty is pressed upon them that would rob them of their carnal ease,
Prove, 26. 13. and 22. 13. 3. It Is much for one in a secure frame to wrestle
with their own indisposition, it is a weariness then to take the hand out of
the bosom, Prove. 26. 15. 4. It Is not a commendable shamefastness, but must
needs be a very sinful modesty, that keeps one from duty: It was indeed more
shameful to lie still, than to rise.

Her second ground is of the same nature, I have washed my feet: washing the
feet, fitted and prepared for rest; men's feet in these countries, being, by
walking barefooted, someway stiffened, beaten and bruised, which by washing
were eased and refreshed, as we may see, Genesis 18. 19. in Abraham and Lots
carriage to the Angels, supposing them to be men: So here, it is, I have fitted
and composed my self for rest, as being wearied with the painfulnesse of holy
duties, and now she cannot endure to stir her self toward these, as if that
would again defile her: In (...) reasoning, there are these faults, 1. That she
does at all offer to debate a clear duty, this makes way for the snare. 2. That
she interprets the study of holiness, and communion with Christ to be a
trouble, and carnal security to be an ease: There will be strange
misrepresentations sometimes, both of our faults and failings, and of Christ's
worth and excellency, which have much influence on our deadness and sinful
distempers. 3. She makes one sinful action the cause of her continuance in
another: There is often a connection amongst ^ins, and one draws on another; the
premises that the flesh lays down as principles, will still bear conclusions
like themselves: It Is unsound and unsafe reasoning from these. 4. That which
should stir and persuade her to rise, to wit, that she was not right, she makes
a motive of it to strengthen her self in her lazy inclination to lie still;
Carnal sense draws conclusions most unreasonable in every thing, and tends
still to foster it self, whereas faith and tenderness would reason the quite
contrary. 5. She puts too honest a name upon her security, and calls it the
washing of her feet, which was indeed the polluting of them: Fairding and
plaistering over our own evils, is a great fostering of security, yet too
common; as to call unbelief humility, presumption faith, security peace, etc.
We give to sin the name of virtue, and then without a challenge maintain it;
which is a degree of putting darkness for light, and bitter for sweet, and a
sort of calling evil good, which brings under the hazard of the pronounced woe,
Isa. 5. 20. 6. She fails here, that she expects more ease in lying still, than
in opening to Christ, whereas it is but the flesh that is troubled at Christ's
presence; but, solid satisfaction is only to be had in his company: Flesh has
ever secret fears of Christ's company, as if it were intolerable, irksome and
troublesome to be a Christian in earnest; and these whisperings, and wicked
suggestions of the flesh, may have sometimes too much weight with a believer.
7. She mistakes Christ's word, which pressed that he might be admitted, who was
a most loving husband, and had suffered so much in waiting for entry; but, she
states the matter otherwise, if she that was at ease should trouble her self,
that so the shift might seem reasonable; Though Christ be not directly and
downright refused, and the heart dar not under convictions adventure on that,
yet by opposing respect to our selves to him, and by shifting to open to him
when he knocks, many are guilty upon the matter of refusing and slighting
Christ himself, when they think they slight not him, but would only shun
something that is troublesome to themselves: These words are not so to be
looked on, as if explicitly believers would so argue, but that in their lazy
and drousie spiritual distempers there is such arguing on the matter, and such
or such like shifts prevails often to make them keep out Christ, when directly
they dar not refuse him; which does evidence the power and subtility of
corruption, even in a believer, and the greatness of the love of Christ that
passes it by.

If it should be asked, Why is this sinful distemper of hers registrat, and put
upon record? Why say, 1. For her own good; It Is profitable for believers to
mind and record their miscarriages to Christ, as well as his kind dealings with
them. 2. It Is for the honor of the Bridegroom, whose love appears and shines
most brightly, when it is set for-against her miscarriage; believers would
acknowledge their infirmities and failings, as well as their mercies and
graces, when it may make to the Bridegrooms commendation. 3. It Is for the
edification of others; often one believers infirmities, through Gods blessing,
may prove edifying to others, for making them watchful, and bidding them stand,
and sustaining of them when fallen: The infirmities of Job under his fore
trials, have strengthened many, as his patience has convinced them.

In sum, this reasoning is indirect and frivolous, showing in the general, 1.
That men incline to cover their secret misregard of Christ, as if it were
rather tenderness to themselves, than indiscreet disrespect to him, yet he
expounds it so: as, Mat. 22. 5. when they allege it as a necessary excuse,
that they behoved to wait on their farm and merchandise, he interprets it, they
made light of the invitation to the marriage of the Kings Son. 2. It shows,
that the shifts whereby men put back Christ, are exceeding frivolous, there can
be no strong nor relevant reason alleged for our slighting Christ, and for our
ruining our selves in slighting of him in the offers of his grace in the
Gospel; although corrupt nature exercise and rack it is invention, to find out
reasons to plead our excuse, yet when such reasonings are examined, they will
not abide the trial. 3. That when men's hearts are in a declining frame, very
trivial and weightlesse arguments will prevail to make them keep out Christ;
and for as trivial as they are, they would prevail even with believers, did not
grace refute them, and make way for his entry into the soul.

Verse. 4. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels
were moved for him.
There follow; in this fourth verse, a second step of Christ's carriage, with
the effects of it: He gives not over, but puts in his finger, and powerfully
makes application to her, by a saving work of the Spirit upon her heart, which
has the desired and designed effect following upon it; she rises and opens.

In this we have, 1. The mean applied and made use of. 2. The manner of
application. (for that the worker is the Beloved himself, is clear) The mean in
his hand, which in Scripture signifies three things, when attributed to God,
1. His Omnipotency, whereby he does what he pleases, Exodus 15. 6. Thy right
hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power: And, Exodus 8. 19. it is said, This is
the finger of God, that is, his power. 2. It Is taken for the Spirit, or the
common operations of the Spirit, whereby miracles, beyond the power of man are
wrought; as by comparing Matthew. 12. 28. with Luke 11. 20. will be clear. 3.
It Is taken for the saving work of the Spirit, applied for the working of faith
in the elect at the first, or renewing and confirming of it afterward in
believers; as, Acts 11. 21. The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great
number believed. This is it which is pointed at, Isa. 53. 1. where, Who has
believed? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? are made of equal
extent: And so especially it is to be taken here, as the scope clears, to wit,
for the immediate powerful work of the Spirit, made use of in the working of
faith, as a key is made use of for the opening of a door.

The way of applying this mean, is, he put in his hand by the hole of the door:
where (following the similitude of a husbands standing at a shut door, and not
geting entry) he shows what he did, when knocking prevailed not; to wit, he
took an effectual way of opening it himself, which is ordinary by putting in
the key, or somewhat else at the hole of the door: So Christ by his Spirit made
open the heart, in a kindly native way, not by breaking open, but by opening;
he indeed having the key by which hearts are opened, even the key of David,
that opens and no man shuts, and shuts ^and no man opens, Rev. 3. 7. Which
words do show, 1. That beside the call of the word, and any common conviction
that is thereby wrought in the heart, there is in the conversion of sinners, an
immediate, real, powerful and peculiar work of the Spirit that accompanies the
word. 2. That the application of this is necessary, and that men being now
asleep, and dead in sin, cannot without that be stirred and quickened by the
most powerful external Ordinances, or common operations: Nay, even to the
believers reviving, from his backslidden and drousie case, this work if
omnipotency is needful. 3. This work of the Spirit is effectual, and when
peculiarly applied by Christ, cannot be frustrat; for, he puts in his hand, and
the effect follows. 4. Although it be a most powerful work, yet it works
kindly, and brings about the effect without wronging of the natural faculties
of the soul, but makes use of them formally for bringing forth the effect, as
one that opens a door by the lock, makes use of a key, but does not hurt nor
destroy the lock: There is therefore no inconsistency betwixt Christ's opening
and ours; for, he co-acts not nor forces the will, but sweetly determins it,
so that it cannot but be willing; he takes away unwillingness from it, and
makes it willing, Psalm. 110. 3. Christ has the keys of hearts, and can open
and shut at his pleasure, without wronging of them. 5. Grace being the work of
a high-hand, it cannot be easy to procure welcome to Jesus Christ even amongst
believers, and much less with others, who have no principle of grace within to
co-operat with Christ. 6. Christ Jesus as he is a most powerful worker, so is
the work of his power most free, sovereign and wonderful; which clearly
appears in that it is applied on the back of such a slighting answer, and not
before: Yea, 7. Oftentimes the work of grace surprizeth his own, when they are
in a most unsuitable case, and when in respect of their deserving they might
have expected the quite contrary; certainly, we are not obliged to our freewill
for our conversion, but to his Spirit; nor to our predispositions for his
applying of it, but to his own grace, who in his gracious way of dealing with
his people, comes over many obstructions, and packs up (to say so) many
affronts and injuries.

If any should ask, why Christ did not apply this work, and put in his hand at
first, but suspends it till he had gotten a refusal, and be now at the very
withdrawing? Answ. 1. He does this to show the Sovereignty of grace, that works
as well when it will, as on whom it will: Grace must not be limited by us in
the manner or time of it is working, more than in it is work, or subject matter
upon which it works. 2. By this he discovers, what believers would be
without his grace (and so would teach them to walk humbly) which otherwise had
not so well appeared. 3. His wisdom and tenderness appears herein, that he
will not withdraw from her, and leave her lifelesse too, but ere he awake
challenges in her, he will make her lively in the exercise of her graces;
otherwise she might have lain still in her deadness: Christ times his
operations, his appearings and withdrawings with much tenderness, wisdom and
discretion.

This work of the Spirit puts a stir in the Bride, which vents it self in four
steps. 1. Her bowels are moved. 2. She arises. 3. Her fingers drop with
Myrrh. 4. She opens. All which may be considered, either, 1. As effects
following the work of the Spirit, whereby she is recovered from such a
condition: Or, 2. As duties lying on a believer: Or, 3. As they hold out the
order of the effects wrought by the Spirit. In general, it holds forth, 1. That
the work of the Spirit, when it is effectually applied, makes a very great,
palpable and universal change upon the persons in whom it works: There is a
great difference betwixt the Brides carriage here, and what it was, verse. 3. 2.
Although it be not absolutely necessary, nor ordinary for a believer, to know
the instant of his conversion; yet, when the change is sudden, and from an
extremity of a sinful condition, it will be discernable, and the fruits
following the change will be the more palpable. 3. A believer would endeavor
to be clear in the change of his condition; and when this clearness is
attained by the distinct uptaking of the several fruits of the change, it is
very useful and profitable for establishing the believer in the confidence of
his interest in Christ, and that there is a saving change wrought in him; So
here, the Bride both asserts him to be her beloved, and likewise the reality of
the change he had wrought in her.

The first effect, is, my bowels were moved for him; Which, in short, holds
forth the kindly exercise of serious repentance, affecting and stinging (as it
were) the very inward bowels, for slighting Christ so long: which will be
cleared by considering, 1. What is meant by bowels. 2. What by moving of the
bowels. 3. What that is, for him. By bowels, are understood either sorrow, and
that in an intense degree, as, Job 30. 27. my bowels boiled. Lam. 1. 20. My
bowels are troubled. And Ier. 4. 19. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the
very heart: Or, bowels are taken for affection and tender love in the highest
degree, such as mothers have to the children of their womb, Philip. 2. 1, 2. If
there be any bowels. And Philemon, v. 12. Receive him that is my own bowels.
Thus they are taken, Isa. 63. 15. Where are thy bowels? and frequently
elsewhere, both in the Old and New Testament. By moving of the bowels (or
sounding, or making a noise, as the word is elsewhere trauslated, Isa. 10. 11.
and 63. 15.) is understood a sensible stirring of the affections, when they
begin to stound, and that kindly, and in a most affectionat manner, either
severally, or jointly, such as is the turning of the bowels, Hos. 11. and the
troubling of the bowels, Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. It Is even such as is kindly
sympathy with persons that are dearly beloved, when any sad change befalls
them: It Is called the yerning of the bowels, spoken of that mother, 1 King. 3.
26. who was so affected toward her child, out of love to him, that she had
rather quite him to the other woman that was not his mother, than see him
divided, her bowels were so hot toward him; (another thing than was in any
on-looker) It Is the same word here, which shows, that this motion of the Brides
bowels proceeded from love to Christ, and from sorrow for wronging of him,
which two jumbled her within, and pierced and stounded her to the heart, as a
kindly parent uses to be for the death or distress of his only child, which
is the character of true repentance, Zech. 12. 10, 11. 3. For him, holds out,
1. The procuring-cause of this trouble, that it was for wronging of Christ, and
the slighting of so kind an husband and friend, that, that stounded her at the
heart above all, as, Zech. 12. 10. They shall look on him whom they have
pierced, and mourn for him. 2. It holds forth the final cause wherefore she was
so stirred and moved; It was for him, that is, that she might enjoy him, as the
word is, Hos. 7. 14. They assemble themselves for corn and wine, that is, to
obtain them: So her bowels were moved for, or after him, to obtain and enjoy
him: And thus, sense of the wrong done to him, in her bypast unkindly carriage
to him, and desire to recover him again, so affects her, as if it were the
pangs of a traveling woman, till Christ be again formed in her heart. Obs. 1.
The first work of the Spirit, is, by powerful convictions to beget evangelick
repentance in the heart, and to make the soul sensible of bypast failings, Act.
2. 37. This although it be not in time before faith, nor in nature (for, seeing
it proceeds from love, it supposes faith) yet it is the first sensible effect,
that sinners (surprised in a sinful condition) are touched with, and it is never
separat from, but always joined with, the exercise of faith, Zech. 12. 10. 2.
This work of repentance is necessary to be renewed, even in believers after
their failings, and it is the way by which they recover; Christ's Bride is thus
affected, and it becomes them well who have sin, to be deeply moved and
afflicted with the sense of it. 3. Where most love to Christ is, and where most
sincerity has been, when a wakening comes, it will be the more sensible, and
affect the heart the more thoroughly. Particularly, we may gather hence these
properties of true repentance or godly sorrow. 1. Godly sorrow is no fruit of
nature, but is a work and effect of the Spirit of Christ, and a peculiar saving
grace, beyond common conviction, and a believer is not the worker of it in
himself. 2. This sorrow consists most in the inward pangs and stings of the
heart, wherein love to Christ, and indignation against our selves for wronging
of him, strugle, and put all within, in a stir. 3. True repentance is different
from, and beyond convictions, and challenges (which the Bride had before when
this was wanting in her) and makes another kind of impression, and a more
sensible touch upon the heart and inward bowels: I say not that it is always
terrible; for, that is accidental to it, but sensible it is. 4. Though this
godly sorrow affect the heart deeply, yet does it work kindly, sweetly and
affectionatly, as a mothers affection warms to her child, or, as a man is
troubled for his firstborn: Love has a main influence upon, and goes along
in, this godly sorrow, both in the rise of it, love kindles this
heart-indignation; and also in the exercise of it, love to Christ keeps it
lively; and in the manner how it vents it self, it makes it a kindly and no
torturing or terrible exercise. 5. Nothing more affects a kindly repenting
heart, truly touched with godly sorrow, than that it should have sinned against
Christ It Is own hazard is not the predominant cause of this sorrow (she is
clear of her interest still) nor is it any sad event that might follow, which
so affects her (though she was not senseless as to these) but it is for him,
and his cause, and not her own, that she is thus moved: The Spirits conviction,
Ioh. 16. 8. is, because they believe not on me. 6. Considering the words with
what follows, I rose, etc. and comparing them with what went before, Observe,
That true repentance brings forth always a change in a believers carriage to
the better, in those things by which Christ their Beloved was formerly
provoked; and it does stir up to universal activenesse, in the study of
holiness: This makes her arise from the laziness in which she formerly was.
7. Consider, that she rests not till first she open to Christ, and thereafter
obtain his presence, which shows, that where true repentance is, the soul
will never sit down on challenges, convictions, or making a-mends in the
conversation, or any thing in self; but it will be restless until by faith it
close with Christ; yea, it will be pressing after the intimation of his favor,
on the back of any peace attained in closing with him, as David does, Psalm. 51.

Verse. 5. I rose up to open to my Beloved, and my hands dropped with Myrrh,
and my fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh, upon the handles of the lock.
There are two steps of her carriage, or effects of the Spirit's work, verse. 5.
The first is, her bowels being thus stirred and moved, she arises to open, as
being sorry she had lain still and shifted him so long: I rose up; This is
opposite to her former lying still, and refusing to give him entry; now she
yields, and begins to bestir her self, to draw her clothes to her, etc. Which
imports not only more diligence as to the matter of duty, but much seriousness
as to the manner: It seems to differ from opening (which is the actual
receiving of Christ into the heart, when all things are ready and prepared) not
as if it were simply contradistinguished from faith (for, this being a fruit of
her repentance, and he acknowledged to be her beloved, there behoved to be
faith in it) but only, as one degree or act of faith is distinguished from
another, as, Luke 15. In the Prodigals case, it is said, after he came to
himself, before he act, he deliberats and stirs himself; So this holds forth,
her rousing and quickening her self, for receiving Christ, which is not separat
in time, either from her repentance in the former words, or her faith in these
that follow; she rose to open, that shows her design, that she resolved now not
to stand at, but to go over her former reasonings; and purposed by this
stirring, to have the way rid for Christ's entry, and to make him welcome;
which shows, it was no confused exercise that her repentance put her unto, but
distinct and digested, like the Prodigals, I will arise, and go to my Father,
and say, etc.

Obs. 1. Repentance will put the securest sinners to their feet, when it is
real. 2. There is no settling of an exercised mind, but in receiving of Christ,
and in making of him welcome. 3. When the heart is affected with the sense of
sin, and desire to have Christ, it is not time to delay or dispute what to do,
but to rise and open, and by faith to receive Christ. 4. Where a soul has been
plunged in security, or (like the Prodigal, Luke 15.) in prophanity, there will
be need of gathering, composing and rousing of it self, for exercising of faith
in Christ; this is not from any difficulty that is on graces-side to receive a
sinner, but from the difficulty that is on the sinners side, in acting of
grace, who being at a low ebb, must by several steps of grace ascend out of it,
with a kind of violence to corruption, discouragement and unbelief, from under
the power of which the penitent must arise, when they combine to entangle and
detain him, as she does here. 5. Believers would be distinct in their
exercises, especially in reference to their end and design, that in their
activity and stirrings it may be discerned by themselves what they would be at:
Some exercises are confused, neither having a distinct cause, nor a distinct
end; kindly exercise has both, though much confusion may be with it. 6. Faith
in Christ, and making way for him into the heart, should be, and is the native
end of all inward exercises, diligence in duties, etc. This must be the great
scope of all pains whatsoever; these stings of exercise that put not the soul
to open to him, though they put the person through other, are not to be
fostered, nor laid much weight upon. 7. Though faith and duty differ, and the
most active frame is not to be rested on without faith, yet activity in duty,
and liveliness in the exercise of faith go together: as her rising and opening
do, even as before, her lying still, and the keeping of him out, went together.
Yea, 8. This activenesse runs especially to perform what he called to: He
called to open, and she accordingly rises to open; which shows, that the
penitents activity does principally bend it self toward these duties, that
Christ in a more especial manner calls for.

She proceeds to set down her experience which she found when she had risen,
which is the third effect of the work of grace on her by Christ's putting in
his hand, when she arose to open: Her hands and fingers dropped sweet smelling
Myrrh upon the handles of the lock: She continues the comparison of opening a
shut door, he, as it were, put in the key without, and she came to draw the
handle or slot within. (as is usual in some locks) The door is the heart, as
Psalm. 24. 7. called, the everlasting doors: The lock that closes, is unbelief
and security, indisposition and declining in the exercise of grace, whereby, as
by a fast lock, Christ in his access to the heart is kept out: Now she puts-to
her hands and fingers to the sock within, which imports her stirring her self
again in the exercise of faith and diligence, being now arisen to open;
Therefore by faith we are said to grip and take hold of Christ, and to work
righteousness, and by it the heart is opened to him, as follows. This sweet
smelling Myrrh that drops, is the flowing of habitual grace, which formerly
was not vigorous and active, but now it flows and vents, and is to the heart
as oil applied to moisten and make easy a rousted lock, to make it open
without difficulty: This grace is ordinarily compared to Myrrh, and the
anointing typical oil was made of it and of other spices, Exodus 30. 23. It Is
said here, to drop from her fingers, implying the active stirring of her faith,
because when faith becomes lively, it puts all other graces to exercise, and
thereby (as it were by oil) her former hardness and indisposition was softened
and removed, and her heart made meet to act lively. In sum it is this, That when
she in the exercise of faith and holiness, set her self seriously and
effectually to make way for Christ, and to remove what formerly had kept him
out through her indisposition, unexpectedly she found, that by his putting in
of his hand, it went much more easily and sweetly than she expected, all had
been so anointed and quickened; and thus conduced to the opening of her heart,
as dropping of oil does to the easy opening of a lock: Which shows, 1. That
the work of grace upon the heart, being applied by Christ from without, does
leave an inward fitness on the heart within for the opening of it self to him:
Grace infused and quickened by Christ's Spirit, will make the most indisposed
and secure heart to open to him heartsomly. 2. That though Christ apply grace
from without to open the heart, yet will he have the heart formally opening it
self to him; and though the heart open it self formally to him, yet it is by the
virtue of his application from without; for, this putting-to of her hand, and
it is dropping Myrrh, is the effect of his putting in his hand, first. 3. Often
when the most spiritual and difficult duties (if it were even faith it self)
are e^^ayed, they will be found more easy, than was expected, and none can
tell how they will go with them, till they undertake and set about them. She,
while lying in her security, thought it impossible to get this done, yet now it
goes easily and sweetly with her. O! but when grace goes along and flows, the
exercise of duty is a sweet, and easy work. 4. Although the exercise of grace
make duties easy, and a supply of help be given thereby for doing of spiritual
duties, yet the Lord will have the person assaying duty ere he find it so; nor
can he find or expect that supply that will facilitat duties to him, till he
first set himself about them, as she first rises to open, before her fingers
drop with Myrrh. 5. These that set themselves to open to Christ, and mind
that singly from the sense of their need of him, and being affected for
wronging of him, will not find grace wanting and deficient to help them; and by
this all the mouths of unbelievers will be stopped, that are ready to say, and
usually say they had not grace to open. 6. Faith in exercise has a great
influence on the keeping of all other graces in a believer fresh and green,
because it acts by Christ's strength, and therefore when it is in exercise, it
makes all the rest to drop, as it were, with sweet smelling Myrrh.

Verse. 6. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn himself, and was
gone: my soul failed when he spoke: I sought him, but I could not find him: I
called him, but he gave me no answer.
This 6. verse. contains five particulars of the Brides experience in this case:
The first of them, I opened, etc. is the last effect following upon his putting
in his hand verse. 4. This work of grace left her not in an indifferency,
whether to open or not, but having given her to will in the former verse, now
he gives also to do, and actually determins the will, or makes it determine it
self to receive him: but now Christ is found to be absent, whereupon follows
the other steps of her carriage, and the disappointments that she met with in
seeking of him. This opening is the very thing called for by him, verse. 2.
which (considering the words following) is especially to be understood of her
exercising of faith in him, whereby the heart is delated to receive him, hence
believing is called, a receiving of Christ, Joh. 1. 12. And it being a
heart-receiving, it must be the very thing understood here by opening. Now
although faith according to it is several acts, may be several ways considered,
yet that act of faith whereby the heart consents to receive Christ, and to rest
on him, is that which is mainly here aimed at, 1. Because this opening, is
opposed to refusing, Psalm. 81. 10, 11. It must therefore be consenting. 2. It Is
not giving of consent, that mainly keeps Christ at a distance from souls, or
keeps them without interest in him, as opening to him, or receiving of him
intitles them to him, Ioh. 1. 11, 12. and Acts 16. 14. 3. This opening is both
different from conviction, resolutions, repentance and what may be supposed to
preceed; these were in the words going before: and is also distinguished from
sense and the fruits of believing, which follow after: It must therefore be the
hearts yielding to Christ's call, and submitting thereunto, Romans 10. 3. as
actually consenting to be his: Yet all these acts would not be looked on as
distinct in respect of time, as they proceed from grace (which puts all
together) but in nature, and in respect of the distinct uptaking of the same
grace, in it is effects: In a word, says the Bride, the Lord having applied the
work of his Spirit to me, it effectuated one step after another, and left me
not until I yielded my self to him to be his, as a mansion for him to dwell
in. Which shows, 1. That grace does not only work upon the understanding to
enlighten it, but that it does also immediately work on the will, and determins
it; for, this opening of the heart, is an effect of that work of grace, verse.
4. as the former steps were. 2. The act of believing and opening to Christ is
both the effect of grace, and also the work formally of the believer: Therefore
the Lord is said to open the heart, Act. 16. 14. because the effect flows from
his putting to his hand; and the Bride is said to open her own heart, because
she formerly brought forth, or elicited the act of faith, by the strength of
grace. 3. This (being compared with his call, verse. 3.) shows, that it is by
faith that way is made for Christ into the heart, and it is that which
especially intitles one to Christ, closes with his call, receives him, and
enters Covenant with him; for, if opening or believing be that which he calls
for, as giving him access to the hearts of his people, then believing, being
the performance of that called-for condition, must unite the soul to him, and
enter him into the heart. 4. There is some peculiar efficacy in faith, in the
uniting of one to Christ, in accepting of Christ's call, and making way for him
to come into the heart, which is not in any other grace: Or, it has a peculiar
way of concurring, in effectuating the persons union with Christ (and so in
Justification) which no other grace has: Hence this opening is peculiarly to
be attributed to it, and is distinct from repentance spoken of before, verse. 4.
and from other duties mentioned in the words following. 5. Whoever honestly,
from the sense of sin and need of Christ and desire to have him to supply their
need, essays believing and opening their heart to him, shall certainly come
good speed, and without fail attain their design; I rose to open (says she)
and I opened. 6. Although the distinct exercise of says be not attained
instantly, (but there must be first a rising, and an offering of violence to
our corruptions in the pursueing thereof, before we win to the distinct opening
of the heart) yet it should be prosecute till it be perfected. 7. Sometimes the
exercise of faith will be distinct and discernable, so that a believer can tell
he has believed; and it is no less comfortable to be clear from serious
reflecting on our selves, that we have indeed by faith yielded to Christ, than
to be clear of it by the fruits following thereupon: For she is clear and
confident in this, that she had opened to him.

Having opened, now the Beloved is gone, like as a husband, being offended at
his wifes disrespect to him, should withdraw, when she at length with much ado
were brought to rise; So our Lord Jesus takes that way of rebuking kindly the
former unkindlinesse of believers, by after-desertions and withdrawings. The
word is doubled, but my Beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone, or, he was
gone, he was gone; which does not only import in his carriage a sad
withdrawing, and on hers an observation of it; but also a sorrowful regrate and
weightednesse, as having met with a sad disappointment (as the following words
clear) as if she had said, at last I opened, but alace he was gone and away!
What this withdrawing of Christ is, we may know by considering what his being
present is, which is not to be understood of the omni-presence of his Godhead,
there being no coming nor going that can be attributed to that infinite Essence,
which is everywhere at all times present; but it is in respect of the
out-letting of his especial love, and that in the peculiar way of manifesting
it to his people, and not in regard of his love it self, or of their interest
in him; for, here her interest stands in him, and faith in him is exercised,
and the lifelesnesse that she was under is removed, so that now she is acting
faith, and there is a presence o^grace making her active and lively, even under
this withdrawing: The thing then which is wanting, is a sensible manifestation
of Christ's love to her, which now upon her yielding to open, she expected to
have been filled with, as a wife opening to her husband should expect his
embracements, and yet in place thereof, find that he were gone: This
withdrawing is no real alteration on Christ's side, nor are we to look upon it
as if now she had less than before she believed and bestirred her self; for,
her union with him, and the influence of his grace on her remained: But, 1. She
missed that comfortable and sweet sense of love that she expected from him;
that was kept up. 2. She was then more sensible that he was provoked, and found
that her peace was not so well grounded, which formerly she pleased her self
with, as she conceived. 3. Upon this also followed some kindly exercise,
whereby Christ might make his dissatisfaction known, as a husband does his, by
his withdrawing; so that although interest be not disputed, and the heart be
kept in the exercise of duties, yet disquietnesse may grow above what it was:
and Christ wisely times this sense of his absence now, with the presence of his
grace, because she might both better endure it, and it would also be more
profitable thus to chasten her now, than if he had done it in her dead
condition. Hence, Observe, 1. That believers, in the lively exercise of faith
and duty, may have many more exercises, and sharper spiritual dispensations,
than they had formerly in their security. 2. Christ has a peculiar way both of
presence with, and absence from his own. 3. Often believers when they are in
the exercise of faith and duty, expect satisfying manifestations of Christ to
their sense; for, it is supponed here, that she looked for him this way, when
she opened. 4. Sometimes Christ will keep up the sense of his love, and
withdraw himself from his own, even when in the exercise of faith and duty. 5.
Christ's withdrawing is not always an evidence of the worst frame, even as his
presence does not speak out his satisfaction every way with his peoples
condition, but these are often acts of Sovereignty, timed according to his good
pleasure; for, she is now in better case than formerly, and yet he is withdrawn
and gone. 6. Christ by his withdrawing may be chastning for some former sin or
disrespect, done to him before the believer became lively, who yet for good
ends did suspend the taking notice of that sin, till he was in a frame to bear
it, and profit by it. 7. Christ's withdrawings ought to be observed by his
people, as well as other pieces of their own experience: It Is profitable to
know what he does, as well as what they do themselves. 8. There is a great
difference betwixt faith and sense; yea, betwixt clearness of interest, and
sensible presence, the one may be in a great measure, where the other is not,
as in this case here. 9. It Is the exercise of faith in Christ, that makes his
absence to be discerned: (for that is not known here, till the door be opened)
And the more lively a person be in the exercise of grace, the more will
Christ's absence be marked and regrated; whereas in a believer's secure frame,
or in a person still unacquainted with Christ, his absence is not discerned nor
laid to heart. 10. Although sense be not satisfied, yet believers should not
disclaim their faith when it is real, but acknowledge that they do believe, and
open to Christ when they do it: So it is here, I opened, or yielded by faith to
him, even when he was gone, and I could not find him.

What effect this disappointment had upon her part, follows, my soul failed
when he spoke: This effect is sad and heavy, the sense of her sin, and the
apprehension of her grieving of him, kindled by love to him, pierces and
stoundeth her so to the heart, that it becomes almost lifelesse: So the word is
used, Genesis 42. 28. of Jacobs sons, when they found the money in their sacks
mouths, they were sore afraid, and their hearts failed them, or, went out of
them; It Is a surprising unexpected heaviness, and that in a high degree,
holding forth, how de^ply believers will be affected, when disappointed of the
expected presence of Christ, and that by their own guilt: The cause or occasion
of this failing of heart, is in these words, when he spoke, which look to the
time past, though the effect was present; and they may be two ways understood,
1. As being a remembering how it was with her while he spoke (for now he speaks
not) she now observes, and calls to mind, that when he called and she shifted,
yet even then her heart was affected with his word, and this smites her now,
that she should have so long smotherd so much kindness, and have brought all
this upon her self; It Is like that of the Disciples, Luke 24. 32. who after
Christ was gone, say one to another, Did not our hearts burn within us, while
he talked with us by the way, and opened up to us the Scriptures; though before
they little heeded it, yet afterward they observe, and when they recollect
themselves, it becomes more distinct than it was in the time. 2. It may be
looked on as being the present effect of the words formerly spoken, which
although they did not so sensibly affect her when he spoke them, yet now being
brought to her remembrance (as, Ioh. 14. 26.) they pierce her, that she should
have slighted and neglected them, as, Matthew. 26. when Peter is admonished, the
word for the time affects not, but afterward, verse. 75. when he remembers it
(as challenges brings back words formerly spoken) he went out and wept
bitterly; So her resentment of what she formerly slighted is now bitter. Obs.
1. The time of Christ's absence is a time when bygone challenges, or
challenges for bypast offenses, use to recur. 2. Often believers when brought
through a secure fit, will find some stirrings and effects of the grace of
Christ to have been in them, even then, which were not so discernable to them
while they were under their distemper. 3. Christ's word may have effects long
after it is spoken and heard; yea, a word long since heard, may be an
after-remembrance (being brought again to mind by the Spirit) Ioh. 14. 26. and
have operation more than at first; or, although for a time it have had none at
all, but may be as seed under the ground, till the Spirit blow on it to bring
it above, yet, afterward by the the Spirit's influence, it may have many
blessed effects. 4. There is nothing that will affect a gracious soul more,
than to miss Christ's presence, when the disappointment has been procured by
it is own sin, if it be but a withdrawing for a time, that will make the hearts
of his own even to fail, but O! if it be eternal, by reason of sinners constant
slighting of him now in the offers of his grace, what desperate anguish will it
produce? And there is none that slights Christ's call now and puts him away,
but one time or other it will be heavy to them and cost them dear. 5. It Is a
kindly thing, when a believer misses Christ, and wants presence, to be affected
with it; and it is unkindly to discern absence, and not to be affected. 6.
Repentance where it is kindly, or right heart-sorrow will have it is continuance
and growth from one degree to another: This failing of heart is a continued,
but a further step of the moving of her bowels, verse. 4. 7. Although interest
in Christ be clear, and matters otherwise not in an evil case, yet want of
Christ's presence for the time, and the remembrance of bygone guilt, will be a
very sad exercise to the believer, and affect his heart very much.

This is a sad posture, yet she gives not over, notwithstanding of this or any
following disappointments, till she obtain the holy design she drives: Where
faith and love are exercised together, for attaining Christ, nothing will scar
nor discourage the soul in it is pursuit of him. Her carriage follows in four
steps (whereby she endeavors to recover him) with the success that she found
in each of them. 1. She gives private diligence. 2. She applies her self to
public Ordinances, verse. 7. When that also fails, she, 3. betakes her self to
the exercise of mutual fellowship with the daughters of Jerusalem, and seeks
their help, verse. 8. and at last rests on the exercise of faith in him, Chap.
6. 3. Her secret painfulnesse, with the fruit thereof, is set down in two
steps, in the rest of this verse, 1. I sought him, that is, painfully used all
means to meet with him, as one searches earnestly for what he wants; so the
word is taken, Prove. 15. 14. It shows her seriousness as to the end, and also
her holy solicitude in the manner of pursuing it: But (says she) I found him
not, he was now obtained, but she continues still under the want of the
sensible manifestations of his presence. Again, the 2. is, I called him, that
is, prayed to him, but (says she) he gave me no answer, that is, I had no
sensible ease, and return of prayer; though the prayer was not altogether
unheard; for, her continuing to seek after him, shows that she was answered
with strength in her soul, Psalm. 138. 3. There was sustaining-grace even then,
though there were not the soul-satisfying and comforting inlargements, or
sensible embracements of Christ, and his warm-speaking of peace to her heart,
which she aimed at; and the greatness of her bensil after these, makes her
think that she had received no answer at all. It Is in sum, as if a wife, by
search and running to and fro, did seek her husband, and when that succeeds
not, she calls him by his name: So did she leave no mean unessayed, but did not
obtain what she sought. Which shows, 1. That God often blesses want of sense
to a believer, to be a spur to much diligence. 2. When desertions are most
sensible, then ought the believer to be most diligent in the use of all means,
especially of prayer, for an outgate. 3. There may be much life in duty, even
then when there is little sense and satisfaction as to the event; there is here
seeking and calling on him, though she found him not, and he gave her no
answer. 4. It Is a blessed heart-sorrow that vents in diligence and prayer to
God for his presence. 5. The remembrance and resentment of our bygone wrongs
to Christ, should not so affect, as to scar us from him, but should press us
to seek to be again in his company; otherwise, if we scar at him, or bide away
from him, because of the sense of guilt, it will be the mending of one fault
with another: It Is ever best reckoning our own guilt, when he is present. 6.
Christ's presence is the only cordial that can satisfy a soul, fainting under
the sense of the wrongs it has done to Christ: therefore when her heart fails,
she sits not down under it for ease, but seeks and calls for himself and his
own presence. 7. There may be much seeking and prayer, which may be so indeed,
and accepted of by God, and yet his comfortable presence be kept up, and the
particular sought-for suspended. 8. Often the having of our eye in prayer upon
one particular (suppose upon one comfort) may make us construct our prayers, to
have less of an answer than they have, whileas indeed they are not fruitless,
but may be answered in other things, which we do not observe. 9. The Lord may
deny comfort when it is sought, and yet show his grace in sustaining his
people, and quickening them to follow him in their duty, when they in the mean
time may take it for a sort of refusal, 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10. It is ever good for
believers to reflect on their duty, and on the success of it, whatever it be;
and that not in one step only, but in the whole tract of their way. 10. If we
compare this with her former carnally easy and secure condition, verse. 2, 3.
we see, that sensible desertion, when a believer is holily active under it, is
no ill condition; comparatively it is better with her now when she is swounding
and fainting without Christ, than when she did ly still carelessly without him;
grace is working more actively now (as from verse. 4. is clear) and she is
nearer unto him, and has much more solid ground of peace than she had at that
time.

Verse. 7. The watchmen that went about the City found me, they smote me, they
wounded me, the keepers of the walls took away my vail from me.
When private means do not the business, the Bride betakes her to public
Ordinances, and frequents them: And this 7. verse. shows what she found in the
use of that mean, a sad disappointment also, which is several ways aggreged:
Christ's presence is easily lost, but it is not easily recovered; This will
cost much pains, and the enduring of many perplexing disappointments: It is
much more difficult to win to enjoy Christ, than it is to lose him: Lying on
the bed in ease may bring on that, which much labor and watching will not
remove.

That this verse points at her going about the public Ordinances, the scope
makes clear, that being the next ordinary mean used for enquiring after an
absent Christ, when private diligence has had little success. The matter of
the words, as was cleared in Chap. 3. 3. does also evidence this; The Church is
the City which has walls (that is, the Ordinances) for preventing her hurt,
and promoving of her edification: The watchmen are her Ministers, appointed and
designed to keep the walls, and to go about the City: They are said to go about
the City, in respect of their care and solicitude to prevent inward
difficulties and hazards, and are called keepers of the walls, as they stand to
repel what from without may disturb the Churches edification, and ecclesiastic
peace: In a word, they are the same by office, that these were, Chap. 3. 3. but
their carriage to her is more unlike the relation they stood in: Which is set
forth in four steps, all which are to be looked on as a special piece of
untendernesse in them, and of suffering in her; which now the Lord in his
wisdom permits her to meet with, that so she may find how unwisely she had done
to neglect Christ's kind call, verse. 2. when as now other hands deal more
roughly with her: The reasons hinted, Chap. 3. 3. do confirm this; beside,
there being so much spoken of their wounding of her, either she or they must be
wrong; Now she is (for the main) in her duty, and under a fainting condition,
seeking after Christ, and there is no warrant to wound a poor seeker of Christ
in such a condition, even where there have been former failings, (2 Cor. 2. 7.
The Apostle will have the incestuous person in such a case tenderly dealt with,
lest he should be swallowed up) but it is duty rather to bind up their wounds,
and to pour oil into them, by speaking a word in season to such weary souls.
This was, no doubt, their duty, and the Lord himself does so, Isa. 50. 4.
Neither could her former security be a ground to reach her such blows now,
especially her offense being betwixt Christ and her their alones, and so no
object of public reproof; and she being a burden to her self, ought not to
have been made more heavy by them: Beside, Chap. 3. 4. the watchmen dealt more
tenderly with her, when yet she had been in security also. This dealing of
theirs cannot be to speak a word in season to the weary soul of a tender
person, whose carriage is so convincing even to others, that verse. 9. they give
her a high commendation, which is a clear testimony against the malignity of
these watchmen; they must therefore be looked on as untender, or unskilful, or
both, who do thus misapply the Word contrary to the end for which it is
appointed, and as miserable comforters talk to the grief of such as he has
wounded. The first step is, They found me: It is not the finding of a friend,
as Chap. 3. 3. but (as the effects clear) the finding of an enemy, and is as if
a Minister should digress of purpose, to take in the case of some poor tender
soul, that he might reach it a blow, though beside his Text: Thus, Ezekiel. 34.
21. The Idolshepherds (who it may be, had a true external call) are said to
thrust with the side and shoulder, and push all the diseased with the horns:
And, verse. 4. to rule with force and cruelty: And in Ezekiel. 13. 20. they are
said to hunt the souls of God's people: A part of which cruelty and oppression,
is verse. 22. in making the righteous sad: This is their finding, a seeking
occasion to load them with bitter invectives, and reproaches. It Is observable
also, that here at the very first finding they hurt her, without so much as
suffering her to tell her own case, as she did to the watchmen, Chap. 3. 3. So
that without taking notice of her condition, they presently fall upon her;
which says, that in their smiting her, they did not respect her case. 2. They
smote her, that is, more gently at first; however, they suffer no occasion to
slip, whereby they have any access to give a wipe to such heart-exercised
souls, but it is laid hold upon; and what infirmity is in any of them, or
inconsideratnesse in their zeal, that is casten up, and often somewhat of less
moment is much aggreged. The word takes in also wronging with the tongue, Ier.
18. 18. Come, let us smite Jeremiah with the tongue: and it is like, by the
words following in that verse, the profane Priests had no little accession to
it. 3. They wound her: This is a further step, and imports such a smiting as
continues till the person be wounded, denoting a higher degree of cruelty, such
as is the persecuting of these whom God has smitten, and talking to their
grief, Psalm. 69. 26. which will exceedingly wound a tender exercised soul, who
is soon affected; and the Psalm especially points at Judas, who, Ioh. 12. 4, 5,
6. was ready to condemn the holy zeal of an honest soul, which our Lord
vindicats and leaves on record to her eternal commendation. 4. The last step
is, They took away my vail from me: The word that is rendered vail, comes from a
root that signifies to subdue, it is that fame word which we have, Psalm. 144.
2. who subdues the people, etc. It had a threefold use, 1. For decorement, as
Isa. 3. 23. 2. For a sign of modesty, pleaded for by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 6.
3. And mainly, for a sign of women's subjection to their own husbands; for which
cause Rebekah puts on her vail, when she meets Isaac, Genesis 24. 65. And
therefore it is called power, as being the sign of the wifes being under the
power of her husband, 1 Cor. 11. 10. Here, her vail is the tenderness of her
profession, whereby in a decent, modest and humble way, she professed her self to
be a believer, seeking after Christ Jesus, as one bearing the b^dge of
subjection to him as her husband. The taking away of the vail, is their
wronging of that honest profession she had, and the giving of her out, not to
be that which she professed her self to be, and so not worthy of a vail; but that
her profession was hypocrisy, her painfulnesse and tenderness, conceitinesse,
even as Judas, Joh. 12. 5. nicknames that good work wrought upon Christ by that
honest woman, calling it wastry: And by these and such other means, often
tender souls are affronted, and proposed as a reproach to the multitude; even
as if a wife that is chaste, were denuded of her vail, and reputed as an gadding
harlot, while she is seeking her own husband: So when the Lord threatens his
people, that their le^dnesse should be made to appear, he uses this
expression, Ezekiel. 23. 26, 27. They shall stripe thee out of thy clothes, etc.
that being a manifest shame to a woman, that should be covered, 1 Cor. 11. 6.
This is added, to show that they pretend they have reason for their smiting:
They disgrace her, and take away her vail, that they may not be thought to
smite holiness or tenderness, but a hypocrite under such a vail, or a whore
more decently adorned than became her to be.

This is the sum, when I prevailed not in private diligence, I frequented the
public Ordinances; but these who were watchmen and healers by office, being
untender (as if they had intended it) did by malice, or want of affection, or
through unskilfulnesse and want of experience, so apply the word, that they
sowed pillows under the arm-holes of the profane, and made the righteous sad:
Whereby I was not only nothing profited, but returned more weighted and
ashamed, and had no encouragement to seek any more of their help, as I had
done, Chap. 3. 3. but was necessitat to turn to others: Which shows, that she
accounts them untender, and therefore, sets it down here as a piece of her sad
trial; whereas, had it been the wounding of a friend, it had been a kindness
to her, Psalm. 141. 5. and would have engaged her to follow on for healing from
that same hand, so far would it have been from being the matter of her
complaint, neither would it have been complained of by her.

These words afford many such doctrines, as, Chap. 3. 3. As, 1. The visible
Church is a distinct incorporation by it self, and all it is members have right
to it is privileges, to wit, such whereof they are capable: It Is the City, and
they are the Citizens, Ephesians. 2. 19. 2. Its a City that is not without fear and
hazard, though it have walls; but it had need to be watched both within and
without: Or, the visible Church has many enemies, she is in constant war:
Hence therefore, is she called the militant Church; and for this cause, she
has walls and watchmen. 3. The Lord has provided her with sufficient means
against all assaults. 4. A lawfully-called ministry, or watchmen peculiarly
defigned for that end, are the great mean Christ has appointed for preventing
the hurt, and promoving the good and edification of his Church, Ephesians. 2. 12, 13.
They are as the sentinels, which he has set on the walls for giving
advertisement and warning; and this well becomes their office, Isa. 62. 6.
Ezekiel. 3. and 33. Chapters, and elsewhere. 5. Tender believers will put a great
price upon public Ordinances, even when they seem to themselves to come little
speed in their private duties; private diligence furthers public, and public
furthers private: These two ought not to be, neither will they, be separat in a
tender person, but go together. 6. Tender believers may have weights added to
their exercise, and a load put above a burden, even by these whose stations and
relations call for much more sympathy and healing. 7. Public Ordinances may be
sometimes unfruitful to believers, even when they have great need, and are
under great sense of need. 8. When one that is tender gets no good nor ease by
public Ordinances, often there is an addition made to his burden thereby. 9.
Untender, unskilful and unfaithful men may creep in, and be admitted to the
ministry, and to watching over the Church, as Judas was. 10. When such are
gifted, and (as to order) lawfully called, they are truly ministers, though not
true ministers, and have authority for discharging of all duties; and duties
discharged, or Ordinances dispensed by them according to Christ's warrant, are
valide, and the word from their mouth, is to be received as from him; Therefore
they are called watchmen, which imports them to be really in office, which
could not be if the former assertions were not true. 11. Very often, tender
believers in their exercises, suffer much from such ministers: Or an untender
minister, is often a great affliction to tender exercised believers; yea, of
all men, these prove most sadly afflicting to them; no man wounds godliness
more, or wounds and affronts the profession thereof more in them that are the
most real and tender professors, than a gifted untender minister may do, and
often does; though sometimes the Lord will make use of him for their good, to
humble them, yet more to provoke them to the study of more seriousness in
secret duties, and to more closse and constant waiting on the Lord himself. 12.
Where enmity against godliness once arises and vents it self against the
godly, it often grows from one degree to another, as here; Men, especially
Ministers once engaged in it, are not easily recovered and brought out of that
evil, but are carried, yea, often hurried from one step to another: yet, she
accounts them watchmen, as holding out the respect she bare to their office,
even then: Whence observe, 13. That it is a piece of spiritual wisdom and
tenderness, to distinguish carefully betwixt the office of the Ministry, or
the Ordinance it self, and the faults and untendernesse of persons, who may
miscarry in the exercise of that office; and not to fall from the esteem of the
Ordinance because of them, or of what faults may be in them, but even then to
respect the Ordinance out of respect to Christ, and his institution and
appointment. 14. Believers would observe the fruit of public Ordinances, as
well as of secret diligence, as the Bride here does.

Verse. 8. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that
ye tell him that I am sick of love.
When this mean fails her, she gives not over, but betakes her self to the use
of mutual fellowship with the Saints (which is the third step of her carriage)
v. 8. that she may have their help for recovering of Christ's presence: She
propounds her case to them, and presses for their bearing burden with her; Her
case is in the last words, I am sick of love: a strange disease, yet kindly to
a believer: This sickness implies pain as of a woman in travel, whose showers
are sharp, and pangs vehement till she bring forth: The same word is used to
this purpose, Isa. 26. 17. Like as a woman that draws near her delivery, is
in pain, etc. And it imports in this place, these two, 1. Vehement desire after
Christ, from ardent. love to him, so that she could not endure to want him. 2.
Much heart-affectednesse following upon that ardent desire, which (under her
former disappointments) did beget such pain and fainting, that it was as a sore
sickness, though not dangerous; This sickness differs from that spoken of,
Chap. 2. 5. as the scope shows: That is like the pain procured by an overset of
the stomach, so the sense of his love being let out in a very great measure,
was like to master her; not that sense of his love is simply or in it self
burdensome, but she is weak like an old bottle, or a queasie and weak stomach
that cannot bear much: But this is like the pain that proceeds from hunger, and
a strong appetite, when that which is longed-for is not obtained, which
augments the desire, and at last breeds fainting and sickness. This shows, 1.
That love to Christ where it is sincere, is a most sensible thing. 2. That the
more disappointments it meets with, in seeking after sensible manifestations of
Christ, it grows the more vehement. 3. That continued absence to a tender soul,
will be exceeding heavy and painful; hope deferred makes the heart sick,
especially when the sweetness of Christ's presence has been felt, and his
absence distinctly discerned. 4. That Christ's presence is the souls health,
and his absence it is sickness, have else what it will. 5. That love to Christ
will sometimes, especially after challenges and disappointments, so overpower
the soul, that it cannot to it is own sense (at least) act under it, or sustain
it (it seems so heavy a burden) as sickness will do to the body, if it get not
an out-gate.

The way she takes to obtain Christ after all other means fail her, is by
making her application to the daughters of Jerusalem: Indeed it is Christ, and
not they that can cure her, he is the only medicine for a sick soul; therefore,
her design is not to rest in their company, but to make use of it for obtaining
his company: For, the company, although it were even of Angels, will not be
satisfying to a soul that seeks Christ, the best fellowship is empty without
him, Ioh. 20, 12. 13. Why weepest thou? (say the Angels) Why? (says she) they
have taken away my Lord. In this consider, 1. The parties she betakes her self
to, the daughters of Jerusalem, spoken of chap. 1. 5. Professors not of the
worst stamp; yet (as after appears) under much ignorance of Christ, and of
spiritual exercise: This is the mean she goes now unto. Where observe, 1.
Spiritual communion amongst professors or believers, is not only a duty, but a
special mean, being rightly made use of, to further our fellowship with Christ.
2. Believers in their sad cases, may, and ought freely to make use of this
mean, by desiring others help; and for their own case and furtherance in
meeting with Christ, by communicating their case to them, as she does here. 3.
Even the strongest believers (whom the Bride represents) may be helped by
these, that are much weaker than themselves in gifts, grace and experience; as
the daughters of Jerusalem are here: And so Paul often requires of others,
inferior to, and much short of him, the help of their prayers. Consider, 2. her
desire to them, Tell him (says she) I am sick of love, make my case known to
him, and hold it up by prayer: She had been doing so her self, and had not come
speed, and therefore she puts them upon it, that they might help her to obtain
an answer. Obs. 1. That prayer for one another, is a duty of mutual fellowship,
especially for these that are exercised: others should be in that exercise with
them, Iam. 5. 17. 2. Believers sometimes will not trust themselves with the
opening of their own case to Christ, and will not be satisfied with their own
way, but will think others can do it much better. 3. Praying for our selves,
and desiring of help from others should go together; Or, it will give most
clearness and peace to believers, to desire the help of others, when they have
been serious in the use of all means by themselves, as she had been. 4. It
says, That believers holding up the case of another, will be very acceptable
to Christ. And, 5. That there is nothing we can tell Christ, of our own or
other folks case, that will be more pleasant to, and taking with him, than
this, that we are they who are sick of love to him: This is propounded, as that
which may and will be most acceptable to him: what shall ye tell him? (so the
words run) these are the best and most acceptable news to him. 6. Such a ca^e
as love-sicknesse is a good motive, upon which to press for the help of others
prayers, and that which may also give confidence to any, to bear such a message
to Christ. 7. Believers in their communion with others, would more insist upon
their own cases, than on the faults of Ministers, or miscarriages of others:
Although she was formerly smitten by the watchmen, yet this is the great thing
she propounds to them. Consider, 3. a qualification, put in her suit to the
daughters of Jerusalem; If ye find him: That is, If ye get access, which now
she thinks her self excluded from. And it imports, 1. That there is a peculiar
finding of, and access unto Christ at one time beyond another. 2. That a weak
believer may sometimes have much more access to Christ, and sensible communion
with him, than others of greater parts and experience: She suppones that they
might find, while she did not. 3. That when any gets access for themselves,
then especially they should remember others, and improve their court with
Christ, for their good who may be in bonds, and under sad exercise: Then (says
she) when ye get access, remember my case: She would share of the fruit of
their most warm enjoyments. 4. She does not resent nor envy this, or become
jealous of it, but humbly submits to be helped by them; Christ will have every
one useful to another, and the strongest should not disdain to be in the common
of the weakest.

The last thing is the manner of her proposing of it, I charge or adjure you
(says she) which has the force of an oath proposed to others, as if she had
sworn them that they should do it: The same charge or adjuration is set down,
Chap. 2. 7. and 3. 4. She puts them to it, as they will be answerable. Which
shows, 1. Great seriousness in her; the matter of Christian-fellowship, and
our desiring of the help of others prayers, is no matter of complement, but
should in earnest be sought for. 2. She desires seriousness in them, in their
discharge of this duty: In our praying for others, conscience would be made of
it, as seriously as for our selves, and we would beware of superficialnesse and
overlinesse in it. 3. Our expressions in our fellowship, especially concerning
the most serious purposes, would be suitably serious: A light manner of
speaking in serious things, often spills the beauty of them, marrs edification,
and diminishes from the weight of the matters themselves.

Daughters of Jerusalem.
Verse. 9. What is thy Beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest among
Women? what is thy Beloved more than another beloved, that thou do so charge
us?
In this 9. verse. is the third part of the Chapter, where the daughters of
Jerusalem are brought in speaking: where we may see what effect the Brides
serious charge had upon them: It someway surprizeth and astonisheth them, to
see a person convincingly approveable in her carriage, so taken up with that
which the most part of the world slights; This makes them think that he whom
she asks for, must be a person beyond ordinary, and in this they conclude
right: There is much infirmity in this question (as often many professors are
upon the matter really ignorant of Christ's worth) yet some honest-like things
(at least) are in it. There is, 1. respect to her as a beautiful and goodly
person, even when she was thought little of by the watchmen. 2. Docilenesse,
and a desire to know. 3. Some suspicion of their own knowledge of Christ: And,
4. Ingenuity in seeking help. All which, are good symptoms in beginners, and
we will see that the question ended well with them, Chap. 6. 1. and it is like
was awakened in them by her serious carriage. The return they make to her
charge has in it, 1. The title they give her. 2. The question they propose to
her. 3. The rise of it, or that which gives them occasion to ask, and which
puts them to it. The title is excellent, O thou fairest among women: It was
given to the Bride by Christ himself, Chap. 1. 8. It implies, 1. A spiritual
beauty in her who now was thought little of by the watchmen, and had her own
crosses in the world, yet even in this case lovely in her self, and lovely to
these daughters. Observe, 1. That believers should be eminently convincing, and
commendable in their carriage even before others; They should be fairest among
them, and for spiritual beauty conspicuous, as lights shining in a dark place.
2. Grace when seriously in exercise, is that which makes any person (though
outwardly mean and contemptible) truly beautiful and lovely; It makes them so
really, and also in the eyes of all spiritual beholders. 3. Sometimes God will
make honest seekers of him the more lovely to others, when corrupt Ministers
seek most to defame them; The watchmens wounding her, marrs not the daughters
estimation of her; and this shows that they did smite her without reason.
Again, 2. It implies respectiveness on their part, and also honesty; for, there
is now no external thing to commend her to them: Which says, 1. That to the
spiritual eye of honest souls, none will be so beautiful as the person that is
holy; yea, sometimes holiness will have a commendation in the consciences even
of them that are strangers to it. 2. Often holiness may be more esteemed of,
and holy persons more respectively dealt with, by men of little either
knowledge or profession, than by these who may be much more knowing, and whose
station and place calls them to be more tender: The Bride here is like the
wounded person, Luke 10. 31, etc. whom the Samaritan succored, when both the
Priest and the Levite had passed by him. 3. Where grace shines, it would be
highly esteemed of and respected; and such as are but babes in Christ, ought
much to reverence these that are of older standing. 4. Tender souls when under
exercise, if we can do no more to ease them, would be respectively spoken unto
at least: These daughters do not wound the Bride, as the watchmen did, but
speak discreetly and respectively to her, although they can further her little.
5. The right use of freedom, and seriousness with humility in mutual
fellowship, is a great help to entertain mutual respect amongst professors;
when the weak see the strong ones not puffed up, but condescending to take their
help, it will conciliat love and respect: Thus the daughters meet the Bride
here with respective carriage. 6. Respective expressions of one professor to
another, with gravity and seriousness, becomes Christian-fellowship well; and
is a great furtherance of edification and mutual confidence: So we see here,
and Chap. 6. 1. as also in the Brides expressions preceding.

2. The question propounded by them is, what is thy Beloved? as scarce knowing
him, or acquainted with him themselves: It is not spoken out of disdain, but
out of desire to know, being convinced that there behoved to be some excellency
in him, beyond others, as the following effects clear. The question is proposed
by way of comparison, and doubled, What is thy Beloved more than another
beloved? or the beloved of another? By beloved, all along is understood that
which the soul loves and cleaves unto; Therefore Christ is sometimes designed
by the one name, the souls love; and sometimes by the other, the Beloved; as we
may see by comparing Chap. 3. 1, 2, 3. with Chap. 2. 16, 17. because he
eminently and above competition had the Brides heart. By other beloveds are
understood these things that men of the world set their love and affections
upon, and which bears most sway with them, as that which in a singular manner
their soul loves; the same that ordinarily are called Idols, because they are
put in Gods room; There is the same reason here, why they are called other
beloveds, and strange lovers elsewhere: Such are the belly, Phil. 3. 19. the
world, 1 John 2. 15, 16. Love not the world, nor the things of it, etc. the
lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, the pride of life: So it is as if they
had said, There are many things which the men of the world seek after, it is
none of all these that this Bride is enquiring for, she rests not satisfied
with these, nor valueth them; He must then be some excellent person, a singular
and non-such Beloved that she is so serious in the enquiry after, and therefore
they desire to know from her self what he is. The question is doubled as being
the result of a serious desire to know, and of high admiration, what he might
be who was thus enquired for.

3. The words added, show what is the rise of her question and wondering, to
wit, these, That thou do so charge us: Every word has weight, it is thou, the
fairest among Women, who certainly can make the best choice. 2. Thou art not
only in earnest thy self, but chargest us also. And, 3. Not only thou chargest
us, but so vehemently, pressingly and weightily; This, sure, must be some
excellent Beloved. This question carries in it not so much an enquiry who is
the believers choice, as their desire to know what Christ was indeed, in
respect of his real worth, whose Name only (or little more) they knew before;
Therefore they say not, who is, but what is thy Beloved? as knowing his Name,
but being much ignorant of his worth. Again, it supposes such a question to be
moved by these professors, upon occasion of her exemplary carriage: And indeed
it cannot be told, what thoughts, serious challenges, and exercising questions
the convincing carriage of believers will have amongst those with whom they
christianly converse; and so it shows, that this seriousness in one may put
others to it, to question what the matter may be, and through Gods blessing may
commend Christ to them in the end, which is the scope.

Obs. 1. There may be some respect to godly persons, where there is much
ignorance of Christ himself. 2. Where there is esteem of godliness and of
these who study it, there is some begun inquiry for Christ himself, and it
leads on to further, although the beginnings be weak. 3. True tenderness in
beginners appears in nothing sooner, than in respect to these who were in
Christ before them; They are now but a-beginning, yet this shows it self in the
respect they carry to the Bride. 4. It Is no shame for these that are
unacquainted with Christ, to inquire for him at such as know him. 5. What
Christ is, and the necessity of praying for others, is a suitable subject of
discourse in Christian-fellowship; what is Christ? say they to her; and pray
for me, says she to them. 6. Christ's Name may be known to many, to whom his
worth is unknown, or but little known, and who are not acquainted with what he
is. 7. All men naturally have some lust, idol, or beloved, that their affection
is set upon beside Christ; It Is some other thing, from which he is
distinguished, and to which he is opposed. 8. Men lay out their affections
liberally upon their idols, and upon these things that their heart cleaves unto
beside Christ; They are beloveds, and opposed to Christ, as being that to the
men of the world, that Christ is to his own; they are as Gods and Christ's to
them, they run so mad upon their idols, and are so joined to them, Hos. 4. 17.
men naturally have an high esteem of their idols, as placing some worth in them
which is not, and they have a low esteem of Christ, and prefer their idols to
him. 9. This mistake is a great cause of Christ's being slighted in the world,
that they think other beloveds as good as he, and other life's as good as the
life of holiness; therefore they go to the farm, plough, market, and make
light of Christ, Matthew. 22. 4. 10. The questioning of this grand principle of
corrupt nature, that Christ is no better than other beloveds, or the inquiring
whether he be indeed better than these, is one of the first rises of a souls
making forward to enquire for him. 11. The growing of the esteem of Christ in a
soul, and the decay of the esteem of all idols (formerly beloveds) go together;
as the one stands, the other falls, as the one grows, the other decays. 12.
The right up-taking of Christ's worth, is the great thing that commends Christ
to a soul (therefore the Bride describes him afterward) and the through
conviction of the vanity of all other things, loses the grips of our
affections from them, and makes way for setting up Christ more high. 13. The
convincing-carriage of a believer may stir and raise an exercise in these that
formerly were secure: And God can make the words of a private humble Christian,
the rise of a serious enquiry after Christ in another; Thus her serious
charging of them does so stick to them, as if that word, I charge you, had
pierced them. 14. Nothing more adorns the Gospel, and commends Christ, and
makes him lovely to others, than the convincing, serious carriage of believers.
15. These who are not acquaint with Christ's worth, or the exercises of
believers, are ready to wonder what moves them and puts them to make such a
stir about Christ, more than others that live satisfied and contented without
him.

BRIDE.
Verse. 10. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.
From verse. 10. to the end (which contains the fourth part of the Chapter) the
Bride speaks: and (in answer to the daughters of Jerusalem their question) in a
sweet, pithy, taking-manner commends her Beloved. She is not long in returning
answer to their question, as being fully clear and ready to demonstrate Christ
her Beloved his worth above all; and as impatient that any other should be put
in competition with him, (especially by the daughters of Jerusalem, whose
edification she studies by this to promove) instantly she steps in with a large
commendation of Christ, (though in few words) whereby, she does so demonstrate
him to be an Object infinitely worthy to be her souls Beloved beyond all others,
that Chap. 6. 1. they as convinced yield, acknowledging that her Beloved was
preferable to all other beloveds, and that therefore they are engaged to love
and seek him with her.

In this commendation, she, 1. asserts Christ's preferablenesse in the general,
verse. 10. 2. She confirms and illustrates it in particulars, to verse. 16. And
then, 3. Verse. 16. sums it up in an universal expression, as being in it is
particulars inexpressible. Lastly, Having fully proved her assertion, she
resumes the conclusion as unanswerable, This (says she) is my beloved, a
singular beloved indeed, and therefore it is no wonder that I am so serious in
pursuing after him, and so sick of love to him, and so much pained at the very
heart for the want of him.

The first general in this 10. verse. sets out Christ positively, and
comparatively: Do you ask (says she) what my Beloved is? he is a non-such, an
incomparable Beloved, he is white and ruddy, O so lovely as he is in himself!
and being compared with all others, he has the pre-eminence by far, as being
the chiefest among ten thousands, By white and ruddy, we are to conceive
Christ's qualifications, according to the strain of the Allegory, there being
no bodily qualification set out here, Christ at that time not being incarnat,
yet even then was he white and ruddy: The due and just mixture of these colors
makes a man lovely, and evidenceth a good complexion of body; so by them in
Christ is understood a concurrence of all fit qualifications and excellencies,
that may make him lovely to the soul, when by faith looked upon, and taken up;
there is sweet beauty and comeliness, or a comely, beautiful sweetness that
lusters and shines in him, through the excellent qualifications wherewith he is
furnished, as the Husband of his Church, that ravisheth spiritual affections
far beyond the greatest beauty that can be in the fairest face; for, indeed he
is fairer than the sons of men, There is nothing that may make a Mediator
lovely but it is here. Again, as if that did not fully set out his
amiablenesse, she adds, He is the chiefest among ten thousand: This is a
definite great number for an indefinite; In sum it is this, there are many
beloveds indeed in the world, but compare them all with Christ, they are
nothing to him, without all controversy he is the chiefest, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6.
For, though there be gods many, and lords many (to the world) yet to us there
is but one God, and one Lord Jesus; in all the world there is but one Christ.
The word used here is, He is the standart-bearer, or it may be rendered
passively, He is standarted above ten thousand; all tending to the same scope:
Love ky^hes it is ^ethorick in seeking words to prefer Christ, as having
indignation that his precedence and pre-eminence (who is above all things, Col.
1. 17.) should so much as once be questioned: It Is like, that in these times
the most comely persons were chosen to carry the standart, a piece of dignity
being thereby put upon them; So then, if all the most choice, comely, and
excellent persons in the world were mustered together, Christ would be
preferred eminently and deservedly above them all. Whence, Observe, 1. That
Christ is the most lovely and excellent Object that men can set their eyes on,
that they can cast their love and affection upon: There is not such (...) one
as Christ, either for the spiritual soul-ravishing beauty that is in him, or
the excellent desirable effects that flow from him. O what a singular
description is it which follows, if it were understood ^2. Christ is the most
singularly excellent Husband that ever was closed with: Under that relation he
is commended here, as singularly lovely, and loving; It Is a most honorable,
comfortable, happy, and every way satisfying match to have him for a Husband.
3. Christ's worth in it self is not expressible, and whatever he can be
compared with, he does exceedingly surpass it. 4. Where right thoghts of
Christ are, there is nothing admitted to compete with him, other excellencies
and beloveds are in their greatest beauty darkened beside him; he is set up as
chief, and they are not to be taken notice of beside him, but to be accounted
loss and dung. 5. Christ's absence, when believers are right, will never
lessen their esteem of him, but even then believers will be warm and fresh in
their love to him, and high in their esteem of him. 6. Neither will the great
mistakes of others, shake believers that have a through esteem of Christ's
worth, but will rather with holy zeal awake them to commend him the more. 7. As
where there is true love to Christ, there Christ will be lovely; so when he is
looked on as lovely, that makes the heart to flow and abound with holy
rhethorick in commendations of him. 8. True love to Christ, and to others for
his sake, will not suffer one to despise the weakness of another, but make
them rather take occasion from it, to honor him and edify them so much the
more, as the Bride does he^e in answering the question proposed. 9. The more
nearly and fully any thing be compared with Christ, though it be otherwise
lovely, yet then it will be seen to be nothing, he so infinitely excells all
things he can be compared with; and it is ignorance of him that makes other
things get such a place in men's affections: but, when once they are set
for-against him, he is found preferable, as incomparably chief, for dignity,
riches, and satisfaction, or whatsoever is delightsome, desirable and truly
excellent, verse. 11, 12, 13. etc.

She passes from the general, to demonstrat it in particulars, and therein she
insists in the following verses. If it should be asked, why she descends into
particulars, especially now, considering her deserted case? I answer, for these
good reasons, 1. That she might the more fully demonstrat, and the more
satisfyingly unfold Christ's worth; For, his worth cannot be soon nor easily
told, nor conceived, nor soon believed by others, it needs to be demonstrated,
amplified and insisted upon; yet, his worth can bide the trial: There is no
truth may more fully and demonstratively be made out than this, that Christ is
a most excellent object of love, and infinitely preferable to all others. 2.
This is for the edifying of the daughters of Jerusalem, and in reference to
their question, that they might be the more convinced and satisfied anent the
incomparable worth and matchless excellency of her beloved, she brancheth it
forth and insists upon it, that so a deeper impression of it might be left upon
their hearts. Obs. 1. There is nothing more useful for the gaining and edifying
of others, than to help them to the right uptaking of Christ's worth. 2. That
is a great part of the work that should take up Christians in their fellowship
together, to be spending their mutual conferences on that subject for one
another instruction. 3. To edify another, is no diversion from pursuing after
him, to souls that love Christ, and would be helped by others to meet with him;
This is well consistent with her pursuing after sensible presence for her self,
to stay a while instructing them. A third reason of her insisting is, that it is
suitable unto, and agrees well with her own sad condition, when he is away, she
loves to think and speak of him, and of his loveliness, and that gives her
some ease. Obs. Where love to Christ is, there will be a delight in speaking of
him, and setting out his commendation, even when he is absent; it is a kind of
ease to tell over his qualifications when he is absent. 2. It Is a good
diversion under a deserted condition, and a suitable way to an outgate, to be
dwelling rather upon the excellency of Christ, than on the comfortless
aggravations of our own sad condition; this is more honorable to Christ, more
edifying to others, and more pleasant to our selves: O, it is sweet to think of
him! It Is more useful also for confirming of our faith in him, for warming our
affections to him, and for keeping the mind stayed in dependence on him for the
outgate: Every attribute or property of his, is a cordial to a soul fainting
under a deserted case. 4. Her insisting on this subject, shows the nature of
true love to Christ, that a soul affected with it, being once entered to speak
of this theme or subject (namely the excellency of Christ) it expatiats in it,
and is not soon withdrawn from it: This (to say so) is the very native element
of it, and it does the heart good to enumerat, and tell over distinctly the
commendable qualifications and excellencies of Christ: all which (being his
own) are unspeakably delightsome and refreshing to reckon: If there were any
good measure of love to Christ in men's hearts, they would not be easily
withdrawn from meditating on him, nor from speaking of him; and the great haunt
that other things have in our heart, and the rarity of any expression that
tends to Christ's commendation, shows plainly that there are (alace!) other
beloveds abounding with us beside him.

In opening of the following particulars, we would consider, 1. The scope,
which is to demonstrat, that Christ Jesus is altogether lovely and desirable
beyond all other things, that the hearts of men are set upon; The question
proposed, verse. 9. and the closing answer to it, verse. 16. makes this clear.
This then being the scope, these particulars must be so taken up, as they best
contribute to clear this scope, and so must necessarily imply the excellencies
that are in Jesus Christ; The Mediator himself being as the body, and the
several qualifications, properties and excellencies wherewith he is furnished,
being as the several members, and parts of that body. Now, seeing Jesus Christ
is so excellent himself, and these being instanced as the choice excellencies
that are in him, they must needs be exceeding and passing excellent, as the
aggreging and heightning of every commendation does show: There will be need
therefore of much sobriety, holy admiration and reverence, in the opening of
them, lest we spill so excellent a subject as is the transcendent excellency of
our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. That the Spirit intends by these parts, distinct
considerations of Christ's loveliness in so many distinct particulars, seems
also to be without all question; for, the particular enumeration is brought in
to demonstrat this general, that he is the chiefest among ten thousand, which
is done (as it were) by an induction of so many commendable things that are in
him: Beside in other Scriptures, and especially, Rev. 1. 13, 14. where our Lord
is thus considered, and also in the second and third Chapter of that book of
the Revelation, particular respect is had to the foresaid description, and
these parts are there (being equivalent to them that are here mentioned)
expounded of diverse attributes and properties of his, and not unlike in many
things to the description following, as the particulars will clear. Consider,
3. that it is both difficult and dangerous to be peremptory in the application
of these particulars to the object described, it being so exceeding glorious,
and the Spirits expressions so very comprehensive, we dar not so limit the
words to one thing, as if they were exclusive of another, nor say this is meant
and no other thing; although such and such things as have a necessary connection
with the scope to confirm it, may warrantably be included, and for instances
pitched upon, especially when from the Analogy that is in the expressions which
are borrowed, and from other Scriptures, we have some ground to fix upon: but
to be sure, the words would be so taken up as they best afford the most solid
general doctrines, which are sometimes (because of our darkness, and to
prevent our curiosity) to be rested in; for, whatever be meant, it is Christ,
and he by these commendations is set forth as most excellent: That all these
are to describe a divine person, and no humane body, we conceive so clear that
it needs no advertisement. 4. All these parts hold him forth, not only as
excellent in himself, but as lovely to his people, and as making up their
privilege and happiness in having an interest in him to be theirs; and
therefore as this is the scope, so it is to be applied as setting out his
excellency, and the blessedness of all that have him for theirs; as on the
contrary, to cry down all beloveds of the world, of whom these things cannot be
said, for they are singularly peculiar to him.

Verse. 11. His head is as the most fine Gold, his locks are bushy, and black as
a Raven.
There are ten parts mentioned, that are brought in as proofs of Christ's
singular excellency, each of them almost having a double commendation: two of
them are in the 11. verse. The first is, his head, the most eminent part of the
body; that furnishes influence and direction to all the rest: It may signfie
(if we dar adventure) these three in Christ, 1. His Godhead, which is the most
eminent nature of Christ's person, sustaining the other, and furnishing it for
it is offices; Thus, 1 Cor. 11. 3 as the head of the woman is the man, in
respect of his dignity; so the head of Christ is God, as the Godhead dwells in
him bodily, Col. 2. 9. by a wonderful and unspeakable personal union, the like
whereof is not to be found in any other. 2. It may hold out Christ's headship,
or sovereignty which he has as Mediator, being made head of the body, the
Church, and over all things for the Church, Ephesians. 1. 12. and his instalment into
this office, is the rise of all the other commendations that follow, which are
as parts thereof: Thus Nebuchad-nezzars soveraignity, as being a King of Kings,
is set out by a head of Gold, Dan. 2. 32, 38. 3. It may signify the
qualifications, wherewith he, as head to the body, is furnished for it is behove
and good: So he is an excellent head, for contriving of what is for the good of
the body, and for furnishing life and motion to all his members; Thus, Ephesians. 4.
16. he is the head, from whom the whole body, being fitly compacted together,
does make increase of it self in love: And to this purpose, a man of a great
reach and profound wit, uses to be called a great head. All these agree with
the scope, being instances of Christ's excellencies, and also with the
commendation following; yet, the first seems most agreeable to the Analogy of
head and members, and it is not unlike that Christ's Godhead is begun-at in his
commendation; surely it cannot be excluded, seeing, in Rev. 1. 14. by his head
(as there described) is set forth his eternity, the same nature may well be
here understood, though Christ be otherwise represented in the color of his
locks, because here he is described as a lovely Bridegroom, there as coming to
judge, as also in Dan. 7. But it must be some excellent thing that is meant, as
the commendation annexed cleares. His head is as the most fine Gold: In the
Original, there are two words indifferently made use of, to signify God, the
first because of it is shining brightness and beauty; The second is applied to
it, because of it is solidity and firmness; so it runs, his head is Gold of
Gold, or Gold and Gold, or fine shining and solid Gold, as if Gold were not
enough to set out the excellency of this head: Gold is rich in the quality,
solid and strong as to the efficacy, (as in chap. 3. 10.) sovereign as to
usefulness and profitablenesse; It Is above other metals, and so in the
heavenly Jerusalem, the streets are said to be of pure Gold, Rev. 21. 21.
Therefore that dominion of Nebuchad-nezzars, spoken of, Dan. 2. 32. is compared
to a head of Gold, for it is excellency above the rest that followed, and
especially for the shelter that the Church of God had under it: And this being
Gold of Gold, must hold forth such sovereignty, riches of grace, solidity and
happiness, as is unsearchable; Gold cannot reach it, no not Gold raised to the
highest worth conceivable.

This first particular may put us to a stand, when (as it were) the Bride is at
a stand in the commendation, and must double the word, as Gold, Gold, and it is
hard to draw observations from it, yet warrantably this may be said, 1. Christ
has a head (however we take it) that is exceedingly excellent, he is God, and
in that respect is unsearchable, being the brightness of the Fathers glory,
and the express image of his person, Heb. 1. 3. He, as Mediator, is furnished
with sovereignty and eminent graces for the good of the body; and these, as
they are for their nature most solid and excellent, so as to their virtue they
are most efficacious and quickening. 2. If we take it in general, Obs. That the
excellencies wherewith Christ is furnished, are in the highest degree of
excellency; Therefore it is Gold of Gold, what ever it be, and this general will
necessarily infer the former, that he is God and Mediator, and in such and such
offices furnished for the good of his people, and the former doctrine is the
proof of this: all Christ's properties, wisdom, love, counsel, etc. are of more
than an ordinary depth, being in him to the very uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. and
without measure, Joh. 3. 34. 3. Christ's excellency is not only lovely in it
self, but useful to others; he is not only rich in himself, but enriching these
that possess him, as Gold does enrich the owners of it: Christ is a golden
possession where there is a well grounded claim to him. 4. Gold and all
external riches, are empty things to a spiritual discerner of Christ's worth;
as it were, a new sort of Gold must be invented, or imagined, to shadow forth
the excellencies of Christ, Gold it self is but an insufficient and dark shadow
to represent him; who ever loves Gold, may have (and that freely) the most fine
and choice Gold in him. Yea, 5. this is peculiar to him, in opposition to all
other beloveds, men's idols and other beloveds may be gilded, like the whores
cup, spoken of, Rev. 17. 4. but Christ only is the golden beloved; for, this is
so attributed to him, as it is denied to them, which are but clay, or thick
clay-beloveds, Hab. 2. 6.

The second thing commended is his locks, which are no essential part of the
body, yet are (when lovely) a special decorement, and ever have been so
esteemed: The signification of locks (being joined to the head) will be so much
the more clear if we consider the commendation given them, which is threefold,
1. They are bushie, or curled, not such as old men have, hairs here and there,
but his are bushie, thick and handsome, such as young men in the flower and
vigor of their youth use to have. 2. They are black; and that, 3. as a Raven:
Black hair in these times and places was comely in men, and betokens strength
of youth, and vigor of age, Therefore the same word which is here blackness,
signifies youth also in the Hebrew, as Eccles. 11. 10. childehood and youth,
etc. So black hair here, is opposed to white hairs, whereby decay is signified
(as Hos. 7. 9. by gray hairs on Ephraim, is understood) and thus all other
idols gets a dash, as if they were gray haired, decaying beloveds; but Christ
is alwise in youth and vigor, He continues always vigorous, as his love is
always green. They are compared to the blackness of a Raven, because that is
native black, and lovely beyond other things that are black. As by Christ's
head then was signified that which is in Christ (to speak so) most intrinsickly
excellent; So here, by locks we understand the most extrinsick thing that is in
him (if we may say any thing of Christ is so) that is, if any thing seem less
necessary than another, yet is it in it self excellent, and serves to commend
Christ to others. And again, by bushinesse and blackness, we understand the
vigor and perfection of Christ's lovely and desirable excellencies, that as
loveliness and desirablenesse are in a man, when in his youth, at their height
and perfection, so are they in Christ, with all commendable aggravations, as in
their very prime and vigor. Gold did set forth the intrinsic worth of
Christ's qualifications, this aggreges it so, that it lifts up that worth to
the highest pitch that is conceivable: As a lovely man is yet loveliest in the
flower of his age and youth, so it is with Christ, his perfections are ever in
their flower, and never decays, nor does he ever fail in the exercising of
them for his peoples good, Isa. 42. 4. He shall not fail nor be discouraged;
and, as Rev. 1. 12. Christ's eternity is holden forth by white hairs, so by
black hairs is signified his continuing young, vigorous and flourishing (to say
so) through all eternity; which serves much to the scope of commending Christ;
for, whatever is attributed to him, is in an employed way denied to all other
beloveds: otherwise he were not the chiefest among them, and preferable to them
all, which is the scope. Obs. 1. There is nothing for completing Christ's
beauty but it is in him; yea, even these things in him, that are least taken
notice of by us (though nothing in him be little in it self) they are in
themselves, and in their use when discerned, exceeding lovely; his locks, yea,
all his garments are so, Psa. 45. 8. There is nothing superfluous, and useless
in our blessed Bridegroom. 2. What perfections are in Christ (as there are none
wanting) they are in him in their perfection: What unspeakable commendation is
here? 1. He has infinite numbers of perfections. 2. All these are rich, like
the most fine Gold 3. If there be a season (to speak so) wherein these
perfections may be conceived more lovely and shining than another (for in
themselves they are ever the same) they are so in our Lord Jesus Christ; It Is
ever Harvest, Summer and Youth with him; he is that tree spoken of, Rev. 22. 2.
which bears fruit always; this Sun is ever at the height, and never goes down:
Christ's perfections are continuing perfections, he is a beloved that never
decays, that never waxes sick, weak nor old, but is ever in youth with his
hair black, although he be eternal, and the Ancient of days, for all his
properties are unchangably in him, and ever agree to him, even now as well as
in Solomon's time, and will do so for ever: This is good and very comfortable
to his people, Christ fits not up nor fails, his Spouse weeps not for the
death, decay, or waxing old of her beloved and husband, which can be said of no
other. 3. All other beloveds beside Christ, are decaying beloveds, they evanish
and are growing gray headed; even all this clay-world shall wax old as does a
garment, and the beauty of it shall be stained, and it will become weak, like
an old dying harlot with whom many has gone a whoring; for, if this, to be
black and bushy, be peculiar to Christ, it cannot agree to them, for, they
shall wax old, but he is the same, Psa. 102. 27. which words are peculiarly
applied to Christ, Heb. 1. 10. 4. This continued flourishing of Christ's
excellency in it is perfection, does put Christ supereminently above all
compare, as having no match amongst all beloveds; they decay, but he is the
same; they are broken cisterns, and can hold no water of comfort, and appear
with no beauty at death and judgment, and through eternity they will be as
clothes worn and failed; but, Christ is fresh and vigorous at death to the
believer, and will be so for ever: How blessed are they, when they come to eat
of the tree of life that never wants fruit, to possess him who is yesterday,
to day, and for ever the same, God over all, blessed for evermore! O the
happiness! the eternal happiness, that there is in being espoused to Christ,
when the breath of all clay-idols and beloveds will be out, and Christ still
fresh in the communicating of his fullness to his people! O what a sad heart
will many have, who have forsaken this fountain of living-waters, and chosen
such broken cisterns to themselves as the creatures are, that have set their
heart on that which is not. Prove. 23. 5. and labored for the wind, Eccles. 5.
16. loading themselves with thick clay, Hab. 2. 6. and have neglected him who
gave, and who continues the being of all things, and who then will be, when
they will not be found, or have a being! In sum (says she) my beloved is the
golden beloved, others are but of clay and earth; my beloved is in his flower,
and youth; other beloveds are decaying, waxing old, and drawing to their grave,
therefore is he incomparable beyond them all.

Verse. 12. His eyes are as the eyes of Doves by the rivers of waters, washed
with milk and fitly set.
The third thing commended in him, is in verse. 12. and it is his eyes, which
are several ways described: Eyes in the natural body are the Organs, whereby
we discern external objects; the Lord as he is a Spirit, has nobody, nor
bodily members, but eyes are attributed to him, to hold forth his Omniscience,
who having formed the eye, cannot but see, Psalm. 94. 9. and therefore eminently
is said to see, in opposition to the idols, who have eyes and see not, Psa.
151. 5. This then, sets out our Lords Omniscience, before whom, all things are
naked and open, Heb. 4. 3. even the most secret things are open to his view, as
if by the most sharp-sighted bodily eye he did behold them, and much more; So,
Prove. 15. 3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and
the good: And, Prove. 5. 21. The ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord,
he knows them, as if he were looking on them with eyes, all things are so naked
and discernable to him: This agrees also with that, Rev. 2. 18. where Christ is
said to have eyes as a flame of fire: which title, verse. 23. is expounded, (as
all these titles throughout these Epistles are) and said to be given him, that
men may know that he searches the heart, and tries the reins,; even the most
inward things are fully reached by his Alseeing eye.

The excellency of his eyes (or Omnisciency thereby pointed out) is held forth
under several similitudes, 1. They are as Doves eyes, such as were attribute to
the Bride, Chap. 4. 1. that is, eyes that are quick, lovely and loving, having
much affection in them to his own. 2. They are, as Doves eyes by the rivers of
water, where Doves are most lovely after their washing, or bathing and beeking
of themselves at river-sides. 3. They are washen with milk, that is, most
clean, white and pure. 4. They are fitly set, or (as the word is) set in
fullness, like the stones in Aarons breastplate, Exodus 39. 10. (where the same
word is) signifying that there is no deformity in them, but like curious
Jewels, they are most equally and beautifully set, being neither too hollow,
nor sticking too far out, which are the two extreme deformities in eyes. In
sum, it says, 1. That Christ's knowledge is sharp and peircing. 2. Pure and
clean. 3. Pleasant to his people to look on. And, 4. that it is kindly vented,
and well qualified for the good of his people, whereby he is made exceeding
lovely to them. These notes are sure here, 1. That our Lord Jesus is
Omniscient, knowing all the designs of enemies, knowing all the straits and
necessities of his people, he actually takes notice of all these. 2. Christ's
Omniscience is one of his chiefest excellencies, that qualifies him for the
good and comfort of his people, and does exceedingly commend him to them above
all others: It Is a very present comfort to his people, especially in the time
of trouble, that their Beloved knows all, what we are, what we have need of,
and what is good for us, and what is designed to our prejudice by any of all
our adversaries, and cannot mistake. 3. Christ's Omniscience, though it be
terrible to his enemies (so his eyes are as a flame of fire) yet it is very
amiable to his people, his eyes to them are as Doves eyes, his Al-seeing
knowledge is kindly and comfortable, and exercised for their good (as all his
other attributes are) and is still on work for their good and advantage, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. His eyes run to and fro throughout the earth, to show himself
strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward him: He takes
notice of the case of his own, that he may succor them in their wants, as he
takes notice of his enemies, that he may disappoint and bring them down. 4.
When the eye of the Covenant with Christ is once fastened, these attributes in
him which are most terrible to flesh, and to men in nature, are exceeding
lovely, and make Christ beautiful to his people, as his Omniscience, Justice,
Faithfulness, etc. 5. As it is our duty, so it is our advantage to walk under
the conviction of Christ's Omniscience, and to converse before him with the
faith of his beholding what we are doing. 6. It Is a good evidence of sincerity,
when his Omniscience becomes delightsome to us, and when the heart is made glad
with this, that Christ knows the secrets thereof, as Peter speaks, John 21.
17. Thou that know all things, know that I love thee: It Is much to abide
Christ's search, as Omniscient, contentedly. 7. All other idols and beloveds
are blind, they have no eyes, or though they seem to have, they see not, Psalm.
115. 5. that is, they can take no notice of, nor give any succor to, their
worshippers: Our Lord's eyes, that are upon his people, make him singularly
preferable to all that come in competition with him. 8. It is a singular
commendation of Christ's knowledge, that it is pure and holy, that it cannot
approve of sin, nor take any complacency in it; for, his eyes are as Doves
eyes, by the rivers of waters, washen with milk: He is of purer eyes than that
he can behold iniquity, O how does he delight in purity! and what a strong
motive may and ought this to be with his people, to make a covenant with their
eyes, that they get not leave to wander and gadd on sinful objects?

Verse. 13. His cheeks are as a bed of Spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like
Lilies, dropping sweet smelling Myrrh.
The fourth and fifth instances of Christ's loveliness, are in this verse. The
fourth is, that his cheeks are as a bed of Spices, as sweet flowers: The cheeks
being comely, are a special part of the loveliness of the face: His cheeks are
here commended from two things, first, they are as a bed of Spices, that is,
like garden-beds furnished with excellent smelling and refreshful Spices: It
sets out 1. A proportionable hight of them, as cheeks are in the face, and as
beds are higher than the rest of the ground. 2. A preciousnesse and sweetness
of Spirit-refreshing savor, as such beds use to yield to these who walk in a
garden. The second commendation is, as sweet flowers, or as the words may be
read, as towers of perfume: It tends to the same purpose, but holds forth an
abundance of delight, to the spiritual sense of smelling in the believer, when
Christ is made the Object of it; O the sweet savor he finds in him! It Is fit
to be sober here, these excellencies being mysteries: It Is not unlike, that
lesser glimpses of Christ's manifestations, whereby he makes himself known, may
be understood here; as if she said, he is so lovely, that the least glimpse or
wa^^e of him, when it is seen, if it were but of his cheek, is very
delightsome: And this sense may be gathered, 1. From this, that the cheek is a
part of the face and countenance, yet not the full countenance; now by seeing
his face and beholding his countenance, often in Scripture (and it is like also,
verse. 15.) is understood his most sensible manifestations of himself to his
people; by proportion then the cheeks would hold forth the same, though in a
lesser measur^ and lower degree. 2. It makes well for the scope of commending
Christ above all, whose incomparable worth by his manifestations, is much
evidenced and confirmed to his people, and when a little glimpse of him does
this, how much more would a full view of him demonstrate it? and indeed such a
view does effectually demonstrate it to these who have experimentally known the
excellency that is in him, although others who are unacquaint with his face, do
therefore undervalue him, which may be hinted at as a cause of their so doing.
3. This agrees with the commendation, which sets him forth in this as pleasant
to the spiritual sense of smelling, and so would imply, that it must be
somewhat whereby Christ becomes sensibly sweet and refreshful, as his sensible
manifestations make him more delightsome and refreshing to the souls senses,
than towers of perfume are to the bodily senses; Therefore is his love compared
to ointment, Chap. 1. 3. and elsewhere: However, these things are certain, 1.
That the least glimpse of Christ's countenance is exceeding refreshful and
savory to the spiritual senses. 2. That Christ's excellencies are delightsome
to all the spiritual senses, to the smell as well as to the eye, ear, etc. the
whole soul, and all it is faculties have abundant matter in him, for delighting
and refreshing them all. 3. The more senses be exercised on Christ, and the more
sensible (to speak so) he become unto us, he will be the more lovely and
pleasant; beds of Spices, and towers of perfume in a garden, to them that lie
amongst them, are not so savory as Christ is, when the senses of the soul are
exercised to discern him.

The fifth thing instanced, is, his lips, The Brides lips were spoken of, Chap.
4. 3, 11. and cleared to signify her speech: By proportion they hold forth in
him the loveliness of his Word, wherein he is especially lovely, in that he
magnifies it above all his Name, Psalm. 138. 2. and makes it often sweet as the
honey and the honeycomb to his people. This may be looked on, 1. as it respects
the matter spoken by him, out of whose mouth many gracious words proceeded
(while in the flesh) even to the admiration of his hearers, Luke 4. 22. So that
upon conviction they say, never man spoke as this man speaks, Joh. 7. 46. Or,
2. It may look to Christ's manner of speaking, and his fitness to communicate
his mind to his people, (as lips are the organs of speaking) so he has grace
poured into his lips, Psalm. 45. 2. that makes all his words gracious, as being
formed or anointed by it. Thus it takes in that holy Art, skill and dexterity
wherewith Christ is furnished, to speak for the consolation of believer,
especially under sad exercises, as it is, Isa. 50. 4. He has the tongue of the
learned, to speak a word in season to him that is weary: Both these in the
result come to one; and this being a special piece of Christ's loveliness to
his people, conducing exceedingly to the Brides scope here, and the Analogy
being clear, and lips being frequently made use of in Scripture to signify
speech or words, we conceive that they may well be taken to here, especially
considering, that all the parts of the commendation will agree well to his
words. 1. They are like Lilies, that is, pleasant and savory; so words spoken
in season, are often called pleasant and sweet like honey, Prove. 16. 24. yea,
they are said to be like apples of gold in pictures of silver, Prove. 25. 11.
His words then may well be compared to Lilies. 2. They are not common words,
therefore it must not be ordinary Lilies that will set them forth, but they are
like Lilies dropping sweetsmelling Myrrh: such Lilies we are not acquaint
with, and nature, though excellent in it is effects, yet comes short in
furnishing fit resemblances to represent Christ, and what is in him to the
full: These Lilies dropping Myrrh, signify, 1. A favorinesse and cordial
efficacy in the matter, like Myrrh proving comfortable to these it falls or
drops upon. 2. Dropping shows abundance, seasonablenesse, and continuednesse
therein, so as he still furnishes such strengthening efficacy and influence, as
if it were ever dropping, and never dried up, as the phrase was, Chap. 4. 11.
All these agree well, either to Christ the speaker, who never wants a
seasonable word; or, to the word spoken, which in respect of it is effects,
endures for ever. This must be an excellent Beloved (says she) who speaks
much, and never a word falls from his lips, but it is precious and savory, like
any cordial to the souls of his people, especially in their fainting fits; and
there is ever some good word to be gotten from him, far from the rough speeches
that many uses, but O so pleasant and kindly as all his words are! Obs. 1.
There is a special loveliness in our Lord Jesus words to his people; how much
of this appears throughout the 4. Chapter of this Song? and what love appears
in all his promises? yea, in the titles that he gives his people, every one is
(as it were) big with child of strong consolation to them. 2. Christ's words
have a special refreshing efficacy in them, and can comfort, refresh and
sustain drooping sick souls; he sends out his Word and it heals them. 3.
These who love Christ himself truly, have also an high esteem of his Word, and
are much delighted with that; and where there is little esteem of his Word,
there is but little esteem of himself: They who have tasted the sweetness of
the Word, do highly esteem of Christ himself. 4. The word of Christ is as
Christ's own lips, and does sweetly set out his thoughts of love to sinners;
It Is good reading of Christ's loveliness out of his own Word, and from his own
mouth. 5. Where there has been a sweetness felt in the Word, it should be
turned over to the commendation of Christ that spoke it, as a proof of the
reality of his excellent worth. 6. The Word is never rightly made use of,
though it should fill the head with knowledge, till it be savory to the inward
man and spiritual senses; and it is that which makes it lovely, when the virtue
and consolation that flows from it is felt. 7. All the consolations of the
Word, they come not out at once, neither can we so receive them, but it drops
by little and little in continuance; and therefore daily should men draw from
these wells of Salvation. 8. Observe from the scope, that Christ's Word known
by experience, will lift and set Christ up in the heart beyond all beloveds;
and that the unacquaintednesse of many with Christ's lips, and the consolations
that abound in his Word, makes them so ready to ^light him, and set up their
idols above him. The scope says further, that she was acquaint with his words,
and the refreshfulnesse of them, and in this she is differenced from others.
Whence, Observe. 9. that believers are acquaint with the sweetness of Christ's
Words, otherwise than any in the world are; Christ is another thing to them,
and his Word is so also, than to all the world beside: It Is a good sign, where
Christ's lips are so lovely.

Verse. 14. His hands are as Gold-rings set with the Beryl: his belly is as
bright Ivory overlaid with Saphirs.
The sixth and seventh particulars instanced to commend Christ, are in verse.
14. The sixth is, his hands: The hands are the instruments of action, as the
lips are of speaking: They are commended, that they are as Gold-rings, that is,
as men or women's hands are adorned with Gold-rings, so his hands have a native
loveliness beyond these: yet, this commendation (as all the former) answers
not fully, therefore it is added, they are set with Beryl: This was a precious
stone put in Aaron's breast plate, Exodus 39. 13. To be set with it, signifies,
as preciousnesse, so rare artifice, and such is seen in the right setting of
precious stones. By our Lord's hands, may be understood that powerful activity
whereby he is fitted to bring about what he pleases, and that power which he
exercises especially in the works of grace, as on verse. 4. was cleared: Or, we
may understand the effects produced by that his power, or his works which are
exceeding glorious, as, Psalm. 109. 27. That they may know, O Lord, that this is
thy hand, that is, that thou Lord have done it: So his hands signify such
works especially wherein his Divine power, art and skill does manifest
themselves for the good of his people: Both agree well together; for, excellent
power and skill produce excellent effects, and excellent effects demonstrat the
excellent qualifications of the worker; this being a main piece of Christ's
commendation, and which does hold him forth to be exceeding lovely above all to
the believer (which is the scope) may well be taken here as the meaning,
especially being subjoined to the commendation of his words; for, our Lord
Jesus does not only say well, but also does well: he is a prophet, mighty both
in word and deed, Luke 24. 19.

The commendation suits with his works, as if there were none of them, but what
are adorned (as it were) with excellent Gold-rings, there being much glory,
grace, wisdom and skill shining in them all, they are honorable and glorious,
Psalm. 111. 3. Yea, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord God Almighty,
Rev. 15. 4. These are the deserved epithets of his actions: In sum, it is, as
if she had said, Ask ye what my beloved is, more than others? If ye saw but a
glimpse of the white and red that is in his cheeks, and if ye heard the sweet
words that proceed from his mouth, and if ye knew the excellent works which he
has performed, even to admiration, for the good of his people, and how much
loveliness appears in all these, ye would (no doubt) say with me, He is the
chiefest among ten thousand.

Obs. 1. Christ is an active husband, having hands, and working with them for
the good of his Bride: A piece of his work we heard of, chap. 3. 9. in that
noble Chariot: He is no idle spectator; he works hitherto, Joh. 5. 17. 2. All
our Lord Jesus his works, are exceeding excellent and beautiful, and when
rightly discerned, they will appear wonderful, honorable and glorious, as
proceeding from him who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, Isa.
28. 29. What a curious and excellent piece of work is that Chariot, or the
Covenant of Redemption signified thereby, chap. 3. 9? There are many shining
well-set Jewels, and Rings upon every finger of his hands: There is nothing
that can be done better than what he has done. The works of Christ in our
redemption, do hold forth infinite skill, and gloriousness to be in the worker,
all of them are so wisely contrived, and exquisitly execute. 3. Christ's works
do exceedingly endear him, and that deservedly to his people, and do infallibly
demonstrate his worth above all beloveds in the world; Who is like unto him?
and who can do great works, such as he has done? This makes heaven to resound
with the praises of what this beloved has done for his people. 4. Believers
would be acquaint both with Christ's words and his works, and would be well
versed in the knowledge of the excellencies that are in them both, that so they
may be the more affected with him themselves, and be more able to commend him
to others. 5. Where Christ is lovely, all his works will be delightsome: and
it is by acquaintance with, and observation of, his excellent works, that the
hearts of his people come to take him up, and to be rightly affected with him.
6. As ignorance of the excellency of Christ's works (especially of the work of
Redemption) makes many slight Christ, and prefer others to him (for, she would
discover the daughters of Jerusalem their mistake of him, by instancing this
amongst other things) so it is a kindly-like thing, to have a honorable esteem
of Christ's works in the heart. 7. Although the devil and men's idols seem to
promise much to their lovers, when they suit and entice them; yet never one
indeed can equal Christ, or compare with him, in respect of what he has done
for his Bride; and this sets him up incomparably above them all: His hands, in
respect of his magnificent works, are adorned, as it were, with Gold-rings;
whereas they have hands, but work not for the help and relief of their lovers,
Psa. 115. 7.

The seventh part of this demonstration of Christ's worth, is from his belly:
The word in the Original is the same word, which, verse. 4. is rendered bowels,
and we rather use it so here as it signifies bowels, the native signification
of it, as not knowing why it should be altered in this verse; especially
considering, that wherever it is attributed to God, it is translated bowels, as,
Isa. 63. 15. where is the sounding of thy bowels? and, Ier. 31. 20. my bowels
are moved for him: Reading it then thus, his bowels are as bright ivory, etc.
The words at the very first, would seem to signify the intense love and tender
affection, wherewith our Lord Jesus (who is full of grace) is filled and
stuffed (to say so) for the behove and good of his people, so that no mother is
so compassionatly affected toward the fruit of her womb, as he is toward his
own. This exposition is, 1. confirmed from the ordinary signification of the
word bowels, when it is applied to God, as, Isa. 63. 15. and, Ier. 31. 20. and
it is borrowed from the affection that mothers have to their children, whose
bowels yerns on them, as, 1 King. 3. 26. and so Joseph was affected toward his
brethren, Genesis 43. 30. Hence the word, both in the Hebrew and Greek, in the Old
and New Testament, which is made use of to set forth the Lords tender
compassion, flows from a root that signifies bowels. 2. The scope will
confirm this: for, is there any thing that makes Christ more lovely and
admirable than his love? which makes the Prophet cry out, Mic. 7. 18. who is a
God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity? etc. because thou delights in
mercy; or, is there any other thing that more commends him as a beloved
preferable to all, than his love? Love in a husband is a special property. Now
Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5. 25. it is not like
therefore, that this is omitted: And, 3. it follows well on the commendation
of his works for, and about, his people, as showing the fountain from whence
they proceed; The commendation of this is excellent. 1. It is as bright Ivory:
Ivory is rarely and singularly pure and pleasant, being made of Elephants
teeth: bright, is added, to show, that it is of the best sort, as all that is in
Christ is. 2. It Is overlaid with Saphires; that was a stone in Aarons breast
plate, and also is reckoned one of the foundation-stones of the new Jerusalem,
Rev. 21. 19. which shows, that it is very precious, though we know not the
particular properties of it: The word overlaid, may be from the Original
rendered curiously set, or, enambled: In sum, here, his love is described as
most lovely, clean and pleasant, like Ivory; rich and precious like Saphires;
and well ordered and wisely vented for the good of his people, as bright Ivory
curiously enambled with Saphires: His love is a most excellent, curious and
pleasant object, the like whereof is not to be found amongst all the beloveds
of the world. This verse commends Christ's heart and inside, which is
unsearchable as to it is height, depth, breadth, and length: It may therefore
be hard, and some way hazardous to offer doctrines on, or to form expressions
concerning, that which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. the comprehending
experimental knowledge of it, will be the best commentary on it; yet these
things are clear and safe,

1. There is singular love, affection and bowels in our Lord Jesus to his
people; so singular, that there is none can compare with him in this, no
husband, nay nor wife, it passes the love of women; No tenderhearted mother,
and much less any idol can compet with him in this; It Is inconceivable in it
self, and it is wonderful in it is effects. 2. There is nothing that will
contribute more to make believers see Jesus Christ as admirable in himself, and
lovely to them, than the right apprehension of his love: This is the
constraining, ravishing, engaging, and soul-in-ebriating consideration of
Christ, the conceiving of him rightly in his admirable love; and they will
never esteem of Christ rightly, who discerns not that, it is (as it were) his
crown; and the believing of it, is in a sort the putting of the crown on his
head: Amongst all his excellencies, none takes the believer more up than his
love, and nothing is more remarkable in him than that, and right thoughts of
Christ's love is no ill token. 3. Our Lord Jesus his love and bowels are a rich
Jewel when seen, a precious stately sight; bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires
is but a small and dark shadow of it; Christ's love is a possession beyond
Jewels, a very beautiful object to look on, beyond the most excellent creature:
It Is both a wonder and a heart-break that it is so little thought of, and that
men are not more delighted in it.

4. Although there be much in many mouths of Christ's love, yet there are few
that really knows and believes the love that he has to his people, 1 Ioh 3. 1.
As this is the cause that so few loves him, and why so many sets up other
beloveds beside him; so, the solid faith of this, and the expectation of good
from him, has a great engaging virtue to draw sinners to him, Heb. 11. 6. and
for that end it is made use of here. 5. Whatever seeming smiles, idols may give
to their lovers, yet will they not prove lovers in the end to them; for, that
is proper to Christ, he only has strong love and bowels of affection to his
own to the end, but other lovers in the end will fail men, Only our Lord Jesus
continues a loving Husband to the end; for, whom he loves, he loves to the
end. 6. It is beyond all peradventure, good and desirable to be matched with
Jesus Christ, where so much honor, riches, power, wisdom, loveliness and love
meet all together; for, the scope of this, and of all the rest of the
commendations, is to engage sinners to match with him. 7. There is no cause to
be jealous of Christ's love, his people have a most loving Husband, and never a
sport or ground of jealousy has defiled his bowels since the world began, but
they to this day are, and will be for ever as bright Ivory. 8. Christ's love is
excellent in it self, and is also excellent in the way of it is communicating it
self to his people; therefore it is not as Saphires that are confusedly casten
together, but that are artificially set; or, our Lord Jesus vents not his love
fondly (to speak with reverence) or imprudently, but most wisely, skilfully,
and seasonably, so as it may be for the good of his people; not as a fond and
too indulgent mother, that gives that which is even hurtful because the child
desires it, but as a wise father who gives that which is useful, though it be
unpleasant: He guids his love by discretion, and according to expediency, as
Ioh. 16. 7. It Is expedient for you that I go, and therefore he will go, though
they were even made sad with it. 9. Although some pieces of Christ's love,
being considered in themselves, seem not so pleasant and lovely, like precious
stones not rightly set, yet when all are seen together, and every thing taken
up as in it is own place, and proportionably corresponding with one another, and
especially in respect of the fountain of love from which they come, they will
then (being all looked on together) be seen to be very beautiful and pleasant
and well ordered, like bright Ivory, that is regularly and curiously enambled,
or indented with Saphires: The time comes, when Christ's love will be thought
to be exquisitly and wisely let out and conveyed, even in these things wherein
it is most suspected now by his own.

Verse. 15. His legs are as pillars of Marble, set upon sockets of fine Gold:
his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.
The eighth and ninth particulars of Christ's commendation, are in verse. 15.
The first of them here commended is his legs: The word legs, comes from a root
in the Original, that signifies to walk; and so takes in things and feet,
which are also useful in motion. In Scripture, and by Analogy, they are made
use of to signify these two, 1. A man's way in the series of his carriage and
deportment, as ordinarily his life is called a walk: So, Eccl. 5. 1. Take heed
unto thy feet, that is, to thy carriage; Hence the iniquities of the heels are
spoken of, Psalm. 49. 5. to set out men's defects, that cleave to them in their
conversation, as their feet leave prints or footsteps behind them in their
walking. 2. This metaphor signifies strength and activity, as Psalm. 147. 10.
The Lord delights not in the strength of an horse, nor in the legs of a man;
wherefore (very probably) Eccles. 12. 3. they are called the strong men,
because they sustain or bear up the body: Here being applied to Christ, we
conceive they signify his way, or administration of providence, which he uses
with his people, it being by his dispensations that he walks amongst them.
Hence the series of common providence is so often in Scripture called the way
of the Lord, as Ezekiel. 18. 25. The Lords way is equal, his carriage in his
dispensations is still just, opposite to their way, or walk, which is there
called unequal: And the dispensation of grace is called a way, Romans 11. 33. How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out; which take-in
the contrivance, and administration of his grace, as the scope there does
clear. His way is more general and comprehensive than his works, and takes-in
these three (for which it is called a way.) 1. His design and end, that he
proposes to himself. 2. His wise and powerful plot in contriving and applying
means suitable thereunto, for bringing it about, especially the principle (to
say so) by which he walks and works, to wit, hs wisdom, power and love. 3. His
convoy of, and the progress which he makes in, these, by which he is ever
proceeding toward his end, as a man does in his way by walking with his legs:
In all these respects, the Lords way of carrying on his design is said to be
unsearchable: This we take as intended here, to set forth and commend the
gracious and glorious steps of the Lord, in the administration of his grace,
both in it is contrivance and application amongst his people, whereby his
wisdom, power and goodness, are in these paths of his (that are all mercy and
truth to his own, Psalm. 25. 10.) made exceeding lovely and stately, as the
commendation following imports. This is confirmed, 1. by the Analogy that is
betwixt the legs and walking, and the frequent use that the Scripture makes of
this similitude for that end, and no other thing can suit so well. 2. In Rev.
2. 18. Where Christ's legs and feet are spoken of, with a commendation not
unlike what follows here, namely, that they are like fine brass, as his eyes
are expounded, verse. 23. by this, that he searches the heart, and tries the
reins; so his feet are set out by this, that he renders to every one according
to their works, that is, he keeps an equal and just way in his administration
toward every one. 3. The scope likewise confirms this, Christ being by his way
to his people commendable above all, and this being a special commendation of
his, that all his works are perfect, and all his ways are judgment, Deuteronomy. 32.
4. As also the property attributed to his legs, and from which they are
commended, will clear this, which is, that they are like pillars of Marble:
Marble is a stone that is firm, good and pleasant, therefore was it prepared by
David, for the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29. 2. Pillars signify strength, orderlinesse
and beauty, as was cleared on Chap. 3. 10. which may be applied here: So
pillars of Marble say, that his ways are curiously, skilfully and sickerly
contrived; and wisely, dexterously and infallibly executed, and firmly settled
like pillars, and that of Marble, for unmoveablenesse: The amplification of the
commendation confirms this also, they are not only like pillars of Marble, but
also like pillars set on sockets of fine Gold; pillars are durable, according
to the bases or foundation upon which they are set and founded, Now Gold (as
often has been said) signifies preciousnesse and solidity, so all of them are
settled and fixed on a good and precious ground, which cannot fail, and
therefore they cannot shake, slide, nor slip, but prosper he must in his ways,
and nothing can mar his design, for he is of one mind, and who can turn him?
and what his soul desires, that he does, Job 23. 13. Yet not only are his feet
or legs of brass, (which shows severity against enemies, in his troding on
them, Dan. 10. 6.) but the sockets are of Gold, as his head was, verse. 11. all
is of Gold that is in him, he is a golden Mediator and Beloved from head to
foot, whereas others are clay-beloveds: The sockets are of Gold, to show his
graciousnesse to his people, as Psalm 25. 10. all his ways are settled on mercy
and truth, all his decrees anent them are made lovely and sure by grace, and so
cannot be but precious and excellent as to them.

Observe. 1. Our Lord Jesus has a design, a gracious design, that he is
carrying on amongst his people, and he is ever promoving therein for the end
which he has proposed; he is not like the idols of the Gentiles, Psalm. 115. 7.
which have feet and walk not, but as he sees with his eyes, and works with his
hands, so does he walk and make progress with his legs. 2. Christ's way with
his people, is a most excellent and stately way; or, in all his convoy of grace
toward his people, there is a special excellency shining; All his ways and
works are holy and righteous, Psalm. 145. 17. Just and true, Rev. 15. 3.
Gracious and loving, even all mercy and truth, Psalm. 25. 10. This King of
Saints is marvelous in his way of grace, as he is in all his works. 3. Christ's
purpose cannot ^ail, neither can his design be altered, the contrivance thereof
is so wise, and the execution so powerful, he cannot but attain his point. 4.
However men may quarrel with Christ's way, and say it is not equal, as Ezekiel. 18.
25. And although his way may be sometimes in the deep waters, and not
discernable, Psalm. 77. 19. yet, it is ever ordered in deep wisdom, that there
can be nothing more just, holy and glorious, so that there is no reason to
complain thereof; and this holds, not only in one step or two, but in the whole
series of his way. 5. A right sight of Christ's wise, glorious and Omnipotent
way of grace, will make him singular in the estimation of his people, and put
him above all other beloveds, whose ways are neither for wisdom, nor stability,
any way comparable to his; for, all the counsels and designs of the world
beside his, will come to naught, and be made, nill they will they, subservient
to his: clay-idols have their breath in their nostrils, and in that same very
day when it goes out, their thoughts perish, Psalm. 146. 4. but it is not so
with his, they are more solidly founded, and these strong legs, that are of
Marble, can neither be bowed nor broken: It must then be most sure and safe for
the Lord's people to drive this as their design, to side and share with Christ
in his designs; and it must be a most desperate thing to drive contrary designs
to him, whose legs are as pillars of Marble, and before whom none can stand. 6.
Where there is respect to Christ, there will be an high estimation of his way;
and it is a good sign of an especial esteem of Christ, when his ways are admired
and loved.

The ninth particular instance, brought to prove that he is the chiefest among
ten thousand, is, that his countenance is like Lebanon: The word countenance,
as it is in the Original, comes from a root that signifies to see, therefore
countenance is used in Scripture, not only to signify the face, but the whole
stature and presentation of a person, or that which gives a full sight of one
in all his parts together; and so it is here, and differs from the cheeks
mentioned, verse. 13. as being more extensive and comprehensive: Therefore that
phrase, which, 2 Samuel 23. 21. is rendered a goodly man, or man of countenance
(as it is in the Original) is, 1 Chronicles. 11. 23. (where that same story is
recorded) expressed by this, that the Egyptian was a man of stature, as if it
were said, a brave personage of a man, and so it takes-in face, legs, body and
altogether, when all these are so proportioned, as they make one, a person
goodly to be seen and looked on: Now this being applied to Christ, as subjoyned
to the particulars formerly mentioned, we conceive it takes-in his matchless
stateliness, as it results from all his properties together, so that not only
this or that part of Christ is lovely, but whole Christ, when seen, is
exceeding stately and lovely to the view and faith of a discerning believer,
whatever others think of him; So then, the meaning is, ask ye what my Beloved
is? (says she) as all his parts are beautiful severally considered, so all
being put together, he is a most stately and lovely Object to behold, when he
gives a full view of his countenance. It sets out then, a more full view of
Christ, or Christ in a more full view, as if not only a man's head or legs were
seen, but his whole stature, whereby he is more fully discernable: Thus
Christ's countenance in Scripture, is put to signify his manifestations to his
people; and here being subjoyned to the cheeks, as more extensive, it
signifies more full manifestations, whereby a view (as it were) of whole
Christ is attained at once by the believers faith, as by faith, Heb. 11. 27.
Moses is said to have seen him that is invisible: And this will agree well with
the scope, and the commendation following, which is in two things, 1. It is as
Lebanon, a most pleasant, stately hill, and therefore that which is excellent,
is often compared to it, as was said on Chap. 4. 8. 11. 15. 2. It Is amplified,
that it is excellent as the Cedars: They were useful, stately and tal^ trees,
especially these that grew in Lebanon; The word is, elect, or choice as the
Cedars, which agrees well with a goodly presentation, to be tal, straight and
stately, as they were: Therefore the Brides stature is compared to a palm tree,
Chap. 7. 7. In a word, my Beloved (when seen) looks excellently and
passing-well (says she) so as there is no other Beloved in the world that has
such an aspect as he; who can look on him and not love him?

Observe. 1. Although there is no fully comprehensive view of Christ to be
gotten here, even by the faith of a believer (while we are upon the earth we
cannot see him as he is, that being reserved for heaven) yet there are more
full up-takings of him attainable, even here-away, than ordinarily believers
meet with; yea, such full views of him are to be had, which in respect of our
other ordinary seize may be called a beholding of his countenance,
whereas these are but a beholding of his cheeks, for he has a countenance
which is discernable: neither does the Bride speak of that she never saw, but
of what she has seen; and it imports a more full, near, through and distinct
^ight of him than is usual. 2. There is no such lovely, delightsome,
spiritually gallant, stately and glorious Object, as our Lord Jesus, complexly
considered as in himself; and there will be no sight more satisfying to a
believer than this, when admitted to behold it. 3. All other beloveds, whatever
they be in themselves, are yet exceedingly, nay infinitely short of him when he
is seen; this differenceth him from them all, the more and the better other
beloveds be seen, they are found to be the more fecklesse, insignificant and
little worth; but the more full view be gotten of Christ, he is found to be the
more excellent. 4. Slight and passing views of Christ, makes men think the
less of him, whereas more full, distinct and near beholding of him, does
highten the esteem of him, and lessen the esteem of all others beside him. 5.
Faith in Christ will make a real impression of him, and of his excellency upon
the heart of a believer* even as if he had been seen by sense: therefore she
speaks so of his countenance; and it is a good sign, to be distinct and
confident in our apprehensions of Christ's excellencies.

Verse. 16. His mouth is most sweet; yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my
Beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.
The tenth and last particular commended in him, is in the beginning of the 16.
verse. and it is his mouth, which is compared to sweetness, or sweetnesses in
the plural number. By mouth sometimes is understood the words of the mouth, but
it is not so used in this Song: The Brides words, and his also are set out by
their lips, and it is not like, that that being spoken of, verse. 13. is repeated
here. Again, the mouth, and it is sweetness especially, may be mentioned to
signify friendlinesse and love, or rather the sensible manifestations of
these, as the husband does by kissing his wife; and in this sense is taken,
Chap. 1. 2. and we take that to be aimed at here, to wit, the sweetness of
Christ's more immediate manifestations of himself unto the spiritual sense of
his people, by shedding the love of God abroad in their hearts, by the Holy
Ghost, Romans 5. 5. For, this sensible manifestation of his love, is a thing that
much commends him to his people, and is their satisfaction, in opposition to
all the creature-satisfactions that others have, Psalm* 4. 6, 7. therefore it
agrees well with the scope. Again, it is a different commendation from any that
is mentioned, 1. It differs from his lips, or the comfort that one has from
the Word, as from the Word (though it is not to be separate from that, but to
carry that along with it) yet this is more immediate and sensible, and that is
mediate, though real and sure unto ^aith. 2. It differs from seeing his cheeks,
in that this is more full, near and immediate also, she being, as it were,
admitted to enjoy Christ's sweet embracements. 3. It differs from beholding his
countenance, because that may be, and only can be taken up by faith, beholding
him in his excellent qualifications and offices; but this is discernable to the
believers spiritual sense, when Christ applies his love, as Chap. 1. 2. In
which (to say so) we are more passive, as being fed by him, and having it
infused and shed abroad in our hearts by the Spirit. If we may in a holy way
follow the similitude in a spiritual sense (which is necessary for
understanding of the thing) kisses of his mouth, are his applying and venting
of his love, as one does by kissing another; this also will agree with the
commendation, it is most sweet, it is but one word in the Original, in the
abstract, and that in the plural number, sweetnesses, to show the exceeding
sweetness and loveliness, the soul-ravishing delight that is in that, to
which no similitude or comparison can come up, clearly and perfectly to
resemble it, it is very sweetness it self. If we might allude to what
Philosophers say of fire in it is element, or water in it is element, that being
there, they are more properly and eminently fire and water; so sweetness is in
it is element here; or, Christ's mouth is the very element thereof, in respect
of it is sensible refreshfulnesse to the spiritual senses of his people, to whom
he manifests it. Ask ye then what my Beloved is? (says she) he is indeed
stately to look on, but his mouth when it is felt in his kissing of his own
Bride, by manifesting his love to her sense, there, there, O there, exceeding
unexpressible and unconceivable delight and satisfaction is to be found!

Observe. 1. Christ has more near and sensible ways of manifesting himself to
the spiritual sense of his people, as if he had a mouth to kiss them. 2. There
is nothing comparable to the refreshing sweetness, that these manifestations
have with them; It Is a peace that passes understanding, Phil. 4. 7. and a joy
that is unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. 3. This sensible feeling of
the sweetness of Christ's mouth, should be ai^^ed at, and sought after by
believers, although the manner, measure, time, and other circumstances thereof
should be submitted to him, yet this is not only commendable in it self, but
also as such, is proposed and commended to the daughters of Jerusalem, to be
sought after by them. 4. The experimental feeling of this, does notably
demonstrate Christ's worth to the soul that enjoyes it, and makes him
incomparably sweet and lovely above all things whatsoever, Psalm. 4. 7. 5. There
is no other thing can have any such sweetness or relish to a believer as
Christ has; and to a spiritual taste, the excellency of all created beloveds
will be as the white of an egg in comparison of this. Only Christ's mouth is
sweetness; and so he differs from all others: And it is a good sign, when our
affections, or spiritual senses, can relish nothing but Christ.

Next, it is added; yea, he is altogether lovely: Although she has spent many
sweet words (and indeed there has been no straitning in her) in commending
Christ, and although all her words be sweet, and especially when she draws
near the close, her expressions be the more massy and significant, yet as being
necessitate to succumb under the great task of describing the excellency of her
Beloved, she must give over particulars, and conclude with a general, as if she
would say, would ye know him? O, I, even I cannot tell you all his excellent
properties; for, he is most justly called wonderful, Isa. 9. 6. but in sum, I
may say, he is altogether lovely: The word is, he is all desires, or, all he
desires: The word that is rendered lovely, comes from a root that signifies to
covet, as in Joshua 7. 21. It is said of Achan, when he saw the wedge of gold,
that he coveted it, so it is such a desire as ardently covets the thing desired:
And thus Christ is not simply lovely, but of such an attractive excellency, as
makes him the proper Object of the most ardent and holy-cove^ing desires, or
after which all desires should go forth, as toward the best and most desirable
Object: The words are mean to express somewhat that is not expressible, or
rather the unexpressiblenesse of that Beloved she had been commending, lest
they should think she were satisfied, as if she had fully described him. We may
consider the words several ways, 1. Negatively, as they show there is nothing
in him, but what is desirable: As if she said, all he is desires, there is
nothing of any other nature in him, but such as I have mentioned, he is a God
of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he. 2. Take them positively,
and so they show whatever is in him, is exceeding desirable; go through all his
parts, qualifications, attributes and works, whereof I have given you but a
hint (says she) and ye will see them all exceedingly desirable. 3. Take them
conclusively or comprehensively, and so while she says, he is all desires, the
meaning is, there is nothing truly desirable, but it is to be found in him, the
soul cannot rationally imagine that satisfaction that is not to be found in
Christ, otherwise all desires were not in him; this is sweet, even very^sweet,
what idol is perfect? there are many defects in all other beloveds, but (says
she) my Beloved is perfect: All the beauties and perfections that are scattered
amongst all creatures, are in an eminent and transcendent way gathered
together, contracted and to be found in him at once, so that whatever can be
desired, whether it be for this life, or that which is to come, whether for
sanctification, justification, or consolation, it is eminently to be found in
our Lord Jesus, in whom all fullness dwells, Col. 1. 19. and who alone is all
and in all to his own, as being full of grace and truth, Joh. 1. 14. 4. We may
take them exclusively, or privatively, as they deny any thing desirable to be
in any beloved, but in Christ, he is all, and so consequently they must be
nothing, he is altogether lovely, and so they must be altogether loathsome:
Christ is never rightly conceived of, nor commended, but where other things
come down, evanish and disappear, when compared with him; Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and I desire none on earth beside thee, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.
25. as having full satisfaction, and all that can be wished for in him. It Is
hard to observe what may be suitable to Christ's loveliness, when the Bride
gives it over: But we may say, 1. The more that believers insist on Christ's
loveliness, their hearts will warm the more with it, and it will be found to
be the greater depth; for, now her expressions grow, till at last they be
swallowed up. 2. Where there is true respect to Christ, no commendation of
Christ that believers can invent (whatever it be) will be satisfying to them:
For, there have been, 1. many excellent commendations given of Christ, as being
like Gold, Myrrh, Spices, etc. Yea, 2. like such Gold, Lilies and Ivory, as
are not in the world; and finally she has left and given over comparisons, and
betaken her self to the abstract, sweetness it self; yet all comes short, and
she must quite the thing as unexpressible: It Is the very hight of souls
love-rhethorick, to close with a kind of holy amazement and admiration, which
ends in silence, because they cannot say enough, when they have said all they
can say. O what a lovely Object then must Christ Jesus be! They never knew him
rightly, who were satisfied with their own apprehensions of him, or expressions
concerning him. 3. There is an universal loveliness in Christ, whole Christ is
lovely, neither is he to be divided in our apprehension and esteem, but as
every thing in him is wonderful and lovely, so is it to be admired and loved;
even his lowest sufferings, and seeming infirmities, his frowns and seeming
greater austerity, are lovely and profitable; he is altogether lovely. 4. There
is a wonderful desirablenesse in our Lord Jesus, and incomparable satisfaction
to be gotten in him; there can be nothing more to draw a soul to love it, than
what is here, whatever may be attractive, is here; and there is nothing wanting
to satisfy the soul that injoyes him, and has yielded to his call, to such he
is all desires. 5. Christ is never rightly taken up, so long as any thing
desirable is supponed to be gotten elsewhere, he must be all desires: and
therefore, where any thing has the least share of the affections beside him,
he has not his own place. 6. Empty and undesirable are all beloveds in the
world befide Christ, and broken cisterns will they all prove; and it is no
marvel; for, all desires are in him, and therefore, not one desirable thing is
or can be found in them. 7. They have a good bargain who have Christ; It Is the
short cut (to say so) and compendious way to happiness, and to the inheriting
of all things, to unit with Christ by faith, and to possess him; for, all
desires are in him: and miserable will the persons be who shall miss Christ,
although they were gainers of the whole world.

Having somewhat answered the daughters of Jerusalem their question, by
insisting in this excellent description of Christ, now by way of application
and holy boasting in the close of the verse, she reasons thus: Ye asked what my
beloved was more than other beloveds? and for your satisfaction, I have
described him as I can many several ways, though all fall very far short of
full expressing of his matchless worth: Now (says she) this excellent person
is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem; bring all other
beloveds, and compare them with him, and see if he be not the chiefest and
standard bearer amongst them all; and in this confident boasting of the
excellency of her beloved, she closes: Which sweet discourse wants not it is
fruit on them, as we will see in the Chapter following. Consider the words four
ways, 1. In the matter, they hold forth two sweet relations betwixt Christ and
the believer, and this sweetens all, not only that this beloved is an excellent
person, but that he was hers, she says, he is my beloved, and also my friend;
he is her friend (as she is his friend, verse. 1.) that is, one that is friendly
to her, and will do for her, beyond what a brother, or mother, or the nearest
of all relations will or can do; he is one that is born for the day of her
adversity, and one whom she trusts as her own soul, he is so dear to her, and
she to him; for, this ^ye of friendship is mutual betwixt them. In a word
(says she) he is much in himself, and much to me, unspeakably excellent in
himself, and very dear and precious to me, my husband, and my friend: In sum,
my friendly husband, and my loving friend.

Obs. 1. There are many sweet relations that Christ ^stands in to the believer,
as husband, friend, brother, etc. even as there are many relations that she
stands in to him, as spouse, sister, dove, etc. 2. Christ fills all the
relations that he stands in to his people, and that exceedingly well; he is a
singularly loving, faithful, kind and tender husband; and a singularly kind,
faithful and unchangeable friend, the best friend that ever a believer had;
for, the expression, this is, etc. says, that what Christ is, he is indeed,
and singularly so, as having no equal, he is a matchless husband and friend,
this is the scope. 3. Christ and the believer are upon one side, they are
friends, there is a league of friendship betwixt them, and they have common
friends, and common^ ad^ersries. 4. These who are Christ's friends (as verse. 1.
eat, O friends) Christ may be claimed by them as their friend, and what* that
can^infer* they may expect from him; for, he has no bare title, neither
sustains he any empty relation. 5. Believers should lean much to Christ, trust
him, and expect good from him, as their friend. 6. It Is a notable and singular
consolation for solks to have Christ their friend, it is comfortable in life,
death* and judgment, in prosperity and adversity. It implies these things in
which he is forthcoming to his friends, 1. Constant kindness and faithfulness
at all times, he loves at all times, Prove. 17. 17. and, chap. 18. last: he
never fails, nor can at any time be charged with that which Absalom casts up to
Hushai, 2 Samuel 16. 17. Is this thy kindness to thy friend? 2. Sympathy, and
condescending to supply their wants, he cleaves closer than a brother, Prove.
18. 24. It Is such a love, as one has who aims at his friends good, as well
as his own. 3. Familiarity in mutual communion, as uses to be betwixt friends,
and freedom in conversing, as, Exodus 33. 11. the Lord spoke with Moses as a man
does with his friend. 4. It takes in a mutual confidence that one may have in
another, as in his very own self, and more than in any other; all which are
eminently in Christ, as ointment and per^ume rejoice the heart, so does the
sweetness of a man's friend, and eminently of this friend, by hearty counsel,
Prove. 27. 9. No other friends are comparable to this friend, happy, happy for
evermore are they, whose friend Christ Jesus is. 7. Where Christ is a friend,
there is he also the souls beloved; or, believers choising of Christ for their
beloved, and his being kindly to them as a friend, go together; these two
relations, my beloved; and my friend are never separat. Now to be the souls
beloved, implies these things, 1. That comparatively, Christ is eminently and
only loved by his people, and nothing is admitted to share in their affections
with him, Phil. 3. 8. 2. That there is in the soul an high esteem of him, which
begets this love. 3. That there is such an ardent affection to him, as makes
them long for union with him, as love naturally desires union with that which
it loves, it desires to be with Christ here, and hereafter, as that which is
far the best of all, Philip. 1. 23. 4. It suppons a delight and (...) that
their souls take in Christ, and expect from union with him; their happiness
lies in it, and they are disquieted, and someway holily discontented and
weighted, when they miss it, and under desertion and absence, easily fear,
lest their heart beguile and de^ude them in that concerning-matter, as the
scope of this place, and her present exercise shows. 5. It suppones a
kindlinesse in their love, and a well groundednesse, such as a wife has to her
husband, and not such as it betwixt the adulteress and the adulterer, which is
all the love that the men of the world have to their idols, but the love that
the Bride has to Christ, is a native and avowed love, of which she has no
reason to be ashamed (as men will one day be of all their idols) but to boast
and glory in him; and Christ is to the believer, not what idols are to the men
of the world, but what a most loving husband is to his wife, being the object
of her heartcontenting and satisfying love: where ever these properties of true
love to Christ are, there may the soul lay claim to him as it is friend, and be
confident to find him it is true and kindly friend; for, where he is the souls
beloved, he is the souls friend. 8. This is employed, that whatever other
beloveds men set their love upon beside Christ, they will prove un^ound, and
unfaithful friends in the time of need; or, confidence in any thing but
Christ, will ^ail a man at the last; for, he is their friend, and no other
beloved deserves that name, all other things will be like a broken tooth, or a
foot out of joint, Prove. 25. 19. or like pools in the wilderness, that run dry
in the heat, and makes the wayfaring men ashamed, such as Job's friends did
prove to him, Job 6. 15. miserable comforters will they be to men, in the day
of their greatest need, but then especially will Christ Jesus be found to be a
friend indeed; for, there is an excellency in Christ in every relation which he
stands under to his people, and an infinite disproportion betwixt him and all
creatures, in respect of this.

A second way that we may consider the words, is as they relate to the
daughters of Jerusalem their question, verse. 9. ye ask what he is more than
other beloveds? now (says she) this is he, who is singular and matchless in
all his properties; and so, it looks not only to her choice of him, to be her
beloved and her friend, but says also, that he is singularly and matchlesly
such, even a non-such beloved and friend, and one who will be found, after
trial, only worthy to be chosen and closed with as such. Obs. 1. Believers in
their answers to others, would, as particularly as may be, bring home what they
say to some edifying use (for, this best clears any question proposed) and
would not insist on generals, much less evanish in empty speculations, but
would lavel at edification, and frame what they say, so, as it may best reach
that end, and therefore she applies her answer to their question. 2. When
Christ in his excellency and worth is a little insisted and dwelt on, he will
be found to be incomparable; and the more souls search into him, the more
confidently may they assert his incomparable excellency; this, she here does,
and says, as it were, Is he not, and see ye him not now to be the chiefest
among ten thousand, and more excellent than all others? as having made her
assertion demonstrative, and undeniable. 3. Christ's worth can bide the trial,
and there are, and may be gotten, good grounds to prove that he is well worthy
of all the respect, that can be put upon him; and in reason, his worth and
excellency may be made convincing unto others, and it may be demonstrat to
consciences, that Christ is of more worth than all the world; and her resuming
of it thus, supposes it now to be so clear, that they could say nothing
against it, as appears more fully from the words following. 4. No other
beloved, nor friend that men choose beside Christ, can abide the trial; the
more they are inquired into, and searched out, they will be found to be of the
less worth: therefore she appeals (as it were) all men to bring their beloveds
before Christ, if they durst compare with him, as being confident none durst
enter the lists, purposly and professedly to compete with him.

3. We may consider these words, as her application made to the daughters of
Jerusalem, holding forth her scope, to edify them by this description of
Christ, and pressingly (for their good) to bear it in upon them, that they
might be made to fall in love with this Christ, that had so high a room in her
heart; for, so the very strain of the words seem to run. Hence, Observe, 1.
These who love Christ themselves, will be desirous to have others knowing and
loving him also: and this may be a mark of love to Christ, an earnest desire to
have him esteemed of, and loved by others. 2. These who love Christ and others
truly, will endeavor nothing more, than to have Christ made known to them, and
to have them divorced from their idols, and engaged to him; thus love to them,
as well as to him, manifests it self. 3. It Is a piece of the duty of mutual
communion to which the Lords people are obliged, to instruct others in the
knowledge of the excellencies of Christ, that they may be brought in love with
him; and where that end is proposed, according to men's several places and
stations, no opportunity would be missed, nor pains spared, which may attain
it. 4. That this duty of commending Christ to others, so as it may be
profitable, would be exceeding warrily and circumspectly gone about, as all the
Brides strain clears; For, she goes about it, 1. Tenderly, not upbraiding their
ignorance. 2. Lovingly, speaking still to them as friends. 3. Wisely and
seasonably, taking the fit opportunity of their question. 4. Fully, solidly and
judiciously, bearing forth the main things of Christ to them. 5. Affectionatly
and gravely, as being affected with the thing, and in love with Christ her
self. 6. Exemplarly and convincingly, as going before them in the practice of
that her self, which she endeavors to press upon them; that is, by loving and
seeking Christ above all, her self, she studies to commend that to others the
more effectually. 5. Obs. That the right uptaking of Christ in his excellency,
and the pressing of him upon the heart, is the most solid way of wearing all
other beloveds out of request with the soul: If he once get room, the esteem of
other things will quickly blow up; and there is no way to have the heart weaned
from them, but to have Christ great in the affections of his people; therefore,
when they ask, what he is more than other beloveds? she answers, not by crying
them down, or by discovering their worthlessenesse, but by the describing of
his worth, and thereby giving them a solid proof of his excellency to be a
ground of their faith, which does necessarily in^er the other; for, who is he
that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 1
John 5. 5.

4. We may consider this close, as it holds forth the holy insulting, and
boasting of her soul in Christ, who is so far in excellency beyond all others:
This is clear from her claiming of interest in him, and her repeating of the
phrase, this, this singular this, is my beloved; and again, this, is my friend;
especially compared with the scope, whereby now she holds him out, not only as
a matchless beloved and friend, but to be hers, and she thinks no shame of him;
her heart with holy gladness and joy does exult in this excellent choice of
hers above all others: As if she said, Ask ye what he is? this now so
described, is he that is mine, he is not like the worthless, empty and
stinking beloveds, which others have, I avow him, and count my self happy, and
well come to in him, the contentment I have in him is incomparably beyond the
counterfiet contentment, that all other beloveds can give. This the manner of
expression, and the frame of her heart in the utering of it, and the scope
(which is to show her confidence in this his commendation, as most worthy to be
commended) do imply. Observe. 1. That there is matter of boasting, and holy
bragging in Christ Jesus, whether we consider the excellency that is in
himself, or the confidence that his people may have in him, as one who will
make all that is in him forthcoming to the outmost, for the good of his own. 2.
That there is nothing beside him, that one can confidently boast of; for, this
her boasting is so appropriate to him, as it is employed, to be utterly
unsuitable that men should boast of any other thing, Let him that glories,
glory in the Lord, that is, in him, and in no other thing beside him. 3. That
believers who have interest in him, and have taken him to be their Beloved and
their Friend, may make their boast in him, Psalm. 34. 2. may glory in him, Isa.
45. 25. and may bless themselves, as happy eternally in him, Isa. 65. 16. This
holy boasting implies, 1. an high estimation of him. 2. Confidence in him,
without fear. 3. Satisfaction with him, and having full contentment in him. 4.
An eminent joy resulting from these, which cannot be shaken, all the former
being in an eminent degree. 4. Obs. That it is incumbent to the believer who
has chosen Christ, sometimes to boast in him, and in a lovely and holy way to
vaunt and boast (if we may so speak) of him above all, so are we commanded, to
glory in his holy Name, Psalm. 105. 3. and this is one of the ways we are to
commend him, and Christ will take it as a piece of notable respect put upon
him, when it is seriously done. 5. When a believer is in a right frame, and
clear anent his interest, he will boast himself in Christ, as having the lines
fallen to him in pleasant places, Psalm. 16. 6. whatever else be his lot in the
world: Christ is a bargain, that one day will be found worth the boasting of.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. Whether is thy Beloved gone? O thou fairest among women, whether is
thy Beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.
THe sweet conserence begun in verse. 8. of the former Chapter, and continued to
the end thereof, betwixt the Bride and the daughters of Jerusalem, is further
drawn out in this Chapter; and first they return a new serious question, verse.
1. In the second place she replies, verse. 2. and 3. After which in the third
place, the Bridegroom himself comes in, with a notable expression of his love
to his Bride, and an affectionat commendation of her graces: And so, according
to the number of the parties that speak, we have three parts of the Chapter.

The question proposed by the daughters of Jerusalem, is, verse. 1. and it
supposes them to be convinced of Christ's worth, by the former discourse; and
that they now are provoked, as being deeply in love with him, to desire and
thirst after him and communion with him. Now as it depends upon the former
discourse, and is the continuance thereof, it gives ground to observe, 1. That
serious and faithful endeavors to gain these that are weak, are often followed
with a blessing on these upon whom such pains are taken; for, now the daughters
are engaged to seek him with the Bride: And this should notably encourage to
the discharge of this duty. 2. As it is the duty of one to admonish and instruct
another, so it is all men's duty to accept of admonition and instruction from
others, and in the Lord to yield themselves thereunto, as these daughters do.
3. It makes christian-fellowship sweet and pleasant, where there is faithful
tenderness upon the one-side, and submissive yielding on the other: A wise
reprover upon an obedient ear, is an excellent jewel, even as an ear-ring of
gold, and an ornament of fine gold, Prove. 25. 11. 4. Yielding to instruction,
and acknowledging of a conviction after a mistake (especially concerning
Christ) is one of the first things, whereby desire of obtaining Christ does
appear; whereas such grumblings, as who made thee a reprover, or instructor?
etc. evidence an unhumbled frame, out of case for any true desire after Christ.
4. This may give some directions, for Christians profitable conversing one with
another: as, 1. A necessary and profitable subject, would be proposed to be
spoken of; for, so much the matter of the daughters question imports. 2. It
would be entertained by both sides when once tabled, and all diversions barred
out, and the subject proposed, closely followed with answers suitable to it. 3.
The end designed, would be practice and edification (for, so it is here, to seek
him with them) and not a mere notional contemplation. 4. The manner would be
grave and serious, suitable to the matter. 5. Compellations and expressions
that are used, would be respective of each one to another. 6. These who ^re
weak would not shun to speak, and move questions, in these things that may
edify them, as we may see in the daughters carriage here. 7. They who have
knowledge would not despise these who are weak, but condescend unto them. 8.
It Is sometimes useful to suspend explicit following of our own case,
(especially when these who are present seem strangers to it) and to condescend
to insist upon the case of others for their edification; thus does the Bride
with the daughters.

More particularly, in the words of, verse. 1. Consider, 1. the title which the
daughters give the Bride, O thou fairest among women: It Is the same which was,
Chap. 5. 9. but here it shows their continuing in respect to her, which they
vent by suitable grave expressions; It Is not much at the beginning to carry
respectively to the lovers of Christ, but it is much after some familiar
acquaintance to continue so doing, which is the lesson that may be learned
here. 2. Consider the question, whether is thy Beloved gone? and it is repeated,
to show how serious they were in it, and how desirous of an answer. 3. There is
the end, or motive, that draws this question from them, and that is, that we
may seek him with thee.

She had told them that her Beloved was withdrawn; Now they (when convinced of
his worth) ask, whether? etc. which is a further step of their desire of being
acquaint with Christ and his way, than what was holden out in their question,
Chap. 5. 9. yet having infirmity also: And it shows, 1. that where there is any
conviction of what Christ is, then the great design and main enquiry should be
to know where he is, and how he may be attained. 2. There may be some
acknowledgement of Christ's worth, and affection to him, where yet there is
much ignorance of the way how to come by him. 3. It Is no less necessary for a
person, to know rightly where and how to seek Christ, than to know what he is.
4. There may be some honesty of desire after, and love to Christ, where faith
dar not claim him as the believers own; for, say they, where is thy Beloved?
they say not, where is our Beloved? beginners are often very anxious and afraid
to make this application, although it may be, before their conviction and
conversion, they did never question it.

Next, we would consider, that the daughters here leave the Brides case, and
enquire for instructing of themselves, whence Observe, 1. Whosoever have any
affection to Christ, and any opportunity to be instructed anent him, would
thriftily improve it; if they had but the fellowship of an intelligent private
Christian, it should be made good use of to that purpose. 2. Young beginners
often forget all others cases but their own, and the more experienced should
bear with that, and for others good pass over their own case, and be content
it be laid aside and forgotten for a time. 3. They ask this, that they may be
the more enabled to sympathize, and concur with her, in what she required of
them: which teaches, that they can be most useful to others, that have some
distinctnesse in their own condition; for, confusion in our own condition, does
much obstruct the sympathy, and faithful burthen-bearing that we owe to others
in theirs.

The end they propose, is, That we may seek him with thee: Which may be
considered, first, as their end in enquiring; Tell us (as if they had said)
for, we ask not for curiosity, but to be helped in practice. Whence Observe, 1.
The great end and design of all endeavors for knowledge, would not be to rest
in speculation, but to be furthered in practice. 2. It says, no sooner should
folk be clear in a duty, but instantly should they set about the practice of
it. 3. Men's practice should be according to their knowledge; their seeking, and
knowing where to seek, should go together. 4. The finding of Christ is the
great end of all Religious duties, wherein we are to seek him, as these duties
are the end of knowledge. 5. Often good desires after Christ, are much impeded
by ignorance and confusion, even in the judgments of these that affectionatly
love him.

Again, we may consider the words as a motive proposed to the Bride, to make
her to answer; which is, show us we pray thee where we may find him; for, we
are in earnest, and would gladly seek him with thee. And from the words so
considered, Observe, 1. Nothing will nor should more prevail with a tender
believer, to move him to be helpful to others, than this, that they are serious
and yet weak: Yea, 2. singleness of desire to profit by the means, is a piece
of that frame that is necessary in order to our edification by them; for, thus
they strengthen themselves in the expectation of an edifying answer, which
otherwise they could not have expected; they who are serious and single,
though fecklesse, may look for God's guiding of them.

3. These words may be considered, as holding forth the daughters purpose, and
(as it were) an obligation that they come under: tell us (say they) and we will
seek him with thee: And this teaches, that humble, single purposes, are
neither unsuitable, nor unprofitable to beginners; yea, it is very necessary,
that they seriously devote, and engage themselves in that blessed work of
seeking after Jesus Christ.

Further, the words, we will seek him with thee, considered in themselves,
import not only a seeking, but a joint seeking with her, as coming in to share
in the same exercise that she was taken up with. Which shows, 1. that they
acquiesced in the same way of Religion, which they that were in Christ before
them did follow. 2. That there is an union to be kept amongst the worshipers of
Christ, and a joint cordial concurrence in going about of duties. 3. That this
united, or joint-way is profitable to all, both to beginners, and to these that
are more experienced; otherwise it would not be such a motive, as it is here
held forth to be. 4. Although believers, and all professors, have an union and
communion amongst themselves (as the Bride has formerly kept with the
dauthters of Jerusalem) yet when sincerity is begun to be more fresh and
lively, or when it is begotten where it was not before, there follows a more
near union and communion than that which was before: Now they mind another
joint way of seeking him, than formerly they had done. 5. Often the persons by
whom souls have gotten good, are very dear to them, and in much respect with
them, so that their way has a testimony from them, as approvable; for (says
the daughters) we will seek him with thee, who instructed us: It Is true, that
this may sometimes degenerate (so that folks may drink in the dregs from such
persons, with their wine) yet it seems, in the main principles of practical
godllinesse, not to be unsafe, as, Heb. 13. 7, 8. 6. The great, main, and
native use of what is spoken of Christ's excellency, is to have souls brought
in love with him, and engaged to seek him; and if this be not gained, any other
effect of what is spoken, is little worth, as to what mainly concerns
themselves: As this was the scope of all the Bride spoke concerning Christ, so
it is attained on these daughters to whom she spoke; and it is the great thing
we should aim at, when either we speak of Christ's worth, or hear it spoken of.

BRIDE.
Verse. 2. My Beloved is gone down into his Garden: to the beds of Spices, to
feed in the Gardens, and to gather Lilies.
The Bride is not long in returning her answer, but being glad to have the
opportunity to further their edification, instantly she replies, verse. 2. My
beloved is gone down, etc. as being well acquaint with the place, where he
uses and haunts: If ye would find him (says she) his withdrawings are not far
off, but as a man retiers sometimes to his garden, and is not in his chamber,
so Christ when withdrawn from sense (which is the Chamber, chap. 1. 4.) he is
to be found in the assemblies of his people, in his Church and Ordininces,
which are (as it were) his garden, there ye would seek him: This is the sum of
verse. 2. and then, verse. 3. having instructed them by this notable digression,
she returns to quiet her self (when all outward means fail) in the faith of her
interest in him.

If it were asked, how the daughters could ask the Bride, where Christ was, or
how she now can tell them, when she her self is seeking, and knows not (as
she seemed to profess, chap. 5, 6, 7, 8.) where to find him? Ans. 1. Believers
will often give more distinct advice to others, in their difficulties, than
they can take to themselves in their own exercises; because light and reason
guids them unbyassedly, in reference to others, and sense, inclination and
affection sway too much in their own cases. 2. Believers may complain they know
not how to find him, not so much from defect of light as of life, when either
in their own practice, or in their success in duties, they are not answerable
to what they aim at; exercised souls are ready to aggrege their own
infirmities; and what is indeed in them, is to their own account as not in
them, till the Lord shine upon it and quicken it, and so bring it out and make
it appear.

In the first part of her answer, verse. 2. she speaks to these two, 1. Where
Christ is. 2. What he is doing. The first gives them direction where to seek
him; the second incourages them to fall about it, as a thing acceptable to him:
The place where he is, is set forth by two expressions, 1. He is gone down to
his garden, which implies the simili^ude formerly expressed, of a man's
retiering from his chamber, or closet to his garden: This garden signifies the
Church, as, Chap. 4. 12. 15. and here, as opposed to gardens, in the words
following, it holds forth the Catholic visible Church, as gardens signify
particular societies, or congregations: The Church is like a garden that is
within one precinct, yet divided into diverse quarters and inclosurs: This
being the Church that has the promise of Christ's presence, and where he is
ever to be found, must be understood of no particular Church, of which that
cannot be asserted, that Christ shall be always there: it must therefore be
the Catholic Church, distinguished from particular Churches, or gardens. 2. He
is gone to the beds of spices: As gardens have distinct plots of flowers, and
beds of spices, and some particular parts are alloted for these, where
especially they grow; so in the Church, Christ has his plants, whereof some
are sanctified with grace (therefore compared to spices) and these in some
parts of the visible Church, are more abounding than in other parts (as spices
in beds together that may be elsewhere but in particular stalks, and not so
frequent) and as men love and frequent that plot of their garden most; so does
Christ most manifest himself in his Ordinances ordinarily, where he has his
spices and lilies in greatest abundance: And thus this last part qualifies the
former, he is in his Church, but especially where his spices are most
abounding; and therefore would you have him? seek him in his Church and amongst
his people, and especially in such societies of his people, where true and
lively believers are most to be found. Here observe (beside what was observed
on chap. 4. 12.) Christ's Church, though it have many subdivisions, yet is it
one Church, one whole Catholic Church, whereof particular Churches are parts,
1 Cor. 12. 28. 2. It is in that Church and no where else, that Christ's
presence is to be found, and where believers, the spices and lilies are
planted. 3. There may be in that one visible Church, many more real converts in
one part thereof, than in another; spices in beds are not in every place of the
garden. 4. Though Christ has a singular care of, and respect for, his whole
Church, and has a peculiar presence there where ever there is any part
thereof, yet where he has much people, beyond what he has in other places (as
in Antioch, Act. 11. 21. in Corinth, Act. 18. 10. and Ephesus, Act. 19. 20.)
there especially is he present, and there ordinarily continues he the power and
life of his Ordinances. 5. These who desire Christ, would not run out of the
Church to seek him, or respect any way of finding him, which others have not
found ou^ before them; but would seek after him* by the ordinary means, in his
Church; for, this answers their questions, where is he? proposed for that end,
that they might s^ek him and find him.

He has a twofold exercise in his gardens, for he is not idle, he is gone
there, 1. To feed in the gardens. By gardens, in the plural number, are
understood the subdivisions, and particular plots of that one garden, formerly
mentioned; the Jews had their Synagogues, where the people did meet, and the
Law was read (as we have our distinct congregations) as, Psalm. 74. 8. and Act.
15. 21. do evidence. To feed, taken actively (as chap. 1. 7. where thou feeds,
etc.) signifies his taking care, to provide for his own in the Church; if
taken passively, he is gone down to feed, that is, that himself may eat, and it
is the same with what was, chap. 5. 1. I have come to my garden, I have eaten,
etc. and the scope in both, looks to be the same, and so the meaning of the
similitude is, that as men have their gardens, wherein they solace themselves,
and feed upon the pleasant fruits that are in them, so does Christ delight
himself in his Church, and take pleasure therein, as, Psalm. 147. 11. he takes
pleasure in them that fear him; and he delights in the habitable parts of the
earth, Prove. 8. 31. that is, where Saints dwell, and where the place of his
rest and haunt is; other places being but as an unhabited wilderness to
Christ, the Church is the garden, wherein he delights and finds fruit. He is
said to feed in the gardens, and not in the garden, 1. To show, that the way of
his manifesting himself to his Church, is by erecting his Ordinances in
particular societies, and thus he derives his blessings. 2. To show, that
though there be diverse societies, or particular Churches, yet his presence is
not excluded from, or tied to, any one of them: He walks amongst the
Candlesticks, as observing every one of them, and manifesting himself among
them, as he sees good.

The second part of his exercise is, to gather lilies: By lilies, in this
garden (as often has been said) are understood believers, chap. 2. 2. 16. To
gather, is a borrowed expression from men that use to gather some flowers they
delight in, to bring to their chambers with them, or some fruits, that they may
dress and prepare them, as we heard, chap. 5. 1. Christ's gathering of his
lilies, points, 1. At his calling of them effectually who belong to him; the
elect may be called lilies to be gathered, as they are called sons of God to be
gathered, Joh. 11. 51, 52. Thus also, Matthew. 23. 37. is Christ's expression, I
would have gathered you, etc. whereby their bringing-in to him is signified. 2.
It points at his glorifying of them, which is in part, when particular
believers are gathered to their fathers, as the phrase is, Genesis 25. 8. and 35.
29. This is, as his pulling of some lilies for his own satisfaction: and this
gathering will be perfected, when all the Elect shall be gathered from the four
winds, Matthew. 24. 31. and the Angels shall gather the good fish into vessels,
but cast the bad away, Mat. 13. 48. In a word then, the sense and scope of the
whole is this, Would ye (says she) have my beloved, or know where he is that
ye may seek him? he is in his Church, seek him in the way of his Ordinances;
for, he is there, purposly to delight himself in doing good to his people, it is
his errand to welcome and gather them as a hen does her chickens under her
wings, therefore (says she) seek him there; for, ye can find no better
opportunity. Obs. 1. Our Lord Jesus takes pleasure to be amongst his people,
and to do them good; he feeds on this with delight, as a hungry man does on his
meat. 2. The more Christ gains (to say so) he feeds the better, and is the more
cheerful: he feeds and gathers at once, and this gathering of souls, is as
sweetly refreshing and delightsome to our blessed Lord Jesus, as the plucking
of the sweetest flowers is to a man walking in a garden; and there is nothing
more acceptable and welcome to him, than a seeking-sinner. 3. Wherever Christ's
Ordinances are, there may his presence be expected, in one particular Church,
as well as in another; for, he feeds in the gardens. 4. The great scope of
Ordinances, is to gather-in believers, and build them up; and there is nothing
more acceptable to Christ, than to have some to gather, some whom he may save.
That Is a refreshing feast to him, John 4. 34. 5. Our Lord Jesus has delight in
all his people, and in every one of them, where sincerity is, though it be not
in the greatest measure: Therefore it is said he gathers lilies indefinitly,
that is, one of them as well as another. 6. So long as our Lord Jesus has a
Church and Ordinances in it, as long does he continue to gather, and he is not
idle, but is still gathering, though at sometimes, and in some places, this may
be more sensible and abundant than ordinary. 7. It Is a great encouragement to
poor sinners to seek for Christ, to know, that this is his very errand in his
Ordinances, to gather them, and that he is waiting on, like the Prodigals
father, ready to run with delight to welcome them; This is proposed as a motive
to the daughters, to seek him. 8. Although believers may seem for a time to be
neglected, and, as it were, forgotten, yet will the Lord gather them all in at
last, as his choice of all the world, they being the flowers of his gardens;
there is a good day coming to believers, when not one of them shall be le^t to
grow in this fighting Church, but he shall take them in to the King's Palace,
there to be for ever with him. 9. The readiness of Christ to welcome sinners,
and the delight that he has in doing them good, should exceedingly provock and
hearten sinners to seek him, while he may be found; This is the great scope of
this verse.

Verse. 3. I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine: He feeds among the
Lilies.
The second part of her answer to the daughters question, is, verse. 3. and it
contains the great ground whereon she quiets her self, and wherein she rests,
as being that which makes Christ lovely to her, even though absent, I am my
Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine: This now is the anchor which she casts, when
all other means seemed to disappoint her. We had the same words for substance,
and to the same scope, Chap. 2. 16. Wherein she first asserted her interest,
and secondly maintained it against an objection, even as she does here. Beside
what was said there, we may consider the words here, first, as in them her
interest is repeated, though it was once formerly asserted; Which shows, 1.
that believers, though once clear anent their interest, may have their
difficulties and doubts recurring upon them. 2. That when new difficulties
recur, there is no new way to be taken for discussing of them, but the same way
of believing, which is again to be renewed and kept in exercise. 3. It shows
that miscarriages do not break off that union, which is betwixt Christ and his
people; for, although there had been many failings in her former carriage, yet
her interest is still the same. 4. Believers, even over, and notwithstanding
of, many challenges, may lay claim to an interest in Christ, when they are in
the exercise of repentance, ^aith and other graces. 5. Her thus repeating and
again owning of her interest, shows, that she was exceeding clear and persuaded
thereof; Whence observe, believers may attain a great degree of assurance, and
may and should not only aim to have it, but to preserve and keep it clear;
for, that is of great concernment as to their peace; and the weight of their
consolation in their confident application of all the promises, depends on it.

2. Consider, although the words be the same, yet the order is changed, it was,
Chap. 2. 16. my Beloved is mine, etc. So there she begins at asserting her
interest in him, but here she begins at asserting his interest in her, or her
betaking of her self to him, for clearing of her interest in him, I am (says
she) my Beloveds, or, I am to my Beloved; and from her betaking her self to
him, and adhering to the bargain, she concludes he also is hers: Which shows,
1. that they who are clear of their adhering to Christ, and of their fleeing to
him, as their choice, may warrantably conclude, that Christ is theirs, even
though sense would say the contrary. 2. When there is nothing in Christ's
dispensation to us, that looks convincinglike of his love to us, it is good to
reflect on our acting on him, and if it be found that we have fled to him, and
closed with him, then there is ground to conclude our union with him, and
interest in him, and there cannot be a sounder way of reasoning than that: For,
if we on our part be answerable to the call, we are not to question his part
(namely his bestowing of himself on us, according to the tenor of his offers)
but to believe it according to his word: Believers may sometimes be put to this
way of arguing, and it is sure.

3. If we consider the words, as following on her former desertion and
exercise, and as being now intended by the Bride (as her scope) to fix her
self; they give ground to Obs. 1. That ^aith is still a refuge; when all God's
dispensations, and every thing in the believers case, seems to leave the heart
in disquietnesse, faith is then the last and great refuge. 2. Faith is then
most satisfying, when repentance is exercised, and all other means diligently
gone about; therefore may she now cast this anchor, after she has been in the
exercise of repentance, and in the use of other means (as we have seen in the
former Chapter) which had been presumption to have been done at first, these
being slighted; faith will sustain souls in duty, but presumption puffs up (as
in verse. 3.) even when they are out of it; faith preserves from fainting under
discouragements in the way of God, presumption strengthens against just
challenges, when folks are out of his way.

The second part of the verse, He feeds among the Lilies, was also spoken to,
Chap. 2. 16. It Is brought-in here to remove that objection, if he be thine,
where is he? Is he not away? and if he be away, why claims thou interest in
him? She answers them, though he be not present to sense, yet is he ever kind
to his people, and therefore cannot but be kind to me, which makes me conclude,
that though he be not present to sense, yet he is mine, and I am his. Believers
are called Lilies often, 1. For their native beauty, Matthew. 6. 29. 2. For their
savorinesse, Chap. 5. 13. 3. For their growing, and making increase, as the
Lilie, Hos. 14. 5. And so the similitude points at these three excellencies of
the believer, 1. The native beauty and loveliness of Christ's grace in them.
2. The sweet relish and savorinesse of their graces. And, 3. their spiritual
growth in grace, from one degree of it to another. Christ's feeding among his
Lilies, shows, the great delight he takes in them, and the pleasure he has to
do them good, as was cleared, Chap. 2. 16. Observe. 1. Christ is exceeding
loving to, and tender of, all his people, of one as well as of another, and
has been so from the beginning, that none had ever any reason to complain. 2.
Christ's way in general to his people, when well taken up, may notably quiet,
content and comfort any of them, when a difficulty comes on, or when under any
darkness or desertion, as the spouse here was; He never did any of his own
wrong. 3. A believer that has clearness anent his fleeing to Christ by faith,
may draw comfortable conclusions from, and comfortably apply, the way of Christ
with others of his people to themselves, and expect that same kindness from
him, that they have met with; for, the Covenant is one and the same with them
all. 4. Believers may sometimes be put to gather their comfort, and to sustain
their faith, more from the experience of others, in what they have found, and
how Christ has carried to them, than from any thing that is in their own
present condition. 5. She propounded Christ's kindness to his people ( the
Lilies) to encourage the daughters of Jerusalem to seek him, verse. 2. now here,
she makes use of the same ground, for quieting of her self. Hence learn two
things, 1. That same which warrands believers at first to approach to Christ,
may encourage them to renew, and continue the exercise of their faith, in
making application of him and his comforts. 2. It Is good in our own practice,
to make use of the same grounds, and to walk by the same rules, that we would
propose to others.

BRIDEGROOM.
Verse. 4. Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem,
terrible as an army with banners.
In verse. 4. (which begins the third part of the Chapter) Christ, the
Bridegroom, comes in and speaks: Our Lord Jesus (as it were) has been long
silent, and here he breaks in, without any preface, and makes up all his former
absence and silence, by his singular kindness, when he manifests himself to
his Bride; which kindness, appears in the warmness and sweetness of his many
and various expressions. He continues speaking unto verse. 10. of Chap. 7. after
he had knocked at her door, Chap. 5. 2. he had been longing, as it were, to be
in, and now when he wins in, he insists the more, and several ways prosecutes,
and amplifies the commendation of his Bride. This is, 1. generally propounded
in three similitudes, verse. 4. 2. It Is aggreged in one instance thereof, verse.
5. -- 3. He descends to particulars, verse. -- 5, 6, 7: 4. He takes her up in
diverse considerations, that speak her to be lovely and beautiful, verse. 8, 9.
5. This is confirmed by two instances and proofs, 1. What the daughters did
esteem of her, and their praise is marked, verse. 9, 10. 2. It Is instanced in
the influence that her loveliness had on him, verse. 11, 12, 13. And, 6. he
proceeds in a different method from what he had, Chap. 4. to set out the
particulars of her loveliness, Chap. 7.

Generally she is set out, verse. 4. by three comparisons, 1. She is beautiful
as Tirzah: This was a City of the Tribe of Manasseh, The word in the Original
comes from a root, that signifies acceptable; whereby it seems, that this City
has been exceeding pleasant: It was the seat of one of the Kings of Canaan,
Josh. 12. 24. and of the Kings of Israel, after the rent of the ten Tribes from
the house of David, until Zimri burnt it; after which Omri built Samaria, as is
to be seen at large, 1 King. 16. Thus the spiritual beauty of holiness in
believers ( Psalm. 110. 3.) is set out as having in it so much loveliness as
may commend it, and make it desirable and acceptable to others. 2. She is
comely as Jerusalem: This was the head City of Judah, beautiful for situation,
and the joy of the whole earth, Psalm. 48. 2. but most beautiful for the
Ordinances and worship of God, which were there; therefore glorious things are
spoken of it, more than any thing that was to be seen by carnal eyes, and it
was loved on that account, more than all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87. 2,
3. It Is ordinarily taken for a type of the Church, which is set out by it, as,
Psalm. 122. It seems here the Lord does respect the believers spiritual beauty,
with reference to that comeliness and orderlinesse, which is to be seen among
them, and is maintained by them in the exercise of his Ordinances; and also in
respect of his estimation, every believer is a Jerusalem to him, where he
dwells, where he is worshipped, and to whom he has given the promise of his
presence: Believers are to him as Tirzah and Jerusalem, the most beautiful
Cities of that Land, for the time. Or, the first similitude, taken from Tirzah,
may look to outward beauty; for, Tirzah was a beautiful City: and the other
similitude, taken from Jerusalem, may look to Church-beauty, as the Ordinances
were there; and so the sense runs, my love thou art to me as the most excellent
thing in the world; yea, as the most excellent thing in the visible Church,
which is more precious to him than any thing in the world. 3. She is terrible
as an army with banners: An army is strong and fearful; a banner'd army is
stately and orderly, under command and (...) readiness for service; an army
with banners, is an army in it is most stately posture: The Church is terrible
as such an army, either, 1. Considered complexly or collectively, her
Ordinances have power, authority and efficacy, like a banner'd army: So the
Churches spiritual weapons are said to be mighty and powerful through God, 2
Cor. 10. 5, 6. This being compared with the 9. and 10. verses, may have it is
own place. But, 2. the scope here, and the words following, look especially at
the stateliness, majesty, and spiritual valor that is in particular
believers, who are more truly generous, valorous and powerful, than an army
with banners; when their faith is exercised, and kept lively, they prevail
wheresoever they turn, they carry the victory over the world, 1 John 5. 4. over
devils, which are enemies whom no worldly army can reach; but by the power of
faith they prevail, even to quench the violence of fire, as it is in Heb. 11.
34. and by faith they waxed valient in fight: But mainly this holds in respect
of Christ himself, they prevail over him in a manner, by their princely
carriage, as Jacob did, Genesis 32. 28. As a prince have thou had power with God
and men, and have prevailed: See Hos. 12. 4. he had power over the Angel, and
prevailed: And indeed, no army has such influence upon him, as believers have,
which is such, that he cannot (as it were) stand before them, or refuse them
any thing, that they with weeping and supplications wrestle with him for,
according to his will: Now, that it is in this respect mainly, that the
believer is called terrible as an ^^my with banners, is clear, 1. From the
scope, which is to comfort a particular believer, who has been wrestling with
him already under desertions. 2. The next words confirm it, Turn away thine
eyes from me (says he) for they have overcome me: What stateliness, or
terriblenesse (might one say) is in a poor believer? It Is easily answered, that
this is not any awful or dreadful terriblenesse that is here intended, but the
efficacy of faith, and the powerful victory which through the same, by Christ's
own condescending, the believer has over him; and so in his account, as to
prevailing with him, Christ's Bride is more mighty than many armies, in their
most stately posture; therefore (says he) thine eyes (that is her faith) have
overcome me (that is her terriblenesse) turn them away, I cannot (to say so)
abide them: And these three together, make the believer (or rather Christ's
love, who uses these expressions) wonderful, 1. The believer is beyond all the
world for beauty. 2. The visible Church, and believers in her, in respect of
Ordinances and her Ecclesiastic estate, is very comely and lovely; and yet the
believers inward beauty is beyond that also, the Kings daughter is all glorious
within. 3. Believers in regard of the power of their faith, are more terrible
than armies, or all military power among men: Thou art (says he) so to me, and
have such influence on me, and may expect thus to prevail with, and in a manner
to overcome, me: And so Christ is so far from quarrelling with her, for her
bygone carriage now, that he effectually comforts and commends her. Hence,
Observe, 1. Our Lord Jesus is a most friendly welcomer of a sinner, and the
sweetest passer-by of transgressions that can be; there is no upbraiding here
for any thing, but every word speaks how well he takes with her. 2. Our Lord
Jesus, his manifestations are seasonable and wise: Seasonable, that now he
comes when the Bride has left no mean unessayed, and was at a stand; wise,
that he comes not until she had found the bitterness of her own way, and was
brought to a more lively exercise of faith, repentance, holiness and
profitable experiences therein; of which we have spoken in what goes before.
3. The Lord is not displeased with humble believing, and with the claiming of
interest in him by his own, even when his dispensations to sense are dark, but
takes very well with it, and has a special compl^^ncy in it, and therefore
comes in with this intimation of his love here, importing his hearty accepting
of her. 4. The Lords commendations of his people, and the intimations of his
love to them are such, as it may be seen he conforms and proportions them to
their condition and exercise, and when they have been under any long and sharp
exercise, (as the Bride was in the former Chapter) he makes, when he comes, his
manifestations the more sweet and full, as here. 5. Believers, when grace is
exercised, must needs be beautiful creatures, and much esteemed of by Christ,
who thus commends them. 6: Grace and holiness in a believers walk, is much
more beautiful and acceptable to Christ, than the external Ordinances (though
excellent in themselves) as separable from it; for, Jerusalem, that was very
beautiful as to Ordinances, is but an emblem of this. 7. There is an awfulnesse
and terriblenesse in believers, as well as loveliness, which makes them
terrible to the profane, even whether they will or not, a godly carriage puts
a restraint on them. 8. Loveliness, terriblenesse and authority in holiness,
are knit together; when a particular believer, or Church, is lively in
holiness, then have they weight and authority, and when that fails, they
become despicable. 9. The believer has great weight with Christ, he is the
only army that prevails over him, as faith is the only weapon, being humbly
exercised, by which they overcome: This is more fully expressed in the next
verse.

Verse. 5. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: --
The first part of the fifth verse contains the amplification and heightening
of the Brides lovely* terriblenesse, and the great instance and proof thereof,
is held forth in a most wonderful expression, Turn away thine eyes from me* and
as wonderful a reason, for they have overcome me, says the beloved: Wherein
consider, 1. That, wherein this might and irresistible terriblenesse of hers
consisted, It Is her eyes, which are supposed to be looking on him, even when
she knew not, to her sense, where he was: By eyes, we show, Chap. 4. 9. were
understood her love to him, and says in him, whereby she was still cleaving to
him under desertion, and in the present dark condition she was in, seeking to
find him out. 2. This phrase, Turn away thine eyes, is not so to be taken, as
if Christ approved not her looking to him, or her faith in him; but, to show
the exceeding great delight he had in her placing her faith and love on him,
which was such, that her loving and believing looks ravished him (as it is Chap.
4. 9.) and (as it were) his heart could not stand out against these looks, more
than one man could stand out against a whole army, as the the following
expression clears: It Is like these expressions, Genesis 32. 28. I pray thee let me
go, and, Exodus 32. 10. Let me alone, Moses; which shows, that it is the
believers strength of faith, and importunity of love, exercised in humble
dependence on him, and cleaving to him, which is here commended; for (says he)
they have overcome me: This shows, that it is no violent, or unwilling victory
over him. But (in respect of the effect that followed her looks) it holds forth
the intensnesse of his love, and the certainty of faiths prevailing, that (to
speak so with reverence and admiration) he is captivat, ravished and held with
it, as one that is overcome, because he will be so; yea, according to the
principles of his love, and the faithfulness of his promises, whereby he
walks, he cannot but yield unto the believing importunity of his people, as one
overcome. In sum, it is borrowed from the most passionat love that uses to be
in men, when they are so taken with some lovely object, that a look thereof
pierces them: This, though in every thing (especially as implying defects) it
cannot be applied to Christ, yet in a holy spiritual manner, the effects, for
the believers comfort, are as really and certainly, but much more wonderfully
in Christ. These expressions are much of the same nature with these spoken of,
upon Chap. 3. 4. and Chap. 4. 9. and therefore the doctrines there, will follow
here. But further from the scope and repetition. Obs. 1. That the believers
eyes may look, that is, their love and faith may be exercised on Christ, even
in their dark and deserted conditions; and it is their property to look always to
him, even when their eyes are, as it were, blind through desertion, he is still
the Object they are set upon. 2. That when these graces of faith and love are
exercised on Christ, they are never fruitless, but always prevail and obtain,
though it be not always sensible to the believer. 3. The love and faith of
believers, have weight with Christ and affect him, even when he keeps up
himself, he may be overcome even then; for, the expression in the text looks to
what was past. 4. Faith working by love, is a most gallant, and holy darring
thing, bold in it is enterprises to pursue after, to grip, and stick to Christ
over all difficulties (as may be seen in her former carriage) and most
successful as to the event. 5. The more stayedly and stoutly, with love,
humility and diligence, that ^aith set on Christ, it is the more acceptable to
him, and has the greater commendation, as the eleventh of the Hebrews, and his
commendation of that woman's faith, Matthew. 15. 25. do confirm: Tenaciousnesse,
and importunity in holding of, hanging on, and cleaving to Christ by faith, may
well be marvelled at, and commended by Christ, but will never be reproved nor
rejected: They greatly mistake Christ, who think that wrestling by faith will
displease him; for, even though he seem to keep up himself, it is but to
occasion, and to provoke to more of the exercise of these graces, in which he
takes so much delight.

Verse. 5. -- Thy hair is as a flock of Goats, that appear from Gilead.
Verse. 6. Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing,
whereof every one bears twins, and there is not one barren among them.
Verse. 7. As a piece of a Pomegranate, are thy Temples within thy locks.
The following particulars of her commendation, in the end of the 5. and in the
6. and 7. verses, are set down in the same words, Chap. 4. 1, 2, 3. and
therefore we need say no more for their explication, only we would consider the
reason of repeating them in the same words, which is the scope here, and it is
this; Although he commended her formerly in these expressions, yet considering
her foul slip, Chap. 5. 2, 3. and his withdrawing on the back of it, she might
think that he had other thoughts of her now, and that these privileges and
promises which she had ground to lay claim to before, did not belong to her
now, and therefore she could not comfortably plead an interest in them now as
before; to remove this mistake or doubt, he will not only commend her, but in
the same very words, to show that she was the same to him, and that his respect
was not diminished to her, therefore he will not alter her name, nor her
commendation, but will again repeat it for her confirmation, intimating his
love thereby; and also for her instruction, teaching the Bride her duty by
these particulars of her commendation, and showing her what she should be: And
this commendation had not met so well with her case, nor expressed so well his
unchangeable love, if it had been given in other terms. From this we may
Observe, 1. as believers are ready to slip and fail in their duty, so are they
ready to suspect Christ to be changing toward them because of their failings;
they are very apt from their own fickleness and changes, to apprehend him to
be changeable also, and to refuse comfort from all by^gone evidences and
intimations of his love, and from all words that have comforted them, till they
be restored and set right again. 2. Our Bridegroom is most constant in his
affection to his Bride, continuing still the same, and as he is the most free
forgiver of wrongs to his own, so he is the most full forgetter of them, when
they return; and therefore he continues speaking to her in the same terms as
formerly, without any alteration, as if no such wrong on her side had been
committed. 3. Renewing of repentance and faith by believers after failings,
puts them in that same condition and capacity with Christ, for laying claim to
his love, and their wonted privileges and comforts, wherein they were before,
even as if such failings and miscarriages had never been. 4. Our Lord Jesus
would have his people confirmed, and strengthened in the faith of the constancy
of his love, the unchangeablenesse of their interest, and the privileges
following thereon: And seeing he thus loves his people, he allows them to
believe it. 5. It is not easy to fix and imprint Christ's words on believers
hearts, and to get them affected with them: therefore often, both promises and
duties must be repeated; and what was once spoken must be again repeated for
their good, especially after a slip and fit of security, the same word has
need to be made lively again, and fresh to their relish, which the Lord does
here. 6. Unless Christ speak and make the word lively, the sweetest word, even
that which once possibly has been made lively to a believer, will not savor,
but will want it is relish and luster, if he repeat it not.

Verse. 8. There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins
without number.
Verse. 9. My Dove, my undefiled is but one: she is the only one of her mother,
she is the choice one of her that bare her: the daughters saw her, and blessed
her; yea, the Queens and the Concubines, and they praised her.
This kind Bridegroom proceeds in the commendation of his Bride, verse. 8, 9.
and shows the rich excellency that is in her, by considering her several ways,
whereby she is preferable to what is most excellent: And then in the following
verses, he confirms this by a twofold proof; and lastly, verse. 13. closes the
Chapter with a kind invitation, whereby, as it were, by a new proof of his
love, he puts the commendation given her, out of doubt.

For understanding the 8. and 9. verses, we are to conceive, that by Daughters,
Virgins, Queens, Concubines, by this Dove that is one, and the mother that
bears, are not understood any party distinct from the Church or Bride, but the
same Bride diversely considered, taking-in first the Church as visible, which is
beautiful in her Ordinances, external profession and order; for, she is the
mother that bears the daughters (who are the daughters of Jerusalem) and that
is said to be seen; both which expressions hold forth this, and accordingly
mother and daughters have hitherto been understood in this Song, Chap. 3. 4, 5.
Secondly, and especially, the Church as invisible, and the real believers who
are members of the Church invisible; for, the scope here is to commend her
graces; and if we consider the commendation preceding, and the proofs given,
it will appear that they especially belong to her, and by Analogy agree to the
visible Church, wherein she is comprehended.

This diverse consideration of the Church as one and more, Is not, 1.
disagreeable to other Scriptures, in which Christ uses to commend her, as we
see, Psalm. 45. 9, 13, 14. where there is the Queen, called the Kings daughter,
and the Virgins; or Daughters her companions, who are with her, yet by all is
understood the same invisible Church, considered collectively as one body, or
distributively in her several members. Nor, 2. is it unsuitable to the strain
of this Song, nor is it absurd, as was shown in the Preface, and needs not now
be repeated. And, 3. it agrees well with Christ's scope here (where he is (to
say so) seeking how to express fully the commendation of his Bride, as
singular and eminent) thus to consider her; for, the more ways she be
considered, her excellency appears the more, she being excellent, whatever way
she be looked on: And if as visible, she be glorious, and someway one in him,
much more as invisible she is so, which is the scope, as is clear, verse. 9. By
Queens, Concubines and Virgins then, we understand believers of different
growths and degrees: I say, believers, 1. because these titles agree best to
them, according to the strain of this Song and of Psalm 45. 2. They are
supposed to be of one mother. 3. They praise the Bride, which is an evidence of
honesty and sincerity, and a greater argument of her excellency, that she is
praised and commended by such as had discerning: I say, we are here to
understand believers of different growths and degrees, so that some believers
are Queens, that is, more glorious, and admitted to the highest privileges;
Some are as Concubines, who were accounted lawful wives as to conjugal
fellowship, but differed in this, that they had not such government over the
family, and their children had not right to inherit, therefore they are as half
wives, as the word in the Original will bear; Some are Virgins, that are not so
far admitted, yet are of a chaste carriage, and so differenced from others, as
was said on Chap. 1. 3. Next, the commendation is, that though there be many
Queens, more Concubines, and Virgins without number (that is, though there be
many believers of different (...) and degrees) yet there is but one Bride,
which is a singular excellency in her, and an unheard of thing, that so many
make up but one Bride; the like whereof is not to be found in any marriage that
ever was in the world: Or, we may conceive thus, though men for their
satisfaction, sought out many Queens, Concubines and Virgins, because there was
not to be found in any one what was satisfying, yet, says he, my one Bride is
to me many virtually, as if the worth of so many Queens, Concubines, and
Virgins were combined in one: And thus as she set him out chief of all
husbands, so does he set her out as chief of all Brides, and as comprehending
in her alone, all that was desirable, as the next part of the 9. verse. clear^.
By the number, 60. 80. and without number, we conceive an indefinit number is
to be understood, that is, they are many, only they of the inferior ranks are
manyest, that is, there are more Concubines than Queens, far advanced in
Christianity, and again, more Virgins than Concubines, because experienced
believers of an high degree are most rare, and these who are not grown up, to
have their senses exercised, are most numerous; In a word, there are more weak
than strong believers. Which says, 1. that there are degrees amongst true
believers, all have not the same degree of grace, though all have the same
grace for kind, and though all be in the same Covenant; there are old men, or
fathers, young men, and little children, or babs, 1 John 2. 12, 13. 2. Among
believers, there are many more weak than strong. 3. He accounts of them all as
honorable, and reckons even the Virgins as commendable, though they come not up
to be Queens. Yet, 4. where grace is most lively, and faith most strong, there
he dignifies believers with a most special and ample commendation, verse. 9.

The 9. verse. makes up the scope with the former, By D^^e and undefiled, we
said is understood the Church, especially the invisible Church of believers,
who all partake of the same nature and property, and so of the same
privileges; the titles are spoken of before: The commendation is threefold, 1.
She is one, which sets her out not only with unity in her affections, but (to
say so) with a kind of oneness in her self: Thus the visible Catholic Church
is one garden, verse. 2 comprehending many beds of spices; one Church, made up
here of many particular Churches: And thus oneness or unity, is a great
commendation to her, or a special part of her excellency. But, 2. the invisible
Church is but one, all believers make up one body; though there be many of
different growths, yet there is but one Bride: This is a singular thing, and
this makes for the scope, of commending the Bride; and points out two things,
1. That all the excellencies in believers combine in one, and that must be
excellent, every one of them partakes of another excellency, by virtue of the
mutual union and communion they have with Christ, the Head and Husband, and one
with another, as the beauty of the face adornes the leg, and the straightness
of the legs commends the face, because both hold forth one glorious body. 2. It
illustrats her commendation thus, There are many Queens stately, many
Concubines and Virgins lovely amongst men, yet one cannot be all; but (says
he) although there be many of these in the Church, yet is she one, and although
she be one, yet is she all, collectively suming up all.

2. She is the only one of her mother: This sets her out singularly and
exclusively, there is not another but she: By mother here, is understood the
Catholic Church, wherein children are conceived and brought forth, she is the
mother of all that believe, Gal. 4. 26. Jerusalem that is above, is free, which
is the mother of us all: This Church considered as from the beginning of the
world to the end, is one; and is the mother, in respect of the Church
considered as being in this or that place for the time present, which is
understood by us all, wherever we live, we belong to that mother, Gal. 4. 26.
There is no Church but that one, and who are begotten to God, are brought forth
by her, and belong to her.

3. She is the choice one of her that bare her: This sets her out
comparatively, 1. She is the choice one in respect of the world, this one
Church is more excellent than the multitude of all the societies that are
there. 2. She is the choice one in respect of all visible professors as such,
she is beyond the daughters; amongst all her mothers children, or prosessing
members of the Church, the believer does excel. 3. The Church considered
complexly does excel particular believers, as having all their excellencies
combined together: Or, the scope of these two verses, being to prefer the Bride
as singular, and eminently beyond all other beloveds, whether Queens,
Concubines, such as are joined unto men, or Virgins, such as are yet suited and
sought for, we may conceive it thus, my love, (says he) my dove has not a
match, but is chief; and as she called him the chief of all beloveds, Chap. 5.
10. so here he commends her as the most lovely of all Brides, that can be
wedded or wooed; although there be many of these: Yet, 1. my dove is but one,
that is, in respect of her singular excellency, she comprehends all. 2. She is
the only one of her mother, there are no more of that family, that are born of
that mother, beside her self, that I can set my heart on, or can match with:
And thus, all the world beside the believer, is cried down. 3. Comparatively,
she is the choice one of her that bare her, that is, not only by comparing her
with the world, but by comparing her with all mere external professors, she is
still the choice of all.

That this is the scope, is clear, and the enumerating of so many Queens,
Concubins and Virgins, does illustrat it, either by showing her singularity and
perfection, as having all in her alone, which is to be had in many; or, by
preferring her to all, although they be many: and thus in his commending of
her, he is even and equal with her in the commendation she gave him, which was
both comparative, that he was chief of ten thousand; and also absolute and
comprehensive, that he was all desires, that nothing was wanting, but that all
things desirable were comprehended in him: so now he commends and extols her
above all others, as having more in her alone than was to be found in all
others; to show that his love to her, and his estimation of her, was nothing
inferior to hers of him, and that he was satisfied with her alone, without
seeking to multiply Queens or Concubins, as many men of the world did.

This commendation out of Christ's mouth, of a Bride so undutiful, may seem
strange; therefore, to make it unquestionable* he brings in a double
confirmation, both which, respect what goes before, to make it the more
convincing. The first is in the end of the ninth verse, and it is taken from
that esteem that others had of her, The daughters saw her, and they blessed
her, etc. This beauty (says he) is real and singular, even such that it makes
on-lookers, the most glorious and discerning (not only the Daughters but even
the Queens and Concubines) to be much affected; the beauty of my Bride is such
as takes them all up. The daughters, that is, professors, saw her, they beheld
this beauty of hers (as Chap. 3. 6.) and they blessed her, that is, 1. They
were convinced of her excellency, and accounted her blessed and happy, as Mary
says of her self, Luke 1. 48. And, 2. they wished well to her, desiring God to
bless her, as, Psalm. 129. 8. We bless you in the Name of the Lord; for, these
two are comprehended in one man's blessing of another. Next, the Queens and
Concubins, that is, these who either in the world, or in the Church, are
thought most of, they praised her; by which is understood some external
expression of their esteem of her, and their endeavor to paint out her
excellency and beauty to the view of others, so as they might fall in love with
her: As the first then looks to the high thoughts, and inward esteem they had
of her; so this looks to the outward expression of that esteem, by which they
study to set her out in the eyes of all others: So they yielded the Bride to be
excellent, and called her fairest among women, Chap. 5. 9. which is an evidence
of her loveliness, and of the loveliness of grace in an exercised believer;
and whatever others thought of her, yet that such praised her, it shows, there
was reality in the ground thereof. This is also spoken to their commendation,
who did thus commend her; And it holds out, 1. the notice which he takes of the
thoughts and words which men have of his Bride; our Lord knows what men say or
think of his people, and records it. 2. How pleasing it is to him, to have them
speaking respectively of her, especially when she is exercised with any dark or
afflicting dispensation.

Verse. 10. Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the Moon,
clear as the Sun, and terrible as an army with banners?
The tenth verse may be taken as the expression of his own esteem of her, and
so it begins the second proof of her excellency, that not only they, but He
esteems of her. Or, the words may be looked on as the continuance of their
praise, and be read thus, They praised her, saying (as often that word is to be
supplied) who is she, etc? If they be thus taken, the scope is the same,
holding forth their esteem of her; and his repeating of it, shows his
approbation thereof: and we incline to take the words in this sense, because it
continues the series better, and shows their concurring in their thoughts of
her, with what were his thoughts, verse. 4. which is his scope. This is
peculiarly taken notice of by him as well grounded praise, upon this account,
that their thoughts were conform and agreeable to his. It will also difference
the two confirmations better to begin the second, verse. 11. than to take the
words simply as the Bridegrooms words, wherein the same thing for substance
with what was said, verse. 4. is repeated. However, in these words, her
loveliness is set out, 1. In the manner of expression here used, who is she?
Like that, Chap. 3. 6. which was spoken by the daughters, and so this looks the
liker to be spoken by them also, as wondering at her, What is she? this she
must be some singular person, and so it proves his scope, laid down, verse. 9.
2. The matter of the words, sets out her loveliness in four expressions or
similitudes, tending to one thing, namely to show the lightsomnesse (to speak
so) of the Church, and her ravishing-beauty: The first similitude is, that she
looks forth as the morning: The morning is lightsome, compared with the
night, and refreshful; so the Bride is like the morning, compared with the
world that is darkness, and she is lovely, chearing and heartsome to look-on
beyond all others, so the morning is often opposed to affliction and
heartlesnesse, Isa. 58. 8. for, then birds and fields look cheerful, that
before were dark and drooping. 2. She is fair as the Moon: The Moon is the
lesser of the two great lights, and was made to guide the night, and is a
glorious creature, shining above all stars; so is the Bride like the Moon in a
dark night, very conspicuous and beautiful, and useful withal, to them that
are acquaint with her. 3. She is clear as the Sun: This speaks yet more of her
splendour, her taking-excellent beauty, and usefulness, for the direction and
comfort of the daughters that behold her; The Sun being the most bright,
lightsome and glorious creature of the world, and the greater light that is
singularly useful to the world. 4. She is terrible as an army with banners,
which was spoken to, on verse. 4. and is here repeated, to show that it is no
common, effeminate beauty, but a stately majesty, wherewith she is adorned,
that has an awfulnesse in it toward men, and a prevailing efficacy toward
God. In sum, it describes the spiritual beauty of the Bride in these
properties, 1. That it is lightsome, and shining, there is no true glory but
this, which is like the light, all other beauty is but dark; Grace makes one
shine like a light in a dark place, Phil. 2. 15. 2. It Is a growing beauty,
every step of these similitudes ascends higher and higher, till the Sun be
rested in, The way of the just is as the shining light, that shines more and
more until the perfect day, Prove. 4. 24. 3. It Is comprehensive, therefore it is
compared to lights of all sorts; There is somewhat in grace that resembles
every thing that is lovely, Gods Image being therein eminently. 4. It is
stately and awful, being convincing and captivating to on-lookers. 5. It is a
beauty attended with a military and fighting condition, and therefore compared
to armies: The highest commendation of believers, does insinuate them to be in
a fighting posture, and the more stayedly they maintain their fight, and keep
their posture, they will be the more beautiful. 6. A believer that prevails
with Christ (as she did, verse. 4, 5.) will also be awful to others, as here she
is, and will prevail over them, as the Lord says to Jacob, Genesis 32. 28. Thou
have prevailed with God, and then follows, thou shall also prevail with men.

Verse. 11. I went down into the Garden of Nuts, to see the fruits of the
valley, and to see whether the Vine flourished, and the Pomegranates budded.
Verse. 12. Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the Chariots of Amminadib.
Follows now in the 11. and 12. verses, the second proof of the reality of the
beauty and stateliness of the Bride, which puts all out of controversy; and
this proof he takes from his own experience, respecting what was said, verse. 4,
5. and it may be summed thus, That must be stately beauty, that ravisheth me;
(that is understood) but hers is such; This is proved from experience, I went
down (says he) to the Garden of nuts (having withdrawn from that sensible
communion which was entertained with the Spouse, as a man does out of his
chamber to his Garden) and was looking to the case of my plants, according as
the Bride had informed the daughters of Jerusalem, verse. 2. but (says he) ere
I was aware, she did cast an eye after me, that so suddenly and effectually
ravished me, that I could not but return, and that speedily, as if I had been
mounted upon the swiftest Chariots, and therefore this cannot but be stately
loveliness: Which agrees with, and relates to what is said, verse. 5. Thou have
overcome me: And so we may look on the words, as if he therein, for her
consolation, were giving her an account of his absence, and what he was doing;
and he shows her that even while he was absent, her cries (which Chap. 5. 6.
she thought had not been heard) and her looks to him, were not forgotten, nor
slighted, even when to her sense she saw him not, yet even then (says he) they
pierced me, and made my affections warm, that I could not but be affected, and
return, as now thou sees.

The 11. verse. shows where he was, and what he was doing, when he was absent:
The 12. verse. how he returned. The place whether he went, was to the Garden of
nuts, that same which was called the Garden and beds of Spices, verse. 2. His
going down, is his withdrawing from her sense, and as in that same place, so
here, his end is set out in two expressions (which expounds how he feeds in his
Gardens.) 1. It is to see the fruits of the valley: The Church, called the
Garden formerly, is here called the valley, because she is planted, as it were,
in a good valley-soil, where fruits use to thrive best. His going to see them,
holds forth his accurat observing in general how it is with them, and his
taking delight (as it were) to recreat himself by beholding of them, as men do
who visit their Gardens. Next, and more particularly, it is to see whether the
Vine flourished, and the Pomegranates budded: By Vine and Pomegranate, are
understood particular believers, who are as several trees of his Garden, as was
cleared on Chap. 4. 13. Their flourishing, or budding, looks to the beginnings
of grace, scarce come to ripe fruit, but (as in the bud, Chap. 2. 15.) being
exceeding tender; and these are mentioned distinctly, beside the former
general, of seeing the fruits; To show, 1. his taking particular notice of
every particular believer, as a man that goes from tree to tree in his Garden.
2. His special notice taking of beginners, and of the beginnings of his work in
them, as being especially delighted with the first buddings of grace, and
careful that nothing wrong them: This is his feeding in his Gardens, and his
gathering Lilies, to be delighted with fruitfulness in his people, even with
their weak and tender beginnings, and to be solicitously careful of their good,
as men use to be of the thriving of their fruit trees.

Observe. 1. Where our Lord Jesus has a Garden, which he has planted, and on
which he takes pains, he looks for fruits; His Garden should never want fruit.
2. There are diverse growths, degrees or measures of grace amongst his people;
for, some of his trees have fruits, and some but blossoms. 3. Our Lord Jesus
takes special notice of his peoples fruitfulness, and that as particularly of
every one of them, as if he went from one to another (as the Gardener does from
tree to tree) to discover it. 4. Our Lord Jesus is especially delighted with
the kindly blossomings of beginners, and he takes especial notice of the young
and tender buddings of their grace, and will be so far from crushing them,
because they are not ripe fruits, that he will more tenderly care for them. 5.
Our Lord Jesus accuratly takes notice of his Brides carriage, and expects her
fruitfulness, when he seems to her sense to be absent, and is especially much
delighted with it then; for, when he is gone down to his Garden, this is the
errand, to see the fruits of the valley, whether, etc. when he withdraws, he
has a friendly design, yet, says he, although that was intended, I was made
(as it were) to alter my purpose, and not to stay.

And so we come to the 12. verse, in which is set down, how suddenly he is
transported with affection to his Bride; while he is viewing her graces in his
absence from her, he is so taken with love to her, that he can stay no longer
from her. We may consider in the verse, these three things* 1. An effect, as it
were, wrought on him, He is made like the Chariots of Amminadib, or, set as in
the Chariots of Amminadib: Chariots were used to travel with, and that for the
greater speed; or, they were used in war, for driving furiously (like Iehu) and
mightily, over difficulties and obstructions in the way; The word Amminadib may
be read in one word, and it is to be taken for a proper name of a Prince, and
thus the expression sets out excellent Chariots, such as belonged possibly to
some such valiant men of that name; or it may be read in two words, Ammi nadib,
which in the Original signify, my willing people: So, Ammi signifies, my
people, as, Hos. 2. 1 Say to your brethren Ammi, that is, my people; And Nadib
is the same word that is rendered, Psalm. 110. 3. willing, Thy people shall be
willing; It Is a princely beautifulness and willingness. The word, Chap. 7. 1.
O Princes daughter, is from the same root, and we rather take it so here, as
being more suitable to the scope, which shows what effect his Brides affection
had on him, and the word is often so elsewhere translated; and so it may be
rendered, the Chariots of my princely willing people: They get this name for
their princely behavior, in wrestling with him under difficulties. Again, the
word, I was made, may be rendered, was set (according to the more usual
interpretation of the word) thus the effect may be taken two ways, to one
scope, 1. I was made like the most swift Chariots for speedy return, that
nothing could detain me from returning to my Bride. Or, 2. if we may call the
prayers, faith and love of his people, their Chariots, he is set on them, as
taking pleasure to ride and triumph in them, and to be brought back by them, as
if by Chariots sent from them he had been overcome: And this suits with what is
spoken, verse. 5. for, while he accounts her as an army; these must needs be her
weapons and Chariots, to wit, a longing willingness to be at him, and
soul-sicknesse, casting her eyes after him, and in a manner, even fainting for
him.

2. There is the manner how this effect is brought about, He is suddenly, as it
were, surprised, or ever I was aware, etc. I knew not (as if he said) till I
was transported with an irresistible power of love toward my Bride, who in the
exercise of faith, repentance and prayer, was seeking after me, while I had
withdrawn my self. The expression is borrowed from men (for, properly it agrees
not to him) who by sudden effects that fall out beyond their expectation, use
to aggrege the wonderfulnesse of the cause that brings them about: Thus, I know
not how it was, it was or I was aware, or, while I was not thinking on it, so
forcibly, and, as it were, insensibly the thing prevailed over me: Christ
expresses it thus, to show the wonderfulnesse of the thing that came on him,
that he could not but do it, and could not shun it, more than if he had had no
time to deliberat about it. This narration of Christ's, is not to resent that
effect, but to show how natively it was brought forth, so that when they (to
say so) sent their Chariots to him, and did cast a look after him, he could not
but yield, because he would yield, as the third thing in the verse shows, and
that is, what it was that so easily prevailed with him, the cause is within
himself that set him on these Chariots of his willing people, and made him to
be overcome, it was even his soul, my soul made me, or set me, that is, my
inward soul, my affections, my bowels were so kindled (as it is Ier. 31. 20.)
and my soul cleaved so to my loving and longing Bride, and was so stirred with
her exercise, that I could not but hastily and speedily yield, because I could
not resist my own affections. Hence, Obs. 1. willingness is much prized by
Jesus Christ, when the soul yields to open to him, and longs for him, verse. 5.
and cannot want him, there Christ (as Chap. 5. 6.) will not, and cannot
continue at a distance. 2. Although Christ's affection does not properly
surprise him, nor do the effects thereof fall from him inadvertantly, but most
deliberatly, yet both his affection and the effects thereof, are most wonderful
and astonishing in themselves, and ought as such, in a singular manner to
affect us. 3. The first rise and cause of all the believers good, and that
which makes their faith, prayer, love, etc. bear weight with Christ, is in
himself; It Is his own soul, and good will that overcomes and prevails with him
in all these: It is not any worth or power in their graces, as considered in
themselves, that has this influence upon him, but his intimate love to
believers themselves, that makes their graces have such weight with him: All
that ever came speed with him, were prevented by his love. 4. The believer has
a notable friend in Christ's own bosom, his soul is friendly to them, and is
in a kindly-way affected with their conditions, even though in his
dispensations no such thing appear: And while he is man, and has a soul, they
want not a friend. 5. Considering this as the exercise of his soul, when he was
withdrawn to her sense, and she was complaining, Observe, That Christ's bowels
and soul are never more affected toward his people, then when he seems most
offended with them, and when they are most affected with the wrongs done to
him, Ier. 31. 19, 20. Judge. 10. 16. There be many inconceivable turnings in his
bowels, even when he seems to speak against them to their sense, then he
earnestly remembers them still, and their friend love, steps to, and takes part
for them, and so prevails, that by his own bowels he is restrained from
executing the fierceness of his anger ( Hos. 11. 8. compared with 9.) and
constrained even when he is provoked to take some other course, to express
mavelous loving kindness to them.

Verse. 13. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return, that we may look upon
thee: what will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two armies.
The thirteenth verse continues the same scope, and is a confirmation of the
interpretation given of the former verse, and a new expression of his love,
whereby as a kind husband, having forgotten bypast failings in his wife, he
invites her to return to her former familiarity, with a motive signifying the
love which he had to her, and that upon so good ground (in his gracious
estimation) as that by her yielding to return, he puts no question, but what he
had spoken of her stately terriblenesse, would be found to be a truth. The
verse contains these three, 1. A most affectionat invitation. 2. A most loving
motive proposed, persuading to embrace it, which is his end. 3. An objection
removed, whereby the motive is confirmed and illustrate. In the exhortation or
invitation, Consider, 1. the party invited, or called. 2. The duty called for.
3. It Is repetition. The party called, is a Shulamite: This word comes either
from Solomon, as the husbands name is named over the wife, Isa. 4. 1. and it is
from the same root that signifies peace, from which Solomon had his name; and
it is in the feminine gener, because it is applied to the Bride: Thus it holds
forth, 1. the strict union betwixt him and her, that she with him partakes of
the same name: See Ier. 23. 6. compared with Ier. 33. 16. where ye will find
the like communication of his name to her. 2. It shows the privilege she was
admitted unto, through her tie to him and union with him, by which she is made
his, and is admitted to share with him in all that is his; for, it is not an
empty style she gets, while called by his name, it being to signify that she
was his, and that whatever he had (whereof she was capable, and might be for
her good) was hers. 3. It shows his affection that he so names her now, wishing
her a part of his own peace, and intitling her to it. Or, 2. this word may be
derived from Salem, which properly taken, is Jerusalem, Psalm. 76. 1. and Heb.
7. 1. Melchisedec was king of Salem, which signifies peace, and so, as
Shunamitish comes from Shunem, so Shulamite from Salem, and so taking the
derivation thus, it comes to the same thing with the former, both being derived
from the same root; And this holds forth his respect to her, as acknowledging
her new birth and Original from the new Jerusalem. 2. The exhortation is,
return: This implies, 1. a distance whether in respect of sin, Ier. 3. 1. for,
sin breeds distance betwixt Christ and his people, Isa. 59. 2. or, in respect
of sensible manifestations of his love; for, howsoever, the distance brought on
by sin, was in some measure taken away, and she returned to her former
obedience and wonted tenderness, yet she wants the sense of his love, and is
seeking after it: return, here then, supposes somewhat of these. 2. A duty
laid on her, to quite this distance and to return; this the very expression
bears. 3. A kind offer of welcome, which is employed in his offers and
exhortations, whenever he calls: So Ier. 3. 14. Ier. 4. 1. and thus the sense
is, as if he had said, There has been a distance betwixt us, and thou art
suspicious of my love; but, return and come hither, and neither thy former
^aults, nor present jealousy shall be remembered; and this shows, that the
words are his, both because the scope is continued, and also because none can
call the Bride properly or effectually to return, but he, neither would the
voice of another be so confirming to her of his affection, and his scope is to
confirm her, as to that.

3. This exhortation is twice doubled, Return, return, and again, return,
return: 1. To show the hazard she was in. 2. Her duty to prevent it. 3. The
necessity of speedy putting the exhortation in practice. 4. The difficulty that
there was to bring her over her discouragements. 5. His great and earnest
desire to have them all removed, and to have the duty performed. These words
show, 1. That there may be a distance betwixt Christ and his Bride; even the
beautiful believer may fall into a distance of sin, 2. of indisposition, 3. of
comfortlessnesse, and 4. of discouragement and heartlessnesse, which follows on
the former. 2. There is often a loathnesse to come home, when there has been a
straying; discouragement and shame may prevail so far, as to s^ar fainting
believers (who fain would have him) from hearty applying of his allowances to
themselves. 3. Souls that are at distance with Christ, whatever kind of
distance it be, would not sit down under it, or give way to it, but wrestle
from under it, over all difficulties that are in their way. 4. This would be
done speedily, and without all delay, dispute or dalying, therefore does the
Lord so double his call; there will sure, be no advantage by delaying, or
putting off this great business of returning from our distance to him. 5. The
return of a believer after a slip, to confident walking with Christ, and
comforting of themselves in him, is allowed by him and well pleasing to him, as
well as the conversion and coming home of a sinner at first. 6. Believers after
their slips, are not easily persuaded of Christ's kindness, in the measure
that he has it to them; nor are they easily brought to that confidence of it,
that formerly they had. 7. Our Lord Jesus allows his people to be fully
confident of his love, and of obtaining welcome from him; for which reasons
this return, as a sure evidence and testimony of his kind and hearty welcome,
is four times repeated, to show that he is entreating and waiting for it, and
cannot abide to have it delayed.

2. The end proposed, that makes him so serious, is in these words, that we may
look upon thee: It does him good (to speak so) to get a sight of her: This
looking of his, is not for curiosity, but for delightsome satisfaction to his
affection, as one desires to look upon what he loves, so, Chap. 2. 14. speaking
to his Bride, Let me see (says he) thy face, for thy countenance is comely.
This is to take away all jealousy from the Bride, and to show how he was taken
with her, so that her returning would be a singular pleasure to him, which is
indeed wonderful.

Obs. 1. Our Lord Jesus allows the Bride, when returning to him after her
departings from him, to be confident in him, and familiar with him. 2. The more
that nearness to him be sought after and entertained, he is the more
satisfied. 3. When believers hide themselves from Christ, even though it be
through discouragement, and upon just ground and reason, as they think; yet
does it some way mar Christ's delightsome complacency, and he is not satisfied
till they shake off their discouragement, and show themselves to him with
confidence.

Again, we would consider, that it is not said, that I may look on thee; but,
that we, etc. Which is to show, that she is delightsome to many, her beauty may
be seen by any that will look upon her: This word, we, 1. may import the
blessed Trinity, the Father, Son and Spirit, as, Chap. 1. 11. we will make,
etc. A returning sinner will be welcome to all the persons of the Godhead. 2.
We, that is, I with the Angels, who ( Luke 15. 10.) rejoice at the conversion
of a sinner. And, 3. we may import, I and all the daughters that admire thee.
The thriving of one believer, or, the returning of a sinner may make many
cheerful, and is to be accounted a lovely thing by all the professors of
Religion.

3. The third thing in the verse, comes-in by way of question, either to
highten the loveliness that is in Christ's Bride; what is it that is to be
seen in her? as, Luke 7. 24. etc. what went ye out for to see? No common sight:
or, it is to meet with an objection that strangers may have, what delightsome
thing is to be seen in her, that seems so despicable? Or, she her self might
object, what is in me worth the seeing? It may be, when it is well seen, that
it be less thought of. The Lord to prevent such doubts, especially in her,
moves the question, that he himself may give the answer; what (says he) will
ye see in the S^^lamite? (that is) which may be pleasant, and delightful; and
he answers, as it were the company of two armies; which in general holds out,
1. We will see much majesty and stateliness in her; even so much as I have
asserted, in comparing her to an army with banners. 2. Two armies may be
mentioned, to show, that when she is rightly, and with a believing eye looked
upon, her beauty will appear to be double to what it was said to be; and so,
two armies signify an excellent army, as, Genesis 32. 1, 2. God's hosts of Angels
get the same name in the Original, it is Mahanaim, that same which Jacob
imposes as the name upon the place, where these hosts of Angels met him; and
there may be an allusion to this, these two ways, 1. Ask ye what is to be seen
in her? even as it were Mahanaim, that is, for excellency she is like an host
of Angels, such as appeared to Jacob; she is an Angelick fight, more than an
ordinary army: this is a notable commendation, and serves his purpose well,
which is to confirm her: and therefore, that his poor Bride may be encouraged
to presse-in on him, and return to him, he tells her, she may be as homely with
him as Angels, that are holy and sinlesse creatures; which is a wonderful
privilege, yet such as is allowed on his people, by him who has not taken on
the nature of Angels, but of men, that he might purchase them a room amongst
Angels that stand by, Zech. 3. 6, 7. 2. It may allude thus, what is to be seen
in her? whatever it be to the world, it is to me (says he) excellent and
refreshful, as these hosts of Angels were to Jacob at Mahanaim, when he had
been rescued from Laban, and was to meet with Esau: either of these suits well
the scope, and says, it will be, and is a sweet and refreshful meeting, that
is betwixt Christ and a returning sinner, a little view whereof is in that
parable, Luke 15. 20. of the Prodigal his fathers hearty receiving of his lost
son, and making himself and all his servants merry with him.

Obs. 1. Our Lord is very tender of believers doubts and perplexities, and
therefore prevents their objections which they may make, by giving answers to
them, before the objections be well formed or stated in their hearts. 2.
Believers may, and usually do, wonder what ground there is in them, for such
kindness as Christ shows to them, when he magnifieth them and their graces so
much, that are so defective and full of blemishes: And indeed it is such, that
are readiest to wonder most at his love, and esteem least of themselves, whom
he makes most of, and of whom he has the greatest esteem. 3. It Is a wonderful
welcome that Christ gives to repenting sinners, he receives them as Angels, and
admits them to such freedom with him, and has such esteem of them, as if they
were Angels; for, to be received as an Angel, signifies honorable and loving
entertainment, Gal. 4. 14. 4. The returning of sinners to Christ, and Christ's
loving welcome which he gives them upon their return, makes a heartsome and
refreshing meeting betwixt him and them: And O what satisfaction and joy shall
there be, when they being all gathered together, shall meet with him at the
last day!

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1, 2, 3. BRIDEGROOM.
THis Chapter has two parts: In the first, reaching to the tenth verse, Christ
continues in the commendation of his Bride: In the second, thence to the
close, the Bride expresses her complacency in him and in his love, her
enlarged desires after communion with him, and that she might be found fruitful
to his praise.

That it is Christ, the Bridegroom, who was speaking in the end of the former
Chapter, that continues his speech throughout the first part of this, there is
no just ground to question, the scope, style and expressions being so like
unto, and co-incident with what went before; and what is spoken in the first
person, verse. 8. can be applied to none other, neither would it become any to
speak thus but himself, his love is enlarged and loosed (as it were) in it is
expressions, and this love of his is indeed a depth, that is not easily
reached. In this commendation, he does first enumerat ten particulars (as she
had done when she commended him, Chap. 5.) Then, 2. he shows his acquiescing in
her, as being ravished with her beauty, verse. 6. etc. We had occasion to say
something in the general of such commendations, Chap. 4. 1. which is now to be
remembered, but not repeated; we take this to be understood after the same
manner as that was, and although the visible Church be in some respect Christ's
Bride, and therefore, we will not condemn the application of some of the parts
of this commendation to her, as so considered; yet, since the scope is mainly
to comfort true believers, as differenced from others, and that it is she to
whom he speaks, who had ravished him with her eyes in the former Chapter (which
can agree properly to the true believer only) and considering also, that some
parts of the commendation do respect inherent grace in his people (and indeed
it is this which is the great ground of the Brides commendation) we therefore
incline still to take these commendations, as holding forth the continuance of
the expressions of Christ's love to these, who are his own by saying says; and
so much the rather, as the words being taken so, are of special and particular
use for believers.

There are four differences in this commendation, from that mentioned, chap. 4.
and that which was spoken to, on chap. 6. 6, 7. which by answering four
questions, we shall clear.

Quest. 1. Wherefore is this subjoined now, after so large a commendation in
the words immediately preceding. Ans. The former commendation shows Christ's
love to his Bride (to say so) immediately after their marriage, or on the back
of some agreement, after an outcast; but, this is added, to show what is
Christ's ordinary way of carriage to his people, and what are his usual
thoughts (to say so) of them; he is not kind only at fits (as men sometimes use
to be, and do not continue) or, when he was surprised (as it were) with a
sudden gale of affection, Chap. 6. 12. no, he is constantly kind; and
therefore, these expressions are ^ow renewed, to show that such are his
ordinary kind ways of dealing toward them, even when there is no connection
betwixt his dealing and their present condition, nor any thing in them that can
be looked on as the immediate rise thereof: Our blessed Lord is a most fair,
loving and friendly speaker unto, and converser with his Bride.

Quest. 2. Why is this commendation enlarged beyond the former, having more
particulars in it? Ans. Thereby the Lord shows, 1. the sovereignty of his love,
in making the intimations thereof, less or more as he pleases. 2. The last
commendation is most full, in expressing the riches of his love, to show that
Christ never speaks so kindly to one of his own, but there is more behind in
his heart than has yet vented it self, and that there is more which they may
expect from him, than they have yet met with, however that may be very much. 3.
It Is to make it the fresher unto them, when by this it is evidenced to be a new
intimation of his kindness, although it proceed on the same grounds, on which
former intimations did; and this may be a reason also of the third difference,
and question following, which is,

3. Why are the same parts named, as eyes, hair, etc. and yet the commendation
is different from what it was, for the most part? Ans. 1. This is to show the
beauty of grace, which is such, that one commendation cannot reach it. 2. The
account that he in his love has of her, which is so great, that one expression
does not fully answer it. 3. The various and abundant ways, that love has to
speak comfortably to a believer, there is strange eloquence and rhetoric in
the love of Christ, when he thinks good to vent it.

Quest. 4. Why is the way he followed before changed? He began formerly at the
head, now at the feet? Ans. This is also a piece of his sovereignty, and shows
how he delights to vary the expressions of his love to his people; and that it
may be seen, that whatever way we will follow in looking upon grace in a
believer, it is still beautiful in it self, and acceptable to him.

Verse. 1. How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O princes daughter! the joints
of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman.
The first verse contains two pieces of the Brides commendation, The first part
that is commended is the feet, How beautiful are thy feet? etc. In this
consider the title she gets. 2. The part commended. 3. The commendation it
self. 4. The manner of expressing of it. First, the title is, O princes
daughter! This was not given her before, it is now prefixed to this commendation
in general, to usher-in all that follows, and to make it the more gaining on
her affection: The word in the first Language is, Na^^ib, which signifies a
bounteous prince, or, one of a princely disposition, Isa. 32. 5. It Is given to
the visible Church, Psalm. 45. 13. The Kings daughter is all glorious within.
For more full taking up of the meaning, consider, that it does here include
these three, 1. A nobleness and greatness in respect of birth, that the Bride
is honorably descended: From which we may learn, That believers (whatever they
be in respect of the flesh) are of a royal descent and kindred, a royal
priesthood, 1. Pet. 2. 9. sons and daughters to the Lord God Almighty, 2. Cor.
6. 18. 2. It respects her qualifications, as being princely in her carriage,
suitable to such a birth, Eccles. 10. 17. Hence observe, the believer should be
of a princely disposition and carriage, and when he is right, he will be so;
for, he is endued with princely qualifications, with noble and excellent
principles, beyond the most generous, noble, gallant and stately dispositions
of men in the world: A believer when right, or in good case, is a princely
person indeed. 3. It respects her provision and expectation; that she is
provided for, waited upon, and to be dealt with, and even dalted, not as
children of mean persons, but of princes, to whom it is her fathers good
pleasure to give a Kingdom, and such a one as is undefiled, and fades not
away, Luke 12. 32. 1 Pet. 1. 4. Hence observe, That the believer is royally
dealt with by Jesus Christ, and has a royal princely allowance bestowed on
him; the charter of Adoption takes-in very much, even to inherit with him all
things: No less than this may be expected, and is the claim of a daughter to
the King of Kings, Rev. 21. 7.

2. The part commended is, the feet, by which a believers walk and
conversation, as grace shines in it, is understood, as we may see frequently,
Psalm. 119. v. 59. 101. 105. So likewise shedding of blood, or other defiling
sins, such as leave soul prints upon a man's conversation behind them, are
called the iniquities of the heels, Psalm. 49. 5. by which the nakedness and
offensivenesse of ones conversation is let forth: And on the contrary, the
Brides feet thus commended, set out her good conversation.

3. Her feet are commended from this, that they are not bare, but, beautiful
with shoes: To be barefooted, imports three things in Scripture, 1. A shameful
condition, Isa. 20. 4. 2. A present sad affliction, the sense whereof makes men
careless of what is adorning; So David, 2 Samuel 15. 30. under heavy affliction,
walks barefooted. 3. An unfitness for travel: Therefore, when the people were
to be in readiness for their journey, Exodus 1^. 11. their feet were to be
shod: So then, to have on shoes, does on the contrary import three things, 1.
The honorable estate and dignity to which believers are advanced; and more
especially, it holds out a singular beautifulness in their walk, whereby their
shame is covered. 2. A thriving in their spiritual condition. 3. A readiness
and promptness of obedience, to what they are called unto: All which are
beautiful in themselves, and adorning to the believer. We take it, in a word,
to hold out a conversation such as becomes the Gospel, Philip. 1. 27. which is,
to have the feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6. 15.
because, that as by shoes, men are enabled to walk without hurt in rough
ground, and are in the company of others not ashamed of their nakedness; So, a
Gospel^ conversation quiets the mind, keeping it in peace against difficulties,
and does exceedingly strengthen the confidence of believers in their conversing
with others, and becomes exceeding lovely, that they care not (as it were) who
see them, as, Ezekiel. 16. 10. I shod thee, etc. whereas a disorderly conversation
is shameful, even like one that is barefooted.

4. The manner of the expression is, to aggrege the loveliness of a well
ordered walk, How beautiful are thy feet with shoes! It cannot be told how
beautiful a tender and well ordered conversation is, it is exceeding lovely,
and acceptable to me (says he) to see thy holy walk.

Obs. 1. Our Lord Jesus takes notice of every step of a believers carriage, and
can tell whether their feet be shod or bare, whether their conversation be such
as adorneth, or shameth the Gospel. 2. The believer has, or at least ought to
have, and if he be like himself, will have a well ordered walk, and will be in
his carriage stately and princely. 3. A conversation that is well ordered, is a
beautiful and pleasant thing; grace exercised in a Christians practice, is more
commendable to Christ, than either greatness, riches, wisdom, or what the
world esteems most of, none of these has such a commendation from Christ, as
the believer, who, it may be, is not much in the world's esteem: Practical
holiness is a main part of spiritual beauty, and is valuable above speculative
knowledge and many gifts. 4. Believers should be walking creatures, therefore
has the new nature feet, that is, they should be much in the practice of holy
duties, according to the commands he has given in his word; and in their way,
they should be making progress toward perfection; for, that is their mark,
Philip. 3. 13. Sitting still, or negligence, much more going backward is unlike
a believer. 5. The conversation of all others, though never so fairded with
much civility, and great profession, and many parts, is yet naked and
abominable before God, and subject to bruisings, stumblings, and such
inconveniences, as feet that are bare are liable to. 6. A well ordered walk is
sure and safe: He that walks uprightly walks surely, Prove. 10. 9. And, says
the Psalmist, Great peace have they who love thy law, and nothing shall offend
them, Psalm. 119. 165. Their feet are shod against an evil time, and there is
nothing safer when offenses abound than that.

The second part of the commendation is to the same scope, The joints of thy
thighs, etc. It Is the coupling and turnings of them, as the word bears; they
are also useful in motion, and help the feet to stir, the same thing is
intended as in Chap. 5. 15. by his thighs or legs; only it seems to look to the
principles of their walk, as the feet do respect their way more immediately:
These are compared to Jewels, which are precious and comely, serving much for
adorning; and it is not to ordinary Jewels, to which they are compared, but
such as are the work of the hands of a cunning skilful artificer, or workman,
that is, such as are set orderly and dexterously, by skill and Art; the work
not of a novice, but of one that is expert, by which, not only the matter of
their practice is holden forth to be solid, but also, in respect of the
principles from which their way and duties have their spring and rise, and the
manner of their performing them, they are rightly gone about, with an holy kind
of Art and dexterity: Which says, 1. That there are many things necessarily
concurring in a well ordered conversation; there must be skill to do rightly,
what is in it self right, to make it commendable: It is needful that holy
duties, and what is on the matter called for, be done in the right manner, and
according to Art, and not put-by thus and so. 2. Believers are singularly
expert, in doing of the same duties of Religion which other men do, they do
them in another manner. 3. The several pieces of a holy walk, are in a manner
but spilt, when not rightly ordered, and every one put in their own place, like
Jewels undexterously set by one that is unskilful. 4. There is an holy Art
required to these that would walk commendably, and men naturally are unskilful
in such practices, until they be taught them. 5. Being right in the manner, is
no less necessary to make a man's way commendable, than to be right in the
matter, as much of the commendation lies in this, as in the other; when these
two go together in a believers conversation, it is excellent and beautiful,
there is no Jewel, most finely set, comparable to a well ordered walk. 6.
Believers that use to walk in the way of godliness, may attain to this
spiritual dexterity and skilfulnesse in a great measure; and there is no other
way of attaining of it, but by accustoming our selves to it; when her feet are
once shod, this commendation follows, that the joints of her thighs are like
Jewels.

Verse. 2. Thy navel is like a round Goblet, which wants not liquor, thy belly
is like an heap of Wheat set about with Lilies.
In the second verse, the Lord proceeds from the thighs, to the navel and
belly: which parts, were not touched in her commendation, chap. 4. These parts
in men's bodies have not much beauty in them; and therefore, it seems, that by
them the Lord points rather at what is inward and useful, in the spiritual
complexion and constitution of believers, than what is outward and visible in
their walk, that serving no less to their commendation than this.

The navel has much influence on the intestines, and when it is sound, it
furthers much the health of the whole body; So, Prove. 3. 8. it is said, the fear
of the Lord shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones, that is, it
will be exceeding useful and profitable for thy well-being, as it is useful for
the body to have that part in good case: And on the contrary, a wretched
miserable condition (such as is our condition by nature) is described by this,
Thy navel was not cut, etc. Ezekiel 16. 4. It Is known also, that in nature, the
navel has much influence on the child in the womb, which may be especially
taken notice of here, as appears by the following commendation, namely, that
it is like a round goblet, that is, well formed and proportioned (opposite to a
navel not cut, Ezekiel. 16. 4.) which wants not liquor, that is, furnished with
moisture for the health of the body, or entertainment and nourishment of the
child in the womb.

Before we further clear the words, or observe any thing from them, we shall
join to this the fourth part here commended, and that is, the belly: The word
differs in the Original, from that which is translated belly, being spoken of
him, chap. 5. 14. and it is taken for the inward parts, Ier. 15. 35. Prove. 18.
8. It has a special influence on the health of the body, and on the bringing
forth of children: It Is here compared to an heap of wheat; To an heap, to show
her bigness, as being with child, and still fruitful, and that in abundance:
To an heap of the grain of wheat, To show, it was not big with wind, but with
good grain, even the best, whereby she feeds him, her self, and others: And so,
as in the former similitude, she is represented to be furnished with liquor, so
here she is set forth to be furnished with bread, whereby her spiritual
liveliness and healthfulnesse may be understood. Again, this heap of wheat is
said to be set about with lilies, not only thereby to express it is
beautifulness, with it is usefulness, but also the fruitfulness thereof, in
having particular graces as lilies growing about it, which are moistened and
nourished by these two parts, the navel and the belly. Now we conceive, that
most likely (though it be hard to be peremptory) the graces of the Spirit may
be understood here, which being infused in their habits, and drawn forth in
their actings by the influences of the Spirit, are compared to waters and
liquor, and are said to be in the belly of the believer, Ioh. 7. 38. ( He that
believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of waters) because they have
such influence on the new man, and (to speak so) are the health of the navel
thereof. In sum, the sense of the words comes to this, O princes daughter, thou
have a lively spiritual constitution, by the inward flowings of the Spirit,
whereby thy navel is formed and beautified (which was by nature otherwise) and
therefore thou art not barren, but fruitful, and that of the most precious
fruits. Hence observe, 1. that believers inward constitution and frame, is no
less beautiful than their outward conversation and walk: This Kings daughter
is all glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. 2. Soundness within, or heart-soundnesse
is no less needful than outward fruits, for completing a believers
commendation; to have the navel well formed, is as necessary and requisite, as
to have the feet beautiful with shoes. 3. Inward liveliness, or a well
furnished inside, has most influence on a believers liveliness in all
external duties: This keeps all fresh, being like precious liquor which makes
Christ's Spouse fruitful and big, and that not with wind, but wheat.

Verse. 3. Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins.
The two breasts (which is the fifth part here commended) are spoken to in this
third verse: They were spoken of, Chap. 4. 5. with the same commendation, and
we conceive the same thing hinted there, is aimed at here, namely, to show,
that as she was healthful in her self, and prosperous (like that which is said,
Job 21. 24. his breasts are full of milk) so was she both fitted to communicate,
and loving in communicating the graces that was in her, as nurses their milk to
their children: Which clears, that the scope in short is to show, that the
believer is not only a beautiful bride, but a fruitful mother for bringing
forth, verse. 2. and nourishing and bringing-up, v. 3. which was (especially in
these times) a great commendation of a wife, and a thing that engaged husbands
to them, Psalm. 128. 3. Genesis 29. 34. as on the contrary, barrenness was a
reproach to themselves, and a burden to their husbands: Now, Christ's Bride
has breasts, and is furnished as becomes a mother and a wife, contrary to that
of the little sister, Chap. 8. 8. whose desolate condition is set out by this,
that she had no breasts; and this is repeated particularly, to show the Lords
particular taking notice thereof, and his respect thereunto.

Verse. 4. Thy neck is as a tower of Ivory; thine eyes like the fish-pools in
Heshbon, by the gate of Beth-rabbim: thy nose is as the tower of Lebaanon,
which looks toward Damascus.
In the fourth verse, three more of the Brides parts (which make the sixth,
seventh and eighth) are commended. The sixth is the neck: It was spoken of,
chap. 4. 4. neither does the commendation differ much: There, it was said to be
like the tower of David, here it is as a tower of Ivory, that is, both comely
and precious, being made of the Elephants teeth, a tower whereof, must be very
precious; and by this we conceive, the great defensive efficacy of faith is set
forth, which is still a tower, yet comparable to many, it is so excellent and
sure; they dwell safely who are believers, because they dwell in God, and in
his son, Jesus Christ. And so we may here observe, 1. Faith is a precious
defense; for, Christ is a precious hiding place, and faith must be precious,
because Christ is precious: Hence it is not only precious as Ivory, but much
more precious than Gold, 1 Pet. 1. 7. 2. Faith is a sure defense, and is the
believers tower, whereto he betakes himself when he has to do. 3. It is lovely
and pleasant to Christ, when believers by faith betake themselves to him; He
will never quarrel with them for it, seeing he so commends it. 4. There is no
safe tower to any of the world, but what the believer has; for, he, and he
only, has a tower of Ivory to make use of: Christ is the only rock and sure
foundation, and it is only believers that build their house upon him.

The seventh part instanced, is her eyes, which were several times mentioned
before; they point at her spiritual discerning, and understanding of spiritual
things, and the believing-uptaking of them; in which respect, all natural men
are blind, because of their ignorance and unbelief; she only has eyes. They
are compared to fish-pools in Heshbon, at the gate of Beth-rabbim: This city
Heshbon is mentioned, Numb. 21. 25, 26. It was a royal city, where Si^on King
of the Amorits dwelt; and it is like, there has been some place there called
Beth-rabbim, for the great resort that was made thereunto: And the fish-pools
that were there, it seems, were excellent and clear, and fit to give a shadow
to these who looked into them. Now it would seem, that believers eyes are
compared to these pools, because of the clear, distinct and believing knowledge
they have of themselves, of Christ, and of other spiritual objects. And from
this we may observe, 1. That solid and distinct knowledge in spiritual things,
is very commendable. 2. That a believer has another kind of insight in
spiritual things, than the most understanding natural man, he has eyes in
respect of him; The natural man (who has no exprimental, nor believing
knowledge of spiritual things) is but blind. 3. He is sharpest sighted that
discerns himself, and can rightly take up his own condition; the wisdom of the
prudent is to understand his way: So believers eyes, or knowledge is compared
to a fish pond, that gives representations of a man's face to him.

The eight particular is, the nose (it was not mentioned in her commendation,
Chap. 4.) It is not to be taken here for the whole countenance, but for a part
thereof: Therefore it is distinguished from the eyes, and is described as being
eminent (like a tower) beyond the rest of the face, and so it is to be applied
to the nose properly, which arises with a height on the face, like a tower,
and is the feat of smelling to discover what is hurtful, or savory; also anger
or zeal appear in it, therefore is it in the Hebrew Language in the Old
Testament, sometimes put for these, because it shows a real indignation, when a
man's anger smokes forth at his nose, Psalm. 18. 8. It Is said, 1. to be like the
tower of Lebnon: There is no particular mention of such a tower, but, that
Solomon built there a stately house, 2 Chronicles. 8. 3. called the house of the
forest of Lebanon, wherein, 2 Chronicles. 9. 15, 16. he put many targets and
shields; and Lebanon being on the north of Iulah, near to Syria (where enemies
soon brake out against Solomon) it is not unlike, but either this house was made
use of as a frontier-tower, or that some other was there builded, for
preventing of hurt from that hand, to which this alludes. Next, this tower is
said to look toward Damascus: Damascus was the head City of Syria; So, Isa. 7.
8. It Is said, the head of Syria is Damascus; these that dwelt in it, were at
that time amongst the most malicious enemies that Israel had: They were so in
David's time, a Sam. 8. 5. he slew two and twenty thousand of them; They were so
in Solomon's time, 1 King. 11. 24. Rezon (whom God raised up to be an enemy to
him) did reign in Damascus; and generally they continued to be so. They lay on
the north of Judah (therefore it is called evil from the north, which came from
Syria) and Lebanon was on the north border of Israel next to it: And it is like
that for this cause, either Solomon did change that place into a tower, or
built some other of new, to be a watch especially against that enemy, which was
his chief enemy, to prevent the hurt that might come from that hand; therefore,
it is said to look toward (or to the face of) Damascus, as having a special
respect to that enemy. Now we conceive, that by this, the Brides watchfulness
and zeal, in prosecuting and maintaining her spiritual war against her enemies,
is understood; As also, her sagacity, in smelling and discovering the stirrings
and motions of her spiritual enemies, as the nose does easily smell and
discover what is pleasant or hurtful to sense. Christ's Bride has many
enemies, and some more terrible than others; therefore, she has her watches,
and (as it were) sentinels at the post, to observe their motions, especially
she has an eye upon her most inveterat and malicious enemy, the enemy nearest
her doors, that is naturally most predominant, and her great care is to be kept
from her iniquity, Psalm. 18. 21. This we conceive, agrees both with the scope,
and also with the description and comparison here made use of.

Obs. 1. The most beautiful Bride of our Lord Jesus has enemies, and such
enemies, as are strongly seated and fortified (as the Syrians at Damascus were)
to watch against. 2* There are some particular quarters, or enemies, from
which, and by which, believers often suffer most; and although they have
enemies on all hands, yet is there ordinarily some one particular enemy, more
terrible, malicious and predominant than others, from which they are most in
danger. 3. Believers should ever be on their watch against those enemies, and
must neither make peace with them, nor be negligent to provide against them. 4.
Although the believer should not be secure or careless, in reference to any
ill, but every evil is to be carefully watched against; yet, where one ill does
more often assault him than others, and is more strong, by the concurrence of
tentations from without, or from his own inclination within, there the believer
has need of a special watch. 5. This watchfulness impartially extended, and
constantly maintained, is a main piece of spiritual beauty, and has much
influence on the adorning of a believer, and is a good evidence of a person
that is commendable before Jesus Christ.

Verse. 5. Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thine head like
Purple: the King is held in the Galleries.
The first part of verse. 5. contains the ninth and tenth particulars, that are
commended in the Bride: The ninth is her head; It looks here to be taken for
the uppermost part of the head (from which sense and motion do flow) as being
distinct from eyes and nose; therefore it is said, Thy head upon thee, to wit,
upon and above those parts before mentioned: Next it is said to be like Carmel;
which may be understood, 1. as it relates to a fruitful place, mentioned with
Sharon, Isa. 35. 2. the excellency of Carmel and Sharon. 2. It may be
translated Scarlet or Crimson, as the same word is, 2 Chronicles. 3. 14. thus it is a
rich color, wherewith princes and great men used to be decored; and the hair
being in the next words compared to purple, it is not unlike that it is taken
for a color here also.

By head, we must understand either Christ himself, who stands in that relation
to the believer, and in respect of dignity is called a head to all men, 1 Cor.
11. 3. Or, 2. (which is not inconsistant with the former) some grace in the
believer, acting on Christ, and quickening the new life; and seeing the scope is
to commend the believer from inherent grace, and the new nature being compared
to an inner-man, which is described from it is several parts, and so must have
an head, we think that it is some particular grace that is here especially
aimed at. By head then, we conceive the grace of hope may be understood, it
being the grace whereby the soul still sticks to Christ, expecting the
enjoyment of him; for, not only is hope a grace necessary and commendable (and
so it cannot be unsuitable to the scope, to take it in upon one branch or
other) but it may be called the head, 1. Because it is above, having Christ
himself for it is object; and though the word may be said to be the object of
hope, yet it is not so much the word, as Christ held forth in the word; and
therefore, hope is said to be within the vail, Heb. 6. 19. for, properly we
hope for him, because of his word, and so he is our hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1. 2. Hope
is a grace, which has it is rise from faith, and is supported by it, as the
head is by the neck; though hope be some way above faith, yet does faith
sustain it, and give it a being; the believer hopes, because he believes. 3. It
has much influence on all spiritual duties, and especially on our consolation,
and is useful in the spiritual war, as being an essential piece of the
believer's spiritual armor, and is therefore called the helmet or headpiece
of salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. and the headpiece may be some way called the
head; So hope, which keeps (to say so) graces head, may not unfitly be called
the head, seeing without it the head will be at least without it is helmet: And
taking it so, for this special piece of the believers armor, it follows well
on watchfulness: however, it is certain, that hope bears up the believer under
difficulties, Romans 8. 24. and that it rests on Christ, who therefore is called
our hope: And so, corelatively being considered, as acting on him, it may get
the name of head, as faith is upon the like account called our righteousness,
and thus our head is Christ hoped upon: And the commendation, that it is like
Crimson, will suit well with this interpretation, the red or Crimson color
having a special reference to Christ's death and sufferings, which puts the
right color on our hope, and makes it of this dye, that it is never ashamed nor
stained, Romans 5. 3. Obs. 1. The exersing of hope is a necessary piece of a
believers beauty, and as to have the heart sustained and comforted in the hope
of what is not seen, is both necessary and profitable; so, when by the power of
hope, a believers head is helped up, and kept above in all waters, that he fink
not, it is his singular ornament. 2. Hardly will a believer be in good case,
without this grace of hope, and when other graces are lively, hope will be so
also: These pieces of armor, and spiritual decoring go together. 3. There is
no other in the world that has a well grounded hope but the believer; it is
only the believer, whose head is like Crimson: all others, their hope makes
ashamed, and their confidence shall be rooted out, whileas his will be always
fresh and green.

The tenth and last particular here commended in the Bride, is her hair: This
was spoken of, Chap. 4. 1. But here, both the word in the Original, and the
commendation that is given of it, do differ from that which is there recorded;
The word here translated hair, is not elsewhere to be found: It comes from a
root that gives ground to expound it smalnesse, or tenderness; therefore, it is
taken by some, to signify a pin, or some of the small decorements of the head:
and it is compared to purple, for it is preciousnesse, loveliness, and other
reasons formerly mentioned in speaking of that color.

We take the scope here to be, to show the universal loveliness and
preciousnesse of grace in a believer, even in the least things; What shall I
say (says he) that thy feet, navel, eyes and head are beautiful? even thy
hair, or the pins that dress it, are lovely and excellent: so glorious,
princely and stately a creature is this Bride, that there is not a wrong pin or
hair to be found upon her: And thus, all the commendation is well closed with
this. By the hair then, we conceive is understood, even the meanest gestures
and circumstances of a believers walk, which being ordered by grace, are
beautiful, and serve much to the adorning of the Gospel.

Obs. 1. That grace makes an observable change upon the whole man, it regulats
even the least things, it orders looks, gestures and circumstances, wherein
often men take too much liberty. 2. Grace vented in the meanest piece of a
Christian carriage, is very beautiful; it puts a special beauty and luster upon
the meanest circumstances of the Christians actions: Or, when a believer
squares all his walk, even in the least things, by the right rule, it makes his
way exceeding lovely; whereas, often a little folly, or unwatchfulnesse in
such, proves like a dead flee, that makes a whole box of ointment to stink,
Eccles. 10. 1. 3. Our Lord takes notice of the smallest things in a believer,
even of the hair, yea, of the smallest thereof; There is nothing in his people
so mean, but he takes notice of it, and there is nothing so little, but grace
should be exercised therein: In a word, all things in a believer should be
suitable, eyes, hair, head, etc.

The particulars of the Brides commendation, of which we have spoken (if they
were understood) certainly they contain much; but, as if these were little, he
proceeds in expressing this beauty of, or rather his love to, his Bride, in
three wonderful expressions, as proofs of what he has said concerning her
loveliness and beauty, or (if we may improperly so call them) aggravations
thereof, whereby that commendation is raised and heightened to an exceeding
great height. The first is in the end of the fifth verse, and it is this, the
King is held (or bound) in the Galleries: The sense in a word is, what
ravishing loveliness is this that is to be found in this Bride, that the King
is thereby (as it were) held and bound, and must stand to look upon it, he is
so delighted with it? 1. This King is our Lord Jesus, the Prince of the Kings
of the Earth; he is not only here, but elsewhere often styled the King, because
he is eminently so, and it is much to the believers consolation that he is so,
if the faith of it were fixed in them. Our Lord is a most royal kingly person.
2. The Galleries here, are the same that were, Chap. 1. 17. called there
Rafters, The word there is our Galleries: Galleries are places where great men
use to walk, and here (Christ and the believer having one house, wherein they
dwell together) the Galleries signify the means or Ordinances, wherein, in a
more special way they come to walk together. 3. To be held (or bound as the
word is) signifies a holy constraint that was on him, that he could do no
otherwise, because he would do no otherwise, it was so delightsome to him, as,
Chap. 3. 4. and, 4. 9. and Chap. 6. 5. 12. where, on the matter, the same thing
is to be found. The word here used, is borrowed from the nature of affection
amongst men, that detains them to look on what they love: In sum, this in an
abrupt manner comes in on the close of the particulars of the Brides
commendation; as if it were said, So lovely art thou, that Christ as captivat,
or overcome, cannot withdraw, but is held (as, chap. 3. 4.) to look upon thy
beauty; which is the more wonderful, that he is so royal a person, whom
enemies, death and devils could not detain, yet he is so prevailed over by a
believer. And it is observable, that there is not one thing oftener mentioned in
this Song, than the wonderful expressions of Christ's yielding himself to be
prevailed over by them, as if his might were to be employed for them, rather
than for himself, and as if he gloried in this, that he is overcome by them,
which is indeed the glory of his grace. Obs. 1. There are some more than
ordinary admissions to neernesse with Christ, that believers may meet with;
which are more than ordinary for clearness, so as they may be said to have him
in the Galleries, and also for continuance, so as they may be said to have him
held there. 2. Christ Jesus by the holy violence of his peoples graces (so to
speak) may be held and captivat to stay and make his abode with them; it is good
then to wrestle with Christ, that he may be held and prevailed with. 3.
Holiness in a believers walk, has much influence on the attaining and
entertaining of the most sensible manifestations of Christ: Thus he is held in
the Galleries. 4. Our Lord Jesus thinks no shame to be out of love prevailed
over by his people; yea, he esteems it his honor, therefore is this so often
recorded for the commendation of his love, and the comfort of believers.

Verse. 6. How fair, and how pleasant art thou, O Love, for delights!
This verse contains the second expression, whereby the Brides commendation is
heightened, in three things, 1. By the title he gives her, O Love, for delights!
He calls her in the abstract, love it self, there can be no more said, she is
not only lovely, but love it self; for delights is added as the reason of it,
because of the various and abounding delights that are to be found in her; she
is (to say so) a person so excellently beautiful, and has so many lovely
things in her. The second thing is the commendation he joins with this title,
and it is in two words, 1. She is fair: This looks to the external loveliness
of her person. 2. She is pleasant, this respects the sweetness, and
amiableness of her inward disposition: These two may be separate in others, but
they meet in the believer, as they do in Christ; therefore she had given him
these two epithets, chap. 1. 16. The third thing is the manner of expression,
which heightens all this: It Is expressed with an How? How fair, etc? (as, chap.
4. 10.) showing an incomparablenesse, and an inexpressiblenesse to be in her
beauty: whereby in sum, the love of this blessed Bridegroom shows his
satisfaction in his Bride, by multiplying such wonderful expressions, as hold
forth the high esteem that he has of her. Obs. 1. There is nothing so lovely
in all the world, as grace in a believer; the most delightsome pleasant thing
in the world is nothing to this. 2. The love that Christ has to his people, is
inexpressible; although he uses many significant ways to express it, yet
must it close with an indefinite expression and question, to which an answer
cannot be made, How fair? It cannot be told how fair, and men cannot take it up
otherwise than by wondering at it. 3. This loveliness of the Bride, and the
Kings being kept in the Galleries, or the sense of the enjoyment of his
presence go together; and therefore is it subjoyned here, as the cause of the
former, like one that is ravished with the admiration of some excellent sight,
he stays and beholds it, and O (says he) how pleasant is it! The believer is
the uptaking object of the love of Christ, wherein he delights. 4. There is no
lovely nor delightsome thing in all the world, that Christ cares for, or
esteems of, as he does of the believer: Grace makes a person Christ's love for
delights: riches, honor, favor, parts, will be of no value without this;
whereas one without these, may with this, have Christ's affection engaged to
them.

Verse. 7. This thy stature is like to a Palmtree, and thy breasts to clusters of
Grapes.
Verse. 8. I said, I will go up to the Palm Tree, I will take hold of the boughs
thereof: now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the Vine, and the smell of
thy nose like Apples.
Verse. 9. And the roof of thy mouth like the best Wine, for my Beloved, that
goes down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep, to speak.
The former two expressions, v. -- 5. 6. have fallen from him (to speak so) in
a ravished, abrupt manner, by way of exclamation: The third way how he
amplifies the commendation of the Bride, follows, verse. 7, 8, 9. (as subjoyned
to the preceding particular description) And this amplification is expressed
these three ways: 1. By commending her stature, as the result of all her parts
(formerly described) put together, with a repetition of one of these parts
mainly taken notice of, verse. 7. 2. By showing his resolution to haunt her
company, by which his respect to her appears, verse. 8. 3. By promising gracious
effects to follow on his performing the former promise, of his keeping company
with her, verse. 8, 9.

The seventh verse then speaks to two things, Her stature and her breasts; Her
stature respects all the bygone parts being now put together, for so they
represent the whole stature: And by stature is understood the
proportionablenesse and comeliness that is in the whole, being considered as
jointly united in one body, as well as severally (as was said of him, Chap. 5.
16.) and the relative this, clears it, this, that is, this which is made up of
all the several parts I have been enumerating, they being put together, make
thy stature, and thy stature thus made up of these members and parts, is like
the Palm Tree: And so from this similitude, her stature is commended: The
Palm Tree is recorded in Scripture to have diverse commendable properties, 1.
It Is straight; therefore it is said of the idols that they are upright like the
Palm Tree, Jer. 5. 10. straightness is comely in a stature, He was like to a
Cedar, Chap. 5. 15. she is like to a Palm Tree here. 2. A Palm Tree has good
fruits, the Daits are the fruit thereof. 3. It Is a tree of long continuance,
and keeps long green; Hence, Psalm. 92. 12, 14. It Is said of the righteous, they
shall flourish like the Palm Tree; therefore, Joel 1. 12. it is an evidence of
great drought, when the Palm Tree withers. 4. They were looked on as most fit
to be used in times when men were about to express their joy in the most
solemn manner, and so when Christ is coming triumphantly to Jerusalem, Joh. 12.
they cut down branches of Palm Trees, to carry before him, and, Rev. 7. 4.
these Victors have Palms in their hands, and in Levit. ^. 40. we find branches
of these trees commanded to be made use of in the joyful feast of Tabernacles,
and the seventy Palm Trees that were found by the Israelits at Elim, are
mentioned, Numb. 33. 9. as refreshful, so is the City of Palm Trees also
mentioned as a most pleasant place, Deuteronomy. 34. 3. All these may be applied to
believers, who, both by the change that is wrought upon them by the grace of
Christ, and also, as they are in him by faith, are such; They are straight, not
crooked, but beautiful and flourishing, and to him refreshful, as the next
verse shows, being the living signs and monuments of his victory over Death and
the Devil. Obs. 1. There ought not only to be in a believer, a thriving of
graces distinctly, but a right joining, ordering, and compacting of them
together, that they may keep a proportionablenesse, and make up complexly a
lovely stature: that is, not only should all graces be kept in exercise
together, but as members of one new man, each ought to be subservient to
another, for making up of a sweet harmony in the result; love should not wrong
zeal, nor zeal prudence; but every grace, as being a distinct member of the new
man, should be settled in it is own place, to make the stature lovely. 2 When
this proportion is kept, and every grace has it is own place, it is exceeding
lovely, like a beautiful stature; whereas grace, when acting unorderly (if then
it may be called grace) is like an eye, beautiful in it self; but not being in
the right place of the face, does make the stature unlovely and
disproportionable: It Is not the least part of spiritual beauty, when not only
one has all graces, but has every one of them acting according to their
several natures, even when they are acting jointly together. 3. This furthers
much believers fruitfulness, and continues them fresh and green, when the
whole stature of grace is right, and kept in a due proportionablenesse.

The particular that is again repeated, is her breasts, which are compared to a
cluster of grapes, or wine, as it is in the eight verse, We conceive, by breasts
here, is signified her love and affection, whereby he is entertained, So, Chap.
1. 13. he shall lie all night between my breasts; and so it agrees well with
that expression, Prove. 5. 19. let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be
thou always ravished with her love: This is confirmed from the similitude unto
which it is compared, and that is, grapes, or wine; Showing, that her love is
refreshful, and cordial (to speak so) to him: Thy breasts (says he) that is, to
lie between thy breasts, and to be kindly entertained by thee, is more than wine
to me: And this is the same thing which was said, Chap. 4. 10. How much better
is thy love than wine? And the similitude being the same, we think the thing is
the same that is thereby set forth and commended, and it is singularly taken
notice of by Christ through all the Song, and marked in Chap. 4. and here, as
that which makes all her stature so lovely in it self: Love makes every grace
act (therefore is it the fulfilling of the law) and makes grace in it is actings
beautiful and lovely to him. These words then, may either express, 1. the
loveliness of her love: Or, 2. the delight which he took in it, as esteeming
highly of it; she was so very lovely, that nothing refreshed him so much as her
breasts: Which expression (as all the rest) holds out intense spiritual-love,
under the expressions that are usual amongst men. And it says, 1. that the
beauty of grace is a ravishing beauty; or Christ's love delights in the love of
his people; a room in their hearts is much prized by him. 2. Christ has a
complacency and acquiescense in his people, which he has in none other, and
where more grace is, there his complacency (though one in it self) does the
more manifest it self. 3. When a believer is right and in good case, then his
love to Christ is warm: And particularly, a right frame is by nothing sooner
evidenced, than by the affections; and it is ordinarily ill or well with us, as
our love to Christ is vigorious or cold.

The second way how our Lord expresses his love to his Bride, is in the
beginning of verse. 8. and it is by expressing of his resolution to accompany
with her, beyond any in the world: She was compared to a Palm Tree in the
former verse, Now (says he) I will go up to the Palm Tree (that is, to the
Palm Tree before mentioned) It Is on the matter the same with that promise,
chap. 4. 6. I will get me to the mountain of Myrrh, etc. Consider here, 1. the
thing promised or proposed, and that is, his going up to the Palm Tree, and
taking hold of the boughs thereof: That the scope is to hold forth his purpose
of manifesting himself to her, is clear, 1. By the dependence of this on the
former, He had said, Thou art a Palm Tree, and now (says he) I will go up to
the Palm Tree, which speaks his prizing that tree above all others. 2. The
effects also of his going up, in the following words, do clear it; It Is such a
going up as has refreshful and comfortable influence upon her: The importance
of the similitude is, as men love the trees they converse much about (and it is
like, Palm Trees were much used for that end) or as climbing up upon trees, and
taking hold of their boughs, do show the delight and pleasure men have in such
or such a tree, and how refreshing it is to them to be near it; So having
compared her to a Palm Tree, he expresses his delight in her, and his purpose
of manifesting himself to her, under the same similitude, as is ordinary in the
strain of this Song. 2. Consider, that this resolution is laid down as no
passing thought, but is a deliberat and determined resolution, I said I will
go, etc. I will take hold, etc. Which does show, 1. Christ's inward thoughts
and conclusions with himself, this is his heart-language. 2. The expression of
these, and so the words come to be a promise, which the believer may make use
of, as of a thing which Christ has said. 3. It shows a deliberatnesse in both,
that they were not sudden, but the advised result of a former deliberation, and
that of old, I said it: In a word (says he) my Bride is my choice in all the
world, the tree that I have resolved, for my delight, to climb up upon, beside
all others. Obs. 1. The scope and result of all Christ's commendations of his
Bride, is, that she may be brought to look for, and expect to be made happy
with his own company, and to be unspeakably made up in the enjoyment of his
presence. 2. It Is not every one that has the promise of Christ's company and
fellowship, or that may expect it; It Is the believer only who may look for it,
he has Christ's word for it, and none but he 3. Christ's most passionat
expressions of love are not from any surprise of affection in him, but are
deliberatly resolved, and that of old, so that now they cannot be altered; his
delight was in the habitable parts of the earth, and his resolution was laid
down to go up to the Palm Tree before it was. 4. Christ's thoughts to his
people (if known) would be found to be precious, thoughts of peace and not of
evil; many a good purpose has been in his heart of old, and there is no
greater evidence of love, neither can be, than to intimat and accomplish these,
as he does here: I laid down this resolution (says he) long ere now, and I
will follow it out. 5. A holy tender walk in believers (which is indeed to have
the stature lovely as the Palm Tree) will obtain the manifestation of Christ's
heart to them; And there is no greater evidence of Christ's respect, than that,
Ioh. 14. 21, and 23.

The third way how he expresses his love, is by the effects, which he
promises shall follow on his presence with her, as his presence is subjoyned
to her lovely stature (which connection is observable) The effects that follow,
are three, the first two are in the second part of the eighth verse, and the
first of them in these words, Now also thy breasts shall be as the clusters of
the Vine; This is the first fruit of his going up to the Palm Tree, which (as
also the rest of them) may be taken as comprehensive of these two, 1. Of some
gracious effect that shall be wrought in the Bride, and so these words bring
him in speaking to this purpose, when I come to thee, then by my presence thy
graces shall flow, and thou shall be in a capacity to edify others, and to
satisfy me, as if thy breasts were clusters of the Vine, to furnish what might
be refreshful: Thus he comforts her, from what should be wrought in her, by his
presence with her: And the scope and connection shows, that this cannot be
excluded, it being a native consequence of his presence, and comfortable in it
self to her. 2. They are to be looked upon as comprehensive of his gracious
acceptance of her and her fruits, as being well satisfied with her; And thus
the meaning of these words, thy breasts shall be as clusters of the Vine, is
this, When I shall come to thee, thy love and company, thy bosom (to say so)
shall be to me more refreshful than clusters of the Vine, I will feed upon it,
and delight in it, as, Chap. 4. 10. This compleats her consolation, and the
evidence of his love, that he undertakes it shall be well with her inward
condition, and that he shall accept of her also, and be well satisfied with
her: These are not only consistent together, but do necessarily concur for
making up the scope, which is to evidence his love, and to comfort her; and the
one of these follows on the other, therefore, we comprehend both in all these
effects. Obs. 1. Christ's presence has much influence on believers liveliness;
their breasts run when he is present. 2. Liveliness is a singular and
comfortable mercy in a believers estimation; therefore is it promised as a
thing that is in a special way comfortable to her. 3. Christ's presence, or
neernesse with him, and fruitfulness, go together: And where the breasts are
not as clusters, no conditon the believer can be in, is to be accounted
presence.

The second effect is in these words, And the smell of thy nose like Apples:
Apples are savoury fruit, the smell of the nose is the savor of the breath,
that comes from it, which in unwholesome bodies is unsavory; Says he to the
Bride, thine shall not be so, but thy constitution shall be lively, and all
that comes from thee shall be savoury, and so shall be accepted of me; It shall
be savoury in it self, as Apples are to the smell, and it shall be delighted in
by me, as having a sweet air and breath with it: This imports a conspicuous
inward change, by the growth of mortification, whereby believers being purified
within from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, there proceeds nothing
from them but what is savoury, whereas a loose and ragged conversation, as
corrupt breath ( Job. 17. 1.) evidenceth much inward rottenness. Obs. 1.
Christ's presence, is of an healing, cleansing virtue, and makes an observable
inward change. 2. An inward change evidenceth it self in the outward fruits and
effects, the very smell and savor of the conversation, and of all external
duties, is changed. 3. This inward purity is very desirable to the believer;
for so it is here a piece of his comfort, to have a promise that the smell of
his nose shall be as Apples, and it is a special evidence of Christ's respect,
to have that performed.

It may also take in the savourinesse of the believers breathing, in respect of
themselves; when Christ is present, they shall draw in a wholesome, pleasant
and refreshfull air; whereas now ordinarily we breath in a corrupt air: It
shall not be so then, says he, the smell of thy nose shall be as if thou did
savor of Apples: Christ's company makes all both fruitful within, and
refreshfull to the believer, and also makes all duties and all dispensations,
he is exercised with, savoury and acceptable to himself; All which follows on
Christ's presence, and suits with the scope, that says, both taste and smell
are satisfied.

The third lovely effect of Christ's presence, is in the ninth verse; And 1.
the effect it self is set down: then it is commendation is amplified. The
effect, or advantage of Christ's presence, is in these words, The roof of thy
mouth (or thy palate) shall be as the best wine: The palate, or roof of thy
mouth, is the instrument of taste, and so is sometimes taken for the taste it
self, and is so translated, Chap. 2. 3. his fruit was sweet to my taste: So,
Job. 34. 3. Or, by palate may be understood the mouth, as, Chap. 5. 16. Next,
it is compared to wine, yea, the best wine (the reasons of the comparison have
been often spoken to) The best wine is that which is most refreshing and
exhilerating: Now this wine is three ways set out in it is excellency (for, that
the following expressions are to this purpose, is clear) 1. It Is for my
Beloved, that is, such wine as he allows his friends, whom he styles beloved,
Chap. 5. 1. (and this shows what kind of wine is understood) and so it must be
excellent wine, being that which is allowed on Christ's special friends. Or,
it is an abrupt expression, whereby he speaks in name of the Bride; It Is such
wine as I (as if she were speaking) allow on thee, my beloved, and which I
reserve only for thee: For which reason, she is called a Fountain sealed, and
Garden enclosed, as being set apart for him, and not common to others; and
thus is he expressing in her name, what she expresses her self in the last
words of this Chapter, It Is all for thee my beloved; And it implies both a
commendation of its sweetness, and her devoting of it to him. However, the
words hold forth something that proves it to be excellent, and not common, but
such as is found amongst these who stand in this spiritual relation. 2. It Is
commended from this, that it goes down sweetly, that is, it is pleasant to the
taste, and is not harsh, but delightsomely may be drunk of: Or, it may respect
that property of good Wine, mentioned, Prove. 23. 31. (that it moves it self
rightly) if the words be translated as the margent imports. 3. It Is commended
from the effects, It drinks sweetly, and when it is drunk, it causes the lips
of those those that are asleep to speak: Wine is cordial and refreshful, but
this Wine must be in a singular way refreshful, that makes men that are infirm,
or old (as the word may be rendered) and almost dead, to revive and speak, or
those that were secure (as the Bride was, Chap. 5. 2.) and in a spiritual
drowsiness, it can quicken them, and make them cheerfully speak; Thus the Wine
is commended. Now we conceive, by this comfortable effect, that is promised to
her upon Christ's coming to her, these two things are here holden forth, 1. How
refreshing it shall be to her self, all her senses shall be taken with it, both
the smell and the taste; it shall be singularly sweet to her spiritual taste,
as it is, Chap. 2. 3. And thus the Wine of the Spirit is commended, which
accompanies his manifestations, and is reserved for his Beloved, Chap. 5. 1.
and is a joy that no stranger is made partaker of: This Wine is indeed peculiar
for his beloved, (and is suitable to himself) and is the Wine that goes
sweetly down; and is most refreshful, and makes secure sinners to speak, and
those that are ^aint it revives them, as Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not filled with wine,
etc. but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms, singing
and making melody in your hearts to the Lord: This effect agrees well to the
Spirit, yea, only to this Wine of the Spirit; and it suits well the scope,
which is to show what comfortable influence Christ's presence should have on
her, so that when he comes to his Palm Tree, her taste shall relish as with the
best Wine; his presence shall thus revive and quicken her, and be a special
evidence of his singular respect to her.

2. It holds out (which follows on the former) that not only her breath shall
savor well to him and others, and her inward senses abound with refreshings to
her self, but also the expressions of her mouth, to others shall be savoury,
and to him refreshful, as a delightsome fruit flowing from her: Thus (says he)
when I betake me to fellowship with thee, and comes near by sensible
embracements, to take hold of thy boughs (as a man embracing one whom he loves,
for thus the Allegory is spiritually to be understood) thou shall be to me, and
in my esteem, exceeding lovely; thy breasts, smell, and mouth, will be che^ring
and savoury, like Grapes, Apples, and the best Wine: And here spiritual
affections and holy reason would be made use of, to gather the life of Christ's
love from the effects of it, with some resemblance of what uses to be betwixt
man and wife, in their mutual loving carriage (for so runs the strain of this
Song) although our carnalnesse makes it hazardous, and unsafe to descend in the
explication of these similitudes: And thus, as Chap. 5. 16. by his mouth or
palate, was understood the kisses thereof, or the most sensible manifestations
of his love to her: So here, by her palate or mouth, is understood her most
affectionat soul-longings of love to him, which being warmed and melted by his
presence, does manifest it self in a kindly way, in spiritual embraces and
kisses (as from verse. 11. and 12. will be clear) which are exceedingly
delightsome to him: and so the sense of this promise is, when I come to thee,
then, yea even now, thy love with the sense of mine shall be warmed and
refreshed, so that it shall in an affectionat way vent it self on me, and that
shall be as the most exhilerating cordial unto me, as the manifestations of my
love will be chearing and refreshing unto thee; both which are notably
comfortable to her, and special evidences of his respect, which is the scope.
Obs. 1. There are some secret flowings of love, and soul-experiences betwixt
Christ and believers, that are not easily understood; and that makes the
expressions of this love so seemingly intricat. 2. These flowings of love that
are betwixt Christ and his people (how strange soever they be) are most
delightsome to the soul that partakes of them, they are as wine that goes down
sweetly. 3. Christ's presence has many benefits and advantages waiting on it,
which contribute exceedingly both to the quickening and comforting of the
believer; many things hang on this one, his going up to the Palm Tree. 4. The
joy of the Spirit has notable effects, and can put words in the mouth of these
that neverspoke much before, yea, can make the dumb to sing, with a sensible
warming of the heart and inward affections, stirring up melody in their souls,
which yet will be distinct in the impressions and effects of it. 5. Our Lord
Jesus has designed the comfort of the believer, which he holds out in
comfortable promises, and allows them to make use of it, and it is pleasant
and delightsome to him to have them so doing.

BRIDE
Verse. 10. I am my Beloveds, and his desire is toward me.
The Bride has been long silent, delightsomely drinking in what she has been
hearing from the Bridegrooms sweet mouth, and so suffering him to say on: Now
in this tenth verse, and these that follow, she comes-in speaking, and having
well observed what he said, the result and effect thereof upon her heart does
appear in what she says. And, 1. she comforts her self in her union with him,
as now being clear in it from his owning of her; and she lays down, and begins
with this conclusion, verse. 10. Now (says she) I may say, I am my Beloveds,
etc. Then, 2. looking to his promise, verse. 8. she puts up her great desire
after communion with him, that according to her interest in him, she might be
admitted to enjoy him; which suit is put up, qualified or enlarged, and by
several arguments pressed on him, verse. 11, 12, 13.

The conclusion which she gathers, verse. 10. from his discourse, comes not in
altogether abruptly, but is the expression of a heart comforted with the
intimations of Christ's love, and wakened with the wine that makes them that
are asleep to speak; and so breathing out the great ground of her consolation:
Now (says she) seeing he loves me, and out of the infinite freedom of his grace
is pleased to commend unworthy me so much, certainly, I may conclude, I am my
beloveds, and his desire is toward me. The first part of this verse, wherein
she asserts her interest in him, was spoken to, Chap. 2. 16. and 6. 3. and it is
now repeated on this occasion, for these reasons, 1. Because it is the great
compend of all her consolation, and that wherein it consists, that she is
Christ's, and Christ is hers: This is indeed matter of solid consolation, and
whatever is comfortable does flow from it. 2. To show that she kept the
clearness of her interest in him, in some measure constantly, and carried it
along with her in the several parts of her exercise, she can assert it this
day, and the next day, and the third day. 3. It Is now a full tide with her, as
to Christ's manifestations, and the flowings of his Spirit; he has been
liberal and large in the intimations of his love, and she makes this use of it,
to put her interest in him out of question, while the evidences of it are so
legible. Obs. 1. Believers may at sometimes, more clearly and distinctly gather
and conclude their interest in Christ, than at other times. 2. When believers
are admitted to neernesse with Christ, and clouds that would darken their faith
are scattered, then they would endeavor to fix their confidence, and put their
interest out of question; that when their sun comes under a cloud, and they see
not to read their evidences so distinctly, they be not put to question their
interest, and all bypast experiences, as delusions. 3. When the Lord owns his
people, and speaks comfortably to them (as he has been doing to the Bride)
then they should own him, and acquiesce in that consolation allowed upon them
by him.

The last part of the verse, in these words, and his desire is toward me,
shows not only that the interest was mutual, and that he loved her, as she did
him; but that he loved her affectionatly, so that in a manner he could not be
without her, His desire was to her. 2. That he condescended to love her with
such a kind of love and respect as a woman has to her husband; for, so this is
spoken of the first woman, Genesis 3. thy desire shall be toward him, that is,
subordinat to his, or seeking to conform to his, that she may please him: And
so here it shows Christ's great condescending, to have the believer carving (as
it were) to him, so ready is he to please and satisfy his people for their
good. 3. It shows a deal of satisfaction that she had in this, it was the
matter of her humble spiritual boasting, that Christ so loved her, has or
contemn her who would. 4. She thinks still much of this privilege of an
interest in Christ, and esteems nothing the less of it that she had attained
clearness in it before now: Clearness is ever of much worth, and these who
are clearest anent this, will esteem most of it: That holy fainnesse (to say
so) that this word, My beloved is mine, brings-in to the soul, eases and
comfort the more that it is often renewed.

Verse. 11. Come, my Beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us lodge in
the villages.
Verse. 12. Let us get up early to the Vineyards, let us see if the Vine
flourish, whether the tender Grape appear, and the Pomegranates bud forth:
there will I give thee my loves.
Verse. 13. The Mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of
pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my Beloved!
When she has laid down this ground of her interest in him, she proceeds to
improve it, verse. 11. by giving him a kindly and familiar invitation, which
she, first, qualifies in the end of the eleventh verse, and beginning of the
twelfth, and then in what follows, adds some motives to press it. The
similitude of a loving wifes carriage to a kind husband is continued, as if
such a loving wife, desirous of her husbands company, did invite him to the
fields, thereby in a retired way to be solaced with his company, especially by
going abroad with him in a pleasant springtime, and staying some nights in
villages for that end, and that they might the more seriously and comfortably
view the state of their Orchards and Gardens, which is both pleasant,
profitable and delightsome to be done in the husbands company: Even so does the
Bride follow the similitude, to show what she desired from Christ in desiring
of his company, and for what end, to wit, both for the profit and comfort she
expected to reap thereby.

The invitation she gives him, is, Come my Beloved; Come, is a word much used
betwixt Christ and the believer, and is a kindly word. He says, Come, Chap. 2.
10. and now she uses the same word; Her putting up this desire, expresses a
desire of communion and neernesse with him, and also much affection, and is the
language both of the Spirit and the Bride, who says, Come, Rev. 22. 17. Here
it imports a petition, pressing for a greater degree of communion, which, by
comparing this with the former words, may be gathered; for, she possessed it in
a good measure for the time, and yet here she says, Come. First, considering
this invitation in it self, we may observe, That communion with Christ is the
one, principal and common suit of the believer, wherein he is never satisfied
till it be perfected. Next, comparing these words with the preceding, Obs. 1.
The more that Christ be manifested to his people, the more near they be
admitted to him, and the better that their frame be, and the more clear they be
anent their interest in him, the greater will their desire be of more near
communion with him. 2. Clearness of interest in him, when it is solid, is a
ground to press for his fellowship, and still it presses the person who has
it to pursue after more full manifestations of Christ. Again, considering these
words as they respect his promise, verse. 8. I said (says he) I will go up to
the Palm tree, etc. Now she having heard it, lays hold on this promise, and
is not long in saying, Come. Obs. 1. That believers should improve the promises
they have, for attaining what is promised in them, and should not suffer
promises to lie by them not made use of. 2. What is promised to a believer may,
and should be prayed for, by them, 3. Believers in their prayers and suits to
Christ, would have a special respect to the promises, not only to conform their
desires to them, but to ground them upon them. 4. The more tender believers be
in their frame, they will the more carefully gather up all Christ's words and
promises, and strengthen their faith thereby in their dealing with him.

Next, she contents not her self to put up this suit, but she further qualifies
it, in several repeated petitions (whereby the ardency of her desire, and the
strength of her faith does appear) all which are recorded, both as a pattern to
teach believers how they should carry in prayer, and also as evidences what
will be their way and manner in that duty, when their spirit is in a good
condition. The first qualification of the former petition is, Let us go forth
into the field. Going forth into the field, holds forth these two, 1. The
extent of her desire, she would have him at home and abroad also, she desires
not to go out of doors without him. 2. A desire of retiredness with him, that
she might be alone in his company, as a wife going abroad to fields alone with
her husband, as, Genesis 24. 63. It Is said, that Isaac went out to the fields to
pray, that is, that he might be the more retired in that duty. Obs. 1. That
where desire of fellowship with Christ is right, it breaths after a walk with
him every where, at home and abroad, they cannot endure to go out at doors, or
to the fields without him. 2. Dilight in Christ's company seeks to be retired
with him, to be alone with him, to be freed from all other companies, and
abstracted from all distraction, the more freely to be solaced with him.

Again, the Pronown, us, Let us go, is not without good purpose added; It Is
not, Go thou, nor, I will go: but, Let us go, as bearing in it a double motive,
and evidence of her affection. 1. That she offers her self to bear him company.
Obs. When Christ's company is loved and respected, the soul will be content to
leave all others, and go with him, for the entertaining of it. 2. It implies,
that though she had an errand, and desire to be abroad; yet, she could not
endure to go about it without him: therefore (says she) Let us go. Obs. 1. The
fields, and most pleasant recreations, are heartlesse and wearisome without
Christ's company, in the believers esteem. 2. His company is the believers
great encouragement to undertake any thing, and that which makes his out-going
and in-coming pleasant: She is content to go with him, and cannot abide to go
without him. Lastly, it shows her respecting that which was her part in the
exercise, as well as his, and her resolution to conform her practice to her
prayers; for, as she desires him to go, so she is willing to go her self: If we
would expect the answer of prayer, our practices should be like our prayers.

The second qualification is, Let us lodge in the villages: Villages are rural,
or land-ward places, by that name distinguished from Towns or Cities; In these,
men traveling, or continuing a time in the fields for their recreation or
business, do lodge, as retired from their ordinary vocations in Cities. Her
desire, Let us lodge in these (or, as the word is, Let us night or dwell there)
shows that she desired him abroad with her, not for a piece of a day, to return
at night, but for a greater length and continuance of time, as loving rather to
lodge with him in the villages, and to take what might be had in his company,
for lengthning their reteirment, than to return hastily to the City, or
businesses whereby she might be distracted, and in hazard of an interruption of
her communion with him. Obs. 1. True desire of communion with Christ in the
enjoyment of his presence, as it presses for retiredness with him, so is it
desirous to have that lengthned, and cannot endure to think of parting with
him, when it gets him in a corner. 2. A backside, or a corner alone with
Christ's company, is good lodging to a lover of Christ: Solitariness with his
presence, is more frequented and delighted in by such, than more public
fellowship and societies.

In the twelfth verse we have some more qualifications of her petition, and some
of the motives, that press her to seek after Christ's company. The third
qualification is in these words, Let us go up early to the Vineyards: The
similitude is continued, but this word early, is added, And it implies (as it is
used in Scripture) 1. timousnesse, so the women came to Christ's grave early,
Luke 24. 1. while it was dark. 2. Seasonablenesse, so it is taken in that
expression, the Lord will help and that right early, Psalm. 46. 5. 3.
Seriousness, so, Hos. 5. 15. they shall seek me early, that is, seriously.
Here it implies, that she, as one impatient of delays, desires to go with
expedition, and for that end offers him her company. Obs. 1. Sincere desire of
fellowship with Christ cannot endure delays, but would presently be at
enjoyment. 2. There is a season or earliness, a fit opportunity of keeping
company with Christ, and that would not be neglected. 3. As privacy is a great
friend to communion with Christ, so is earliness and timousnesse in setting to
it: The more early one begin, they may expect to speed the better. 4. As no
duty would be put off, or delayed, so especially this great and concerning-duty
of endeavoring for fellowship with Christ, would by no means be delayed or
shifted, but early and timously would be gone about.

The fourth qualification follows in the motives, that she might see how the
several fruits budded: And it shows, that she desired not his company only for
her satisfaction, but for her profit also, that thereby she might be helped to
thrive in her spiritual condition, and might be enabled the better to do her
duty. Obs. A sincere and right desire of communion with Christ, studieth to
improve it for spiritual advantage, when it is attained. So then, all these put
together, show, that she desires Christ's presence retiredly, constantly,
timously, and in order to her spiritual advantage and profit: This last will
appear more in the motives, especially the first. This is indeed a main desire,
and therefore, in what follows she presses it with motives, which put her to
it, and also (as being well pleasing to him) give her ground to expect it from
him: And though she uses these motives, as if they were arguments to induce
him to grant her desire, yet they are mainly for strengthening her own faith in
pressing her suit. The using of motives, and her thus qualifying of her desire,
says, That believers in their petitions, would insist and press them; for,
although Christ be not informed by words, nor persuaded by our arguments, yet
this both helps to warm the affections, and strengthen the says of the
believer himself, and is becoming believers in their prayers to him, who calls
for, and admits of reasonable service. The motives in particular are four, The
first is taken from the end of her petition, which is to see how her graces
prosper: The similitude continues, as a wise intending to visit her husbandry
(to say so) is helped and encouraged therein by her husbands presence, and
therefore desires his company; So, the believer has a husbandry, Vineyards,
Grapes, Pomegranates, and diverse plants to oversee, which are the graces of
the Spirit, and diverse duties committed to him (as was said upon Chap. 4. 12,
13. and 6. 11.) and his visiting of these, is the taking of a reflect view of
himself, in an abstracted retired condition, that thereby he may be distinctly
acquainted how it is with him, and with his graces: In following of which duty,
Christ's presence in some secret corner is exceeding helpful; therefore, for
that end does the Bride seek it, and makes use of this motive to press it,
because it is a duty of concernment to her to search her self; It Is pleasing to
him, and a thing that she would be at, yet, cannot win to it in a common
ordinary frame, it is so difficult; therefore does she propose this (which is
her end) as that which would be respected and well taken off her hand by him.
Obs. 1. Believers have a task, and husbandry committed to them to manage, that
is, several duties and graces, holden forth under the similitude of Vines,
Pomegranates, etc. which they are carefully to notice. 2. It Is necessary, in
the managing of this task, for a believer to be well acquainted with the
condition of his graces, and it is his duty to be reflecting on himself for that
end; and if men ought to look to the state of their flocks and herds, Prove. 27.
23. how much more ought they carefully to look to this. 3. This duty should be
purposly, retiredly, and deliberatly intended, undertaken and gone about, with
a resolut design for attaining to the discovery of our own case, as she does
here. 4. This duty has difficulties in it, and ordinarily the heart is not
prevailed with to be kept serious about it, except the frame thereof be more
tender than ordinary. 5. To a tender believer it will be a great favor to get
this duty of self-examination profitably and unbyassedly discharged: It Is a
mercy worth the seeking from God, and the more tender believers be, they will
be the more in this. 6. Although believers be clear as to their interest (as
the Bride was, verse. 10.) yet may they be indistinct as to the knowledge of
their own condition, and therefore ought not to neglect this duty of
self-examination; but, where clearness is solid, they will be the more careful
in the searching of themselves. 7. Christ's presence, as it is a notable help to
all duties, so particularly, it is in a special way helpful to believers in
searching themselves, by making the heart willing and pliable, to follow it
sweetly, by discovering things as they are, and by making the eye single,
rightly to judge of every thing, and impartially to take with that which is
discovered: Much presence would encourage the Lords people to follow this duty,
which otherwise is gone about in a heartlesse way. 8. It Is a good use of
Christ's presence and company, when it is improven for attaining of more through
and distinct knowledge of our own condition; and then especially believers
would take the opportunity of putting themselves to trial. 9. A believer, when
tender, will be particular in his search, he will search even to the least, he
will not disapprove any thing of Gods grace th^^ ^s real, although it be weak
and tender, therefore she looks to buds, as well as more mature fruit, and
acknowledges them, because Christ does so, Chap. 6. 11. 10. Believers promise
not much in themselves, or, they expect not great things anent their own
fruitfulness; therefore, it is to see what is budding or appearing, rather
than what is ripe, which she proposes here to her self, as her design. 11. A
tender believer will esteem much of little grace where it is real, a bud is
much to him, if it look fruit-like, as it is the evidence of Christ's Spirit in
him, and the work of his grace: he that is humble will have a high esteem of
it, though he expect no great thing, nor yet thinks much of it, as it is
inherent in him, yet he will not cast what is least, if solid. 12. The more
tender one is, he will be the more desirous to search his own condition, as
being unsatisfied with what he has attained. Again, if we compare this with
Chap. 6. 11. where it is said, he went down to his Garden for this very end, for
which she desires his presence; We may see, 1. A co-incidence betwixt Christ's
work and the believers (to say so) they have one task. 2. A going along both
of their ends and ways to attain them, he takes pains on his people by the
means of grace to make them fruitful, and they diligently haunt and improve the
means for that same end. And, 3. Christ's words are near the same with hers,
the more to strengthen her faith in obtaining what she sought, when it so
concurred with his design: A believer that aims at fruitfulness and
tenderness by Christ's company in the means and Ordinances, may expect to
obtain his desire; for, that same is his work, which he drives by the means of
grace amongst his people.

The second motive which makes her press for Christ's company in this retiered
way, is in these words, there will I give thee my loves; That is (in short) as
in reteirments the Bridegroom and the Bride rejoice together, in the
expressions of their mutual love, with more than ordinary familiarity; So
(says she) let me have thy company continued with me, that thereby my heart
being warmed, I may get opportunity to let out my love in a lively manner on
thee. By loves here, love simply is not meant, but love in the highest degree
of it, manifesting it self in the most sensible manner, when the heart is
melted, as it were, and made free to pour out it self in love to him: It Is
therefore called loves in the plural number, to show the many ways it will
vent it self, as, in thoughts delightsomely making the heart glad, in cheerful
exulting in him, and affectionat embracing him in it is arms, feeding and
delighting on him, and such like ways; there is nothing kept up from him, and
all doors, whereby love uses to vent, are opened. While she says, I will give
thee my loves, it is not to be understood, as if then she would begin to love
him (for, the thing that made her put up this suit was her love to him) but
that then she would with more freedom do it, and with ease and delight get it
done, which now would not do for her (till his presence warmed her) at least in
the manner she would be at. The word, there, that in the letter relates to the
fields, villages, etc. is to be understood of that reteirment in fellowship,
which she desired with him; in the scope, it looks to his secret manifesting of
himself to her, in admitting of her to his bosom; O! (says she) come, my
heart longs to be near thee, and this advantage I expect from it, I would then
get my heart drawn from idols, and my affections engaged to thee, which in thy
absence I cannot get done so as I would; as a person cannot vent love so in
company, as when he is alone in solitariness with his bosome-friend, thus,
Joseph being to manifest his love to his brethren, Genesis 45. 1. commanded all to
go out, that so he might with the greater freedom let forth his affections on
them; and as Jonathan sent away his boy, when he was to embrace David in the
fields, 1 Samuel 20. 40. etc. So here, the secret manifestations of Christ, by
his Spirit to his people, being that which gives them liberty to let forth
their hearts on him, especially in their unknown access to him, to which no
man is witness, are by this word there, signified. Obs. 1. There are many more
good things than one which accompanies Christ's presence; and where love is in
a believers heart, there will be no scarcety of arguments to hold forth the
advantage thereof. 2. As there are some more than ordinary manifestations of
love from Christ to his people, which are not constant; so, there are some more
than ordinary flowings of the love of believers toward him: There are some
times and cases, wherein especially the heart will melt in affection to him,
and wherein it will be made to pour out it self with ease and delight upon him.
3. It Is no less the desire of believers to love Christ, and to have their
affections flowing on him, than to have the manifestations of his love to them;
therefore speaks she of this, as of a benefit she exceedingly desired, to get
leave to pour her heart out in love upon him. 4. Believers that love Christ,
will not be satisfied with the degree of their own love, but will be desirous
to have it more withdrawn from other things, and more fully venting on him. 5.
Although sometimes, yea, oftentimes, the believers heart comes not up that
length in love to Christ that he would have it, yet he designs to set it on
Christ alone, and there is none that willingly he gives it unto with consent
but Christ, it is on him only he allows it. 6. There is no greater gift can be
given to Christ, than his peoples love; This is therefore the motive that is
proposed by the Bride in her dealing with him, as holding forth the propine or
intertainment which he should receive. 7. Christ's presence, and the
manifestations of his love conduces notably unto, and has great influence
upon, the gaining of our affections to him; It does not only (as it were) give
us the opportunity of his company, but it gains the heart, softens it,
ravisheth it, and heightens the esteem of Christ in it (which no report of him
can do so effectually as his own presence) and also it oyleth all the
affections, that they have a freedom to flow out (like the Ice before the Sun)
which otherwise are key-cold. 8. Love to Christ loves solitariness and
retirements with him; It Is neither so stirred it self as when it is alone with
him, nor are the men of the world able to bear or understand the intimat
familiarity, that will be in the flowings of the love of Christ to a believer,
or of a believers liberty and holy boldness with Christ; nor were it meet,
that they should be witnesses of the love-secrets that are betwixt him and
them. 9. It Is an evidence of single love to Christ, when his presence is longed
for, that we may the more ardently and affectionatly love him, and when all
opportunities are sought for that may increase this; this is singleness and
spiritualnesse in a great length, when this makes us glory in Christ's love to
us, and desire the manifestations thereof, that we may have access thereby to
love him: A believer will love heaven, because there he will have access fully
to love Christ, as well as to be loved of him; and will abhor hell, not only
because there are no intimations of Christ's love there, but also, because
there is no access to love him there: To get the heart loving Christ, is
indeed the believers great delight, and in a manner his heaven. 10. Love in a
believer to Christ, is the result or reflex of Christ's love to him, it is that
sun which begets this heat in the soul that loves him; and the more brightly he
shine on believers, the more is their love hot toward him; for, here is love,
not that we loved him, but that he loved us first. 11. It Is an evidence of true
love to Christ, and esteem of him, when the heart is longing, praying and using
means that it may love him, and get it is love to him heightened till it be all
bestowed on him alannerly.

In the thirteenth verse, we have the third and fourth motives, whereby the
Bride presses her suit: The third is, The Mandrakes give a smell, etc. It Is
like that motive which he uses in pressing her to hearken to his call, Chap.
2. 12. The flowers appear on the earth, etc. The graces of the Spirit, growing
up (as in a Garden) in the believers walk with Christ, are like flowers in the
Spring, which by their pleasantness and favor, invite men to the fields: Thus
the sense of this motive comes to this, all things (says the Bride) are in a
good condition, and there is a thriving amongst my graces, which are for
pleasantness as flower; therefore Come. This avowing of the flourishing of her
graces, is not from any vain boasting, but in humble sincerity, acknowledging
what she sound in her self to his praise, and what she knew to be acceptable to
him, as a confirmation to her faith in the expectation of what she prayed for;
for (which is a lesson we would learn) although the goodness of our condition
can me^it nothing which we pray for; yet, it may give us confidence and
boldness in prayer, when we have a good conscience and testimony within us, 1
Ioh. 3. 20. This fruitfulness of hers is four ways set forth, 1. That these
her fruits are ripe, and in their flower, the Mandrakes give a smell: Mandrakes
were much longed for by Rachel, Genesis 30. 14. and by their savourinesse of taste
there, and of smell here, it appears that they were some lovely fruit, and now
in their prime most pleasant, because they give their smell. 2. Her
fruitfulness is set forth in it is comprehensivenesse and variety, She is
adorned with all manner of pleasant fruits; whereby is holden forth, that as
believers have many diverse graces, like variety of Spices, Chap. 4. 13. 14.
which they should entertain, so all of them were in good case with her. 3.
These fruits were new and old, whereby the plenty of the same kind is set
forth, both (to say so) of this and the former years growth; whereby is
signified, a thriving or increase of the believers grace, there being a new
degree of faith and love, etc. of this year, added to the former degree she
attained before; she preserves the old, and she brings forth new, as, Matthew.
13. 52. the Scribe taught, in the Kingdom of God, brings out things new and
old; he has the old stock, and the new increase, the talents that were given
him, and five more gained by them. 4. These fruits are said to be at our gates;
This looks most simply to signify this, that it is pleasant to have such fruits
at the doors, and it betokens a frequency or plenty, and great abundance of
them, when not only in the Garden, but at the gates they so abound; so this
abounding of grace in a believer, makes (to say so) Christ's entry savoury and
pleasant, and shows, that all things are in a good readiness for him, as the
last motive ( that they are laid up for him, even while they are at the gates)
does show: In sum, all things (says she) are in readiness, and for thee only
my beloved; although not in perfection, yet in sincerity, provision is made for
thy entertainment. Obs^. 1. There are many various kinds of graces in a
believer; and when it is right with one, or when one of them is thriving, it is
ordinarily so with all. 2. Grace has it is growth, and should be increased by
new additions, where it is begun; and when it goes well with the believer,
there will be of these spiritual fruits, both new and old. 3. There is no
keeping in good case of the old stock of grace, but by continuing and growing
in fruitfulness; where the old is preserved, there will be found new also,
otherwise, what seemed once to blossom, becomes almost withered. 4. These who
are seriously desirous of Christ's company, should be making ready for him, by
liveliness of all manner of graces, new and old; and they who aim at such a
condition, may with some confidence expect his presence and company. 5.
Believers who seriously, tenderly and humbly follow holiness, may attain a
great length in it, as this expression of her case signifies: And therefore,
the blame is only our own, that our seize in grace are so small.

The last motive is in the last words, These are the fruits (says she) which I
have laid up for thee, O my beloved! These fruits are many, and at the doors,
yet they are laid up for him; they are then such fruits, as are reserved for
Christ. And this motive compleats the former, whereby having asserted her
fruitfulness, lest she should seem to boast of it, that her graces did so
abound, whatever increase they have made, O my beloved (says she) I have
devoted them to thee; they shall not be for my own satisfaction or boast, but
for thy glory; therefore (says she) Come: as one would say, I have such good
fruits of purpose kept for thee, which no other shall share of, and therefore I
invite thee to come and enjoy them: which is a kind invitation, turning over
the acknowledgment of what she had on Christ, as indeed belonging to him, and
as only to be made use of for his honor: So then, to lay up, signifies, 1. A
carfulness and solicitousnesse, carefully to gather together, as covetous
worldly men use to lay up riches, and to gather them together. 2. It signifies
the success which she had in her endeavor, that there was much gathered, a
store of fruits, as in a treasure; so we find laying up, to have this sense,
Psalm. 31. 19. How great is thy goodness which thou have laid up, as it were in
store? etc. 3. It signifies a setting apart of that store from common uses, as
men do what they lay up, and a reserving of it for some peculiar use: And the
peculiar use for which she laid them up, follows in these words, for thee, O my
beloved! Which implies, 1. that in her gathering and storing up, respect was
had to Christ; and that her provision was not to rest her self upon it, but to
honor him with it. 2. That even when it was attained, she was denied to it,
and did not look upon it as if it could be any stock to her self to live upon,
but that she had prepared it as an offering to propine or entertertain him
with: Even as a kind wise would provide what might be for the husbands
refreshment and honor, and would be still laying up till he return, aiming
singly to satisfy and entertain him with it; So (says the Bride) this store
is for satisfying and honoring of thee, and for thee only, O my beloved! It Is
for thy cause, because thou commands it, loves it, and is honored by it. O my
beloved, is added, to show how affectionatly she insisted in this discourse;
and in particular, how well bestowed she thought all that she had laid up was,
when it was bestowed upon him; O my beloved! it is for thee, and I have
willingly and affectionatly laid it up for that use, therefore come and lodge
and dwell with me, which is the scope. Obs. 1. Increasing in fruitfulness, or
growing in holiness, is a work that will not be done in one day; but it will
take time, and both carfulness and diligence, to gather together and lay up
these spiritual fruits. 2. When Christ is absent to sense, it is a suitable and
seasonable duty to be laying up provision by fruitfulness in holiness, for
his coming and return: Or, when Christ seems not presently to come and accept
of a believers prayers, duties or graces, yet are they not to be rejected, and
cast at as null and useless; nor is the believer to desist from performing of
them, but to continue and persevere in stirring himself up in the exercise of
graces and duties, until he come. 3. Although Christ come not at the first,
but suffer many of the believers duties, and the exercise of his graces (if we
may say so) to ly long on his hand, yet they are not lost, but laid up (and
grace is no ill treasure) and Christ will one time or other come and make good
use of them. 4. It Is no less practick (to say so) or it is no less difficult
in believers walk, to reserve what store they have gathered for Christ's use
alone, and to be denied to it themselves, than to get duties performed, and
spiritual provision laid up. 5. It Is not enough to do duties, and to lay up
fruits, unless they be laid up for Christ; and this is no less a duty than
the former. 6. It Is no small attainment in a believer, and a strong motive for
attaining of Christ's company (without which all will be nothing) when not only
he has store of fruits, and is painful in holiness, but also is denied to
these, as to any use-making of them for his own ends, more than if he had never
been taken up in attaining them, and when he reserves the praise of them to
Christ Jesus alone, that they may be subservient to his honor; This laying up
fruits for him, is opposite to the laying up for our selves, as living, eating,
fasting, etc. to him, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Zech. 7. 5, 6. are opposite to living,
eating, fasting to our selves, which in Gods account is to be as an empty vine,
Hos. 10. 1. 7. Grace is of a durable nature, it can keep, or it will endure
laying up; all other treasures are fading, if men lay them up, they will rust
and canker; but, the laying up of this spiritual treasure, which makes men rich
in good works, is profitable, commendable; and the riches thereby treasured up,
are most durable.

CHAP. VIII.
BRIDE.
Verse. 1. O that thou were as my Brother, that sucked the breasts of my Mother,
when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee: yet I should not be
despised.
Verse. 2. I would lead thee and bring thee into my Mothers house, who would
instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced Wine, and of the juice of my
Pomegranate.
THis Chapter carries on the copy of that spiritual communion, which is betwixt
Christ and the believer: The Bride speaks most here, and the nearer she come to
a close, her expressions become the more massy. It may be divided into these
parts, 1. The Bride continues, and heightens her one great request, of more
intimate familiarity with Christ; which is propounded, amplified and pressed,
with the infinuation of her success, and after-carriage, in the first four
verses. 2. The daughters of Jerusalem being charged by her, v. 4. break out
with a commendation of her, v. 5. -- 3. She forbears to own them, but
proceeds, verse. -- 5. to speak to him (as loath to be interrupted or diverted)
with two further petitions: The first whereof, is for fixednesse in her
fellowship with him, that it be not liable to the frequent interruptions of a
declining heart, verse. 6, 7. The second, is for these not yet brought in, v. 8.
4. The Bridegroom replies to this last suit, in good words and comfortable,
verse. 9. From which, in the fifth place, she gathers a comfortable conclusion
to her self, verse. 10. which she confirms, verse. 11, and 12. 6. The Bridegroom
gives his farewell-request unto her, verse. 13. Which seventhly and lastly, she
meets with the ardent expression and putting up of her first, last, and great
suit to him, to wit, that he would make haste, that is, haste his coming for
completing her happiness, beyond which she has nothing to say, and until
which, she is never silent, Rev. 22. 17. So then, this Chapter does consist of
seven parts, according to the several intercourses of the speakers.

In the first part, the Bride first propounds, and amplifies, or qualifies her
suit, verse. 1. -- 2. It Is pressed with motives, verse. -- 1, 2. 3. Her
attainment and success in her suit is mentioned, verse. 3, 4. And 4. her care
of entertaining Christ, is recorded, verse. 4.

The suit is in the first words, O that thou were as my brother: This I
conceive looks not mainly to Christ's incarnation, but to something that might
have been by believers obtained even then before his incarnation, and may yet
be desired by these who now love him: but, that which is chiefly intended in
these words, is the following forth of the love-strain of a heart-longing for
Christ's company, in the terms and expressions that are in use amongst men: It
has been ever thought unseemly for Virgins, too familiarly to converse with
men that are strangers, even though they were suited for by them, this has
been cause of reproach to many; but, for brethren and sisters to be familiar,
has not been subject to mistakes: They who are in that relation may use more
freedom, than without offense can be used by others; Therefore, Abraham fearing
to call Sarah his wife, gave her out to be his sister, that their conversing
together might be the less suspected; thus, the scope here is to press, that
Christ would condescend to be so homely with her, as she with boldness and
without fear might converse with him: O! (says she) that thou were so familiar
with me, that I might confidently converse with thee, as a woman may do with
her brother: and because, there is great odds betwixt brethren that are of the
same father, yet born of diverse mothers (as Joseph, Simeon and Judah were) and
brethren that are also of the same mother (as Joseph and Benjamin were, who
therefore more dearly loved one another) she does therefore add that
qualification, that sucked the breasts of my mother, that is, such a brother as
has been conceived in the same womb, and nourished by the same breasts (mothers
being then both mothers and nurses to their own children) whereby, a brother in
the most near and warm relation is signified: In sum, The sense is this, O! if
thou were to me so condescending, as a brother is to one born of that same womb
with him, that I might with the more freedom, boldness and confidence, and
sensible out-letting of my affections, converse with thee: Such sensible
breaking forth of affections, we find to have been betwixt Joseph and Benjamin,
Genesis 43. 34. She looks upon all the familiarity that she had attained, but as
that which might be amongst strangers, in respect of that which she longed for
and expected: and that this is the scope of this part of the Allegory, the
words after do clear, then I would kiss thee, and not be despised, or
reproached for it; whereas now in her present condition, which had much of
estrangement in it, any claim she made to Christ, was by tentation cast in her
teeth, and she upbraided, as if it were unsuitable for her to carry so to him;
but (says she) if thou would condescend to me, and be familiar with me as a
brother, I would not be ashamed for any challenge of that kind.

This suit, and it is qualification, import, 1. That there should be much loving
tenderness betwixt these that are in so near a relation as this, to be born of
one mother, etc. 2. That mothers who bear children, and are fitted to give
suck, should not decline that duty to their children, The giving of such being
a duty no less natural, than bringing forth, where the Lord has put no
impediment to the contrary in the way. 3. It imports, that there are steps of
access to Christ, and degrees of fellowship with him, beyond any thing that
the most grown believers have attained: There is somewhat of this, even by the
Bride to be wished for, that she has not yet attained. 4. There ought to be no
haulting or sitting down, in any attainment of neernesse with Christ, till it
be brought to that measure that no more can be enjoyed, and till it be at the
utmost height that is possible to be attained. 5. To have sensible warmlinesse,
and condescending familiarity from Christ, and confident freedom with him, is
the believers great design; that is, to have him as a brother: And these two,
to wit, confident freedom with Christ, and his warm condescending to them, go
together; which the reasons following will clear. They are set down in seven
motives, or advantages, which his being as a brother would bring along with it
to her; and hereby it will be further cleared, what it is that is here
intended. The 1. is hinted at in these words, when I should find thee without:
when, is supplied, and the words read in the Original, I would find thee
without: Now (says she) I have sought thee often without, and have for a long
time not found thee (as Chap. 3. 2, 3. and 5. 6, 7.) but if thou were thus
familiar with me, I would have thy company every where, and think no shame of
it. This suppons, 1. that Christ may be without, or at a distance, even with
his own Sister and Spouse: The most sensible manifestations have interruptions.
2. When Christ is without, or at a distance, then the believer's work is to
seek him till he find him; he loves not to be separate from Christ, and
therefore he pants after his manifestations: An absent Christ, and a seeking,
painful, diligent believer, should go together. 3. That where Christ is
familiar, all interruptions of presence are easily superable, yea, more easily
superable then to others, with whom he is not so familiar and intimat; he may
be found by them even without, that is, in cases that have in them some
obstructions unto intimat fellowship, as without is a place that is not
convenient for familiar communion. 4. It Is a great benefit to a believer, to
have Christ's presence easily recoverable, or recovered; It Is no small mercy to
find him when he is sought. Other things rising from this expression may be
gathered from Chap. 3. 2, 3. and 5. 6, 7. 5. In general, from all these
arguments we may observe, that they all include advantages to the believer, yet
she makes use of them as motives to press her suit; which says, That whatever
may be any re^^ advantage to a believer, does sway much with Christ.

The second reason why she desires this, is, that she may embrace and kiss
him, and it follows on the former (as each of them depends upon another) I
would find thee without (says she) and I would kiss thee, having found him,
she would with delight let out her affections on him. Kisses amongst men, are
the most kindly evidences of their love, as was cleared, Chap. 1. verse. 1. upon
these words, Let him kiss me: His kisses are kindly intimations of his love to
her; and therefore her kissing of him must be a most sensible flowing and
abounding out-letting of her affections on him, as affectionat relations do
when they kiss one another; It Is much to the same purpose, with what she said,
Chap. 7. -- 12. There will I give thee my loves: In sum, if thou were familiar
with me (says she) when I find thee, I would sensible, confidently, and with
freedom solace my self in thee, which now I dar scarce do when I find thee,
being possessed with fear of thy removal. The difference between this
expression, and that in Chap. 7. -- 12. seems to be this; There, she desired
communion with him, that her heart might be by his presence disposed (to say
so) for letting out her love on him, and that she might have the opportunity to
do it: Here, she desires that he would manifest himself more familiarly, that
with the greater holy boldness and confidence, she might satisfy her self in
pouring forth her love, by spiritual soul-imbracings, and kissings of him whom
she loved. This imports, 1. That there are degrees in the way of believers
letting out their love on Christ, as there is in his manifesting of himself to
them; There are sometimes they give him their love, when they have no access
to kiss him; and other times they are admitted to kissing of him, as at
sometimes he does them. 2. The more familiarly his love lets out it self on
them, the more does their love flow out on him. 3. It Is a mercy to the
believer, and highly prized by him, to have access to kiss Christ, and to let
out his heart and love on him. 4. It says, that at all times believers will
not get themselves solaced in Christ; This is an exer^ise to which their heart
does not frame, till he familiarly manifest himself; they cannot kiss and
embrace him, until his embracements come first. More particularly, if we
consider the scope of these words, I would kiss thee, and that, without: they
imply, 1. A more present sensible object, such as may be kissed: Whence, Obs.
Christ's familiar out-letting of himself, makes (...) exceedingly obvious unto
the believer; it makes him so sensibly present, as he may be in a spiritual way
embraced and kissed. ^. It holds out the out-letting of the believers love on
him: From which, Obs. 1. The great duty of one that finds Christ, is to love
him, and to let the heart flow out on him. 2. This should be done whenever, or
where ever, Christ is found; and so soon (...) opportunity is offered, the
heart should close with it without delay. 3. Familiarity with Christ will not
be displeasing to him, but exceedingly acceptable; otherwise, this could be no
motive to press her suit.

3. Kissing him, imports, both a holy confidence, and satisfaction or delight,
in her letting out her heart upon him: Which shows, that it is sweet not only to
have Christ loving us, but to get him loved; and so this is both satisfying to
her, and acceptable to him.

The third motive or reason (which depends on the former two) is, yet I should
not be despised, or, they should not despise me: that is, although I found thee
without, and were seen kissing thee, and by confident boldness delighting in
thee; yet, if thou were familiar with me as my brother, and according to the
neernesse of that relation would familiarly own me, neither men, devils,
tentations, nor any thing else, would have access to despise, upbraid, or
reproach me for it, I would be confident against all; as a Virgin that is
showing her respect to her own born brother, needs fear no reproach from that.
Obs. 1. Believer^ are subject to be despised, even the beloved Bride of Jesus
Christ is not freed from this trial, to be little esteemed of, even as the
offscourings of all things, to be reproached and shamed by men (as she was,
Chap. 5. 7.) to be baffled (to say so) as an hypocrite, by the devil and
tentation, as Job was, Job, Chap. 1. and 2. 2. Believers are not senseless or
stupid, when reproached or despised, they may be affected with it, and my
endeavor rightly to have it prevented, or removed. 3. Often the more tenderly
that believers let out their affection on Christ, or their zeal for him, they
are the more subject to be despised; for, when she kisses Christ, she looks
upon despising then* as waiting on her, if he prevent it not. 4. Christ's
familiar presence, or, his being as a brother owning his Bride, is the great
thing that guards off, and prevents despising, and procures freedom from
reproach, or at least is a Bull-wark to the soul against reproaches: It Is no
little advantage that familiarity with Christ brings along with it; for, by
his owning of believers, either their carriage is made so convincing, that
malicious mouths are stopped, as having nothing to say against them; or they
are so sustained, under all these outward or inward despisings, that they
trouble them not, and so they are to them as if they were not. 5. Christ's
keeping up of himself, is the dispensation under which the believer is most
obnoxious to be despised: The devil, tentations, and men, usually cast up to
them then, Where is their God? Psalm. 42. 9, 10. and that pierces them: So our
Lord was dealt with on the Cross: Job calls this the Lords renewing of his
witnesses against him, whereby (as it were) tentation is confirmed in what it
asserted.

There follows in the second verse, four more arguments, she makes use of to
press her suit: We heard of three in the first verse; The fourth is in these
words, I would lead thee: The word in the Original, signifies such a leading,
as uses to be in triumph, a leading that is joined with respect and honor to
the person who is led. Christ leads his people as a shepherd does his flock, or
a nurse her child; and this signifies tenderness in him, and weakness in
them: The believer again, leads Christ, as a servant or usher does the master,
or as men do Kings and victorious Conquerors whom they honor; and this suppons
stateliness in him, and respectivenesse and attendance in the Bride, she looks
upon him as a glorious, magnificent person, in whom, and with whom, she desires
only to triumph. In sum, the meaning is this, If (says she) thou were as my
brother, when I found thee my self, I would not soon quite thee, but wait with
all honorable attendance upon thee. Obs. 1. Honorable attendance on Christ,
and respective service, is a duty that well becomes believers. 2. To give him
this honor, is a thing which they mainly aim at. 3. It Is a great mercy to them
(and they will so look upon it) when they are helped, in a way suitable to his
Majesty and stateliness, to wait upon him, and do him service. 4. Christ's
familiar presence, both gives believers the occasion, and also the fitness and
disposition, for giving him this honorable attendance; she speaks here, as if
one would say to another whom they respected, If thou were in our quarters, I
would wait on thee, and think it a favor to have the opportunity to do so:
This, or the like, is alluded unto here.

The fifth Argument follows on this, and it is, I would bring thee into my
mothers house: This is a resolution, to perform what she had practiced, Chap.
3. 4. and was spoken to there: The sense is, If thou were familiar with me
(says she) I would usher thee in to the Church, whereof I am a member, for the
good of all the family; as if a Virgin, living in her mothers house, should
press one whom she loved, and with whom she might be familiar as with a
brother, when she had found him without, to go in and abide with her in her
mothers house, as the greatest evidence of her respect, and that they of the
family might have the benefit of his company, as well as she: So it is here.
And it shows, 1. That she would leave no respect, that was possible to her,
unexercised toward Christ; She would not only honor him her self, but she
would endeavor to have him made known to others, that they might have a high
esteem of him also: Believers whom Christ is familiar with, they will not be
satisfied with any respect they can put upon him, but are careful to have him
known, and honored by all others that live in the Church with them. 2. That in
her seeking for him, she minded the public good of the Church, as well as her
own: which teaches us, to propose to our selves the public good, as well as
our own particular advantage, whenever we haunt the means, wherein we are
called to seek him. 3. That she thought it a great mercy, to be any ways useful
for the good of her mothers house: And so believers will look upon it, not only
as their duty, but also as their mercy, to be useful to others. 4. That
Christ's presence, familiarly manifested to particular believers, does
exceedingly capacitat them, for being usefully instrumental in the Church
wherein they live.

The sixth Argument amplifies this, from the benefit that she she would have by
his being brought into her mothers house, in these words, who would instruct
me; That is, then she would instruct me, if thou were there: the Ordinances in
the Church, whereby believers are edified and instructed, would then be lively
and profitable, in a greater measure than formerly: Whereby it appears, that by
Mother, is understood the visible Church; for, there only are the Ordinances
which do instruct; and by the Bride, is understood particular believers,
because it is to them that these Ordinances become the power of God unto
Salvation. Or, the words may be read, Thou would instruct me; that is, if thou
were brought to the Church, thou by thy Ordinances would teach me. The scope in
both these readings is one, To show, that by Christ's presence in the Church,
she expected to be taught, which she looked for no otherwise, nor by any
immediate way, therefore, she would have him there. Obs. 1. The most grown
believer needs instruction, and is still a Scholar while he is in the Church
upon earth. 2. The Ordinances in the visible Church, are the means, whereby
Christ ordinarily teaches his people; otherwise, there were no force in this
reasoning, to desire him to her mothers house, that she might be instructed. 3.
The most eminent believer, even the Bride of Jesus Christ, is no above the
reach of Ordinances, but is to be instructed by them in the visible Church. 4.
Believers should endeavor the enjoyment of Christ's company in the same Church
that was their mother, and seek to be instructed there, and should not
endeavor to carry Christ away from their Mother Church. 5. Christ has a more
full way of manifesting his presence in his Church at one time than at another;
even as also at different times, there are different measures of his
manifestations to particular believers. 6. Christ's presence in his Church and
with his people, singularly furthers their edification and instruction, and
gives a blessing to the Ordinances. 7. Believers, when in a right frame, will
account it no little mercy to be instructed by Christ in his Ordinances, and to
have the word blessed unto them. 8. The most sensible and full manifestations
of Christ, should not, yea will not, lessen the esteem of the Ordinances; but
both should, and will put the Lords people in a capacity to be edified by them,
and will incline and fit them to profit under them.

The last motive is taken from the entertainment she would give him; If (says
she) thou would familiarly manifest thy self, and if once I had found thee,
and gotten thee brought to my mothers house, then I would cause thee to drink
of spiced wine, of the juice of my Pomegranate: In a word, I would entertain
thee as well as I might, and thou should be very welcome, and kindly
taken-with, as Guests, who are respected, use to be. By spiced wine, and the
juice of the Pomegranate, is understood the most excellent entertainment; as in
these Countries, it is like (as we may see from Prove. 9. 2. and Song, Chap. 5.
1.) they used to mix the wine they gave their friends, that it might be the
more favoury. Now through this Song, by such similitudes are understood the
graces that are in believers, as, Chap. 4. 10, 13. etc. Chap. 5. 1. and in sum,
the sense comes to this, if thou were familiar with me, and by thy presence in
my mothers house, were making the Ordinances lively, then I would feast thee on
my graces, and my love, faith, hope, etc. (which are to thee, more savoury than
wine, with which men use to entertain their most special friends) should flow
out abundantly on thee. Hence, Obs. 1. That believers design and aim, at the
feasting and entertaining of Christ, when they have his company, as well as to
be entertained thereby themselves. 2. It Is no little mercy to get respect to
Christ discharged* and a believing soul will think it no small privilege to
get him to entertain, if he have wherewith to entertain him. 3. Christ's coming
to a soul brings sufficient provision for his own entertainment: The Bride
makes no question, but there shall be a feast, if he will come; and if he come,
not, there will be, nothing but emptiness there: She doubts not, but if once
he would come to her mothers house, his presence would make enough of good
provision. 4. The Lord respects even the offer of welcome from his people, when
he is not actually entertained as they would: or though they be not in case for
the time to entertain him, yet their serious desire to do it, is very
acceptable to him; Otherwise, this would be no argument for our Lord Jesus, to
grant her suit.

Verse. 3. His left hand should be under my head: and his right hand should
embrace me.
The third verse is the same, and to the same scope with verse. 6. of Chap. 2.
and the words being the same in the Original, we conceive they will read better
here as they are there, His left hand is under my head; Here, it is, should be
under my head, but should is supplied: And so the words hold out here (as in
Chap. 2. 6.) a return, which the Bride had to her suit; Our Lord Jesus coming,
and putting in his left hand under her head, and as a kind brother taking her
in his arms, answers her suit, and satisfies her desire: This agrees best
with the words, as they were formerly used, Chap. 2. 6. and with the scope
here. The verse following confirms it also, where she charge the daughters
not to stir him up, which suppons him to be present: So we find the same charge
following the same words, Chap. 2. 7. as also, her finding him, and bringing
him to her mothers house, is followed with the same charge, Chap. 3. 5. and she
is said to be leaning on him here, verse. 5. and yet is by the daughters
commended, and not despised, which is a proof that he was present; for, this is
it that made her not to be despised. The meaning then is, Now (says she) I
have obtained what I desired, and he is become very friendly and familiar with
me, like a brother, which was my desire. And this shows, 1. that Christ easily
condescends to his longing Bride, to give her such a degree of his presence as
she called for; and that he does this so suddenly, is great kindness and
confidence: Christ will in this sometimes condescend very quickly to the
desires of his longing people. 2. That she observes and acknowledges it; It Is
no less duty to observe and acknowledge a return, than to put up a prayer. 3.
Christ has a singularly tender way of communicating his love, and of
embraceing his people, he can take them in his arms, and make much of them,
when he sees it fit. 4. There is a sweet satisfaction, and unspeakable
heart-quieting refreshment to be found in Christ's arms; She thinks it so good
to be here, that she speaks of it with much complacency, and carefully sets her
self not to have it interrupted in the verse following.

Verse. 4. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor
awake my Love, until he please.
Having now access to much familiarity with Christ, as she desired, and being
in his arms, she expresses her care in this verse, to prevent any new
interruption of his blessed presence; as if a woman having her friend or
husband sleeping in her arms, should command all in the house to be quiet, lest
he should be awaked: So the Bride sets her self to watch so tenderly over every
thing that is in her, that nothing give him just ground to withdraw: and though
she speak to the daughters of Jerusalem, yet the scope shows, she looks to her
self; but it is thus expressed, partly, to keep the form used in this Song, and
so having spoken of bringing him to her mothers house, she makes use of the
similitude of keeping the house quiet; partly, to show her seriousness and
reality in this her care, and the great need that there is of being watchful,
even as David often provokes all creatures to praise, and lays that charge on
them, thereby to show his own seriousness in the thing, and the greatness of
the work of praise which he was taken up with: so to the same purpose is this
resemblance here. The same words were found, Chap. 2. 7. and Chap. 3. 5. where
they were opened: there are two little differences in the Original, which yet
alter not the scope: 1. That expression, by the Roes and Hindes (which was
formerly used) is here left out, not because this charge is less weighty, but
it shows a haste and abruptness in her speaking, which makes her omit that,
the more speedily to express her charge. 2. It was before, If ye stir or
awake: Here it is (as the margent reads from the Original) why will ye stir or
awake? Which does more plainly import, 1. a readiness, or ben^il in them to
stir him up. 2. A certainty of the effect of his withdrawing, if they should
stir him up, or awake him. 3. An unreasonablenesse and absurdity in the doing
of it, Why will ye do it? says she. 4. A pressing seriousness, in her
proposing of this question, and urging it so vehemently. From this, and the
frequent repetition of this charge, Obs. 1. That it is a difficult piece of
work, to keep the heart tender and watchful for entertaining of Christ, even
when he is present. 2. The strongest believer will take one charge after
another, and all will have enough to do, to make him watchfully tender in
keeping Christ; There is so much laziness in the hearts of the best, and there
is so great need to stir them up to renew their watchfulness. 3. When the
heart has had frequent proofs of it is own declining, there is the more need to
be very serious in the preventing of it again. 4. There is nothing that a
kindly loving believer will have more indignation at, whether in himself or
others, than at this, that Christ should be provoked, and thereby put to
withdraw; this he cannot abide, Why (says she) will ye stir him up? 5. They
who have Christ's presence, will not be peremptory with him, for the constant
continuing of the sense thereof, although they love it; but will be peremptory
with themselves, that by their sin they provoke him not to withdraw before he
please. 6. Communion with Christ is an uptaking exercise to the believer, it
takes him so up that he is never idle: If he be waiting for Christ, he is
breathing, O that thou were, etc. and seeking to find him; If he enjoy him, he
is endeavoring to keep and entertain him, and these two takes him up:
Believers are either seeking while they obtain, or watching that they may
entertain what they have attained.

DAUGHTERS.
Verse. 5. -- (Who is this that comes up from the wilderness leaning upon her
Beloved?)
The daughters of Jerusalem come in speaking to the Brides commendation, in the
first part of the fifth verse, Who is this, say they, (or, who is she?) that
comes up from the wilderness, leaning on her beloved? This part of the verse
stops the Bride from following the purpose she was upon, with a kind of an
abrupt exclamation to her commendation. The daughters now beholding her resting
in her beloveds arms, as it is, verse. 3. to show the commendablenesse of that
posture of leaning on him, they are brought in admiring it; And therefore, both
the Bride and the Bridegroom are spoken of in the third person, and that by way
of question, which supposes no doubt in the thing, who it was of whom they
speak, but implies an exceeding high estimation of the party spoken of, as
being (especially in that posture) exceeding lovely. The words hold out a
believers walk, 1. In the nature of it, it is a coming up, or ascending. 2. In
the term from which, it is from the wilderness: By which two (as was cleared,
Chap. 3. 6.) is understood the believers spiritual progress heavenward, with
their backs on all the contentments of the world, as being unsuitable for them
to rest in: These two are spoken of, Chap. 3. 3. There is added here a more
express description of her posture, in this ascending, she is leaning on her
beloved; that is, as they who are weak, make use of a staff, in climbing of a
strait and steep ground, or ease themselves by leaning upon one that is strong,
and especially one whom they love, for helping them in their way; So the
believer is said to come up from the wilderness, leaning on her beloved,
because she being weak in her self, and unfit for such a difficult voyage, by
faith rests on Christ, for helping her in the way, whereby she is sustained,
and carried through in the duties of a holy walk, and the difficulties in her
way, till she come through the wilderness unto the land of rest. So then, this
leaning imports, 1. felt-weaknesse in her self, for encountering with the
difficulties of this walk or journey. 2. Strength in Christ, sufficient for
enabling her. 3. Her use-making of this strength by faith; for, that is to lean
or rest on him, or to be joined or associat to him, as the word is rendered by
some; and it is ordinary for faith to be expressed by leaning, resting, taking
hold; and so leaning to Christ is opposed to leaning to our own understanding,
Prove. 3. 5. 4. Her quieting of her self delightsomly in her leaning or resting
on Christ, which gave her security against all fears and difficulties in her
way, as John when he leaned on Christ's bosom, Ioh. 13. 23. So the believer
thinks himself sure and safe, when admitted to lean his soul there. 5. A
progress that she made by this in her way and journey, and that this leaning
had much influence on her advancement therein, and upon this account is her
leaning mainly commended. Obs. 1. That even believers are insufficient of
themselves, as of themselves, for the duties of a holy walk. 2. That believers
should walk under the sense of this their insufficiency and weakness, and when
they come the greatest length in a holy walk, they should not lean unto
themselves, or any inherent stock of gifts or grace; which two suppons, that a
believers conversation, when right, is a heavenly and tender walk. 3. Christ
Jesus has a sufficiency and efficacy in him, not only for the justification of
believers that rest on him, but for the furthering of their sanctification
also, and helping of them to a victory over the world; Hence, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He
is our sanctification, as well as our Justification. 4. Believers in their way,
would not only by faith rest on Christ, for attaining pardon of sin by his
righteousness; but, would also by faith depend on him, for furthering of their
mortification and sanctification: And thus, in the exercise of faith and holy
dependence, we are to acknowledge him in all our ways, which is opposed to
leaning to our own understanding, Prove. 3. 5. This was practiced in an
examplary way, by the Worthies, recorded, Heb. 11. 5. The exercising of faith
on Christ for sanctification and life, and for performing of the duties of
holiness, has much influence on the believers success in all these; for,
this is our victory, whereby the world is overcome, even our faith, 1 John 5.
4, 5. And therefore, these that are most in the use-making of Christ, for the
helping them foreward in their way, cannot but come best speed; for, leaning on
him, and going up, are here joined together: And so they can never make
progress in holiness, that make not use of Christ in their endeavors after
it; God has so coupled use-making of Christ, and progress in holiness
together, that Christ may bear all the glory of the believers success in the
way of holiness, and that he that glories may glory in him. 6. The believers
walk toward heaven is both a stately, and also an easy and successful walk;
for, he is to go about all duties in the strength of Christ, and so Christ
bears the burden, and his yoke becomes easy: It Is the neglecting of him, that
makes all duties wearisome. 7. It Is no little piece of the dexterity of a holy
walk, and is the great commendation of it, to do all we do by faith, to walk
and go on in the faith of his strength, as leaning on him; This makes the
Brides posture wonderful, for it is rarity and commendablenesse. 8. Although
doing of duties will not prove an interest in Christ, and although believers
come not to perfection, or any exact suitableness in them, yet the doing of
them in the strength of Christ, and walking, as leaning on him, will make out
an interest in him: None can actually employ him, for bearing them through in
duty, who have not first closed with him, as their beloved, for obtaining of
pardon: This is the Brides property, Christ is first her beloved, and then she
leans upon him, to be helped in her walk. 9. That is solid faith, which does
empty the believer of himself in the performance of all duties, as well as of
righteousness in the point of his justification: The native work of says, is
to make the soul rest on Christ, yea, and actually it makes the soul rest on
Christ alone; for, all true faith lays the burden of all duties and
difficulties upon him, and so is it compared to leaning.

BRIDE.
Verse. -- 5. I raised thee up under the Apple Tree: there thy mother brought
thee forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee.
The second part of this verse, in these words, I raised thee up, etc. are not
without obscurity: We take the words to be a new argument of the Brides,
whereby (after this exclamation of the daughters of Jerusalem) she comes in to
press her former suit upon the Bridegroom, and proceeds in it, as being loath
to be interrupted or diverted from her direct application to him; wherefore,
she seems to take no notice of what the daughters spoke, and makes no reply,
but instantly goes on in her wrestling with him, as if nothing had been spoken
by them. That they are words spoken to him, the A^^^xes in the Original make it
clear; for, although there be no such difference in our Language, whereby we
may discern whether the word thee, be masculine or feminine, as spoken to man
or woman, yet in the Hebrew there is a clear difference; And so, the word thee,
I raised thee, being in the Original of the masculine gener, it is thee man, or
thee my beloved, or husband; and therefore, they cannot be understood as his
words to her, but as hers to him, seeing it may be clearly discerned in the
Original that they belong to a man, and it is a different word from that which
is ordinarily spoken of a woman; and there being no convincing example to the
contrary, we must so understand the words here, and to understand them
otherwise, would bring-in needless confusion in that Language. Next, that her
scope is to press for neernesse with him, both what went before, and what
follows, do demonstrat: which also the opening of the words will confirm. In
them there are two experiences asserted, which tend both to this scope: The
first is her own experience, I raised thee up under the Apple Tree. The second
is, the experience of all other believers, there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought forth (for thee in this repeated expression, is not in the
Original) that bare thee.

By the Apple Tree, we understand Christ himself, who is so called, Chap. 2. 3.
because of his fruit and shadow, under which she sat down. To be under the
Apple Tree, suppons her to be near him, and actually delighting her self on
him, as being abundantly refreshed under his shadow, as was cleared, Chap. 2.
3. Her raising up of Christ, imports these three things, 1. A duty on her part
(to say so) putting him to show himself someway for her, more than formerly he
had done: So to raise, or awake, when it is applied to God, signifies, as,
Psalm. 7. 6. Psalm. 44. 23. Awake, why sleep thou? arise, cast us not off? So
then, the meaning of this expression, I raised thee, is, I dealt with, and
importuned thee in this. 2. It implies importunity in dealing with Christ,
incessantly she stirred him, and with petitions pressed him; So, when it is
said, Isa. 64. 7. No man stirrs up himself, etc. The word, stirrs up, is the
same word, and imports more than to pray: It signifies liveliness and
wrestling in it, as fowls use to stir their young ones when they would have
them flying, from which the word is borrowed. 3. It implies success, I not
only made application to thee, and was helped to be serious; but I prevailed,
and thou was awaked and raised, and did make thy self in more than an ordinary
way manifest to me, and for me, when I being admitted under thy shadow, took
that opportunity to deal with thee. This then is the scope and strength of this
first assertion, It Is no marvel (says she) that I long for thy company; for,
by former experience I have found the good of it, not only for present ease
under sad difficulties, but also I have been thereby helped to more liberty in
prayer, and have had success for attaining new experiences of thy love;
Therefore, I desire thy company still, and cannot but desire it.

The second assertion is more broad and extensive, Not only I (says she) have
found it so; but all thy people have found access to thee, or thy blessed
company and presence singularly useful, to make them fruitful, as having much
influence thereon. So, by Christ's mother, here we conceive, is understood the
believer, in whom he is formed and brought forth, as we cleared on Chap. 3. 11.
and they bring forth Christ, 1. By giving him a being in their hearts, where
he had it not before; his image is in some respect himself, and when his image
is brought forth in the soul, Christ is said to be formed and brought forth
there. 2. By bringing forth of the fruits of Christ's Spirit before others;
when being, as it were, in travel in the pursuit of holiness, they are helped
to manifest his image (after which they are created) in their conversations. 3.
By attaining to the knowledge of this, that Christ is in them; believers being,
as it were, in travel, till they know their delivery; but when that is clearly
made out, and intimate to them, then (as the woman that brings forth a
man-child, Ioh. 16. 21.) they are at quietness, as being delivered. The force
of the Argument lies in the word there, which relates to the Apple Tree; under
the Apple Tree (says she) where I raised thee up, being admitted to thy
fellowship; there also they were made fruitful, and delivered from their former
pangs and travel, even as I was; and when it is found in the experience of all
thy people, as well as by me (says she) that thy presence and company is so
useful, it can therefore be no delusion, nor is it any wonder that I so press
after it: And by this it seems, that bringing forth of Christ in this second
part, is the same in substance with raising of him up in the former, to wit,
the obtaining of some sensible manifestation of Christ's respect, by which,
these who were formerly in pain to have Christ formed in them, are now
delivered and eased from the flames of jealous love, that are as pangs to such
as travel in birth (as it were) to have their interest in Christ made clear, as
the words in the following verse express. Obs. 1. That which in a believers
experience has proven useful, is in a special manner lovely and commendable to
them: Experience is a most convincing demonstration of the worth of any thing,
and leaves the deepest impression thereof behind it. 2. The more any by
experience have learned Christ's worth, and the more they have tasted that he
is gracious, their affections do the more vehemently stir after him. 3.
Christ's presence has many great and excellent advantages waiting on it; It
brings ^ase and quietness to the soul, and gives refreshment under his shadow,
it gives access to pray with freedom, and duties then have usually a sensible
success. 4. The believer looks upon it as a great mercy to have freedom in
prayer, and to be heard when he prays; That by prayer she raised Christ up, is
remembered as a mercy not to be forgotten, and this yet commends unto her the
good of sitting under his shadow. 5. Access to Christ is no time for security,
but for prayer; and when the believer is admitted to solace himself in Christ's
presence, then should he be diligent in wrestling with him, and improving that
opportunity for pressing after a further manifestation of him. 6. There are
some experiences that are unquestionable to all believers, though they be
mysteries to all others in the world. 7. It is not a little strengthening, yea,
exceedingly confirming to believers, when their experience and the experiences
of other believers co-incide, and jump in the proof of the same thing. 8.
Although believers may in some things differ, yet there are some things
commonly found good in experience by them all: This is the advantage of
Christ's company, there was never a believer that attained it, but he ^ound
much good of it; and these who still travel for it, apprehend groundedly that
there is an unspeakable good in it.

Verse. 6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: for love
is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are
coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame.
Verse. 7. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a
man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned.
In the sixth verse, she proceeds to her second petition, wherein she is
strengthened from her former experience: The suit is in two expressions, to one
purpose; and it is pressed with several reasons, in the end of the sixth and
seventh verses; whereby she shows, that less could not be satisfying to her,
and this much she behoved to have granted her. The first expression, holding
forth her suit, is, Set me as a seal upon thine heart: The second is to the
same purpose, in the words that follow, and as a seal upon thine arm. By
Christ's heart is signified his most inward affection; for, it is frequent in
Scripture by the heart to signify the most inward affections; So, Matthew. 6.
12. where the treasure is, there the heart will be: And, Chap. 4. 9. Thou have
ravished my heart, etc. A seal is used for confirming evidences, or closing of
letters: They have some peculiar ingraving on them, serving to distinguish the
deed of one man from the deed of another; wherefore men use to have a special
care of their Signet or Seal: (for both are one upon the matter and in the
Original) Thus Ahasuerus kept his Seal upon his own finger, Esth. 3. 10, 12. So
then, from this we may see, that a Seal, or Signet, signifies, 1. What one
has a precious esteem of; and therefore, Ier. 22. 24. the Lord says of
Coniah, though thou were the Signet on my right hand, etc. And, Hag. 2. 23. the
Lord expresses his love to Jerusalem in this, that he would take Zerubbabel
and make him as a Signet. 2. By Seal is signified something that makes an
impression, and leaves a stamp thereof behind it, that does not wear out again,
as a Seal does on the Wax. Next, by Christ's arm, may be understood, his care
of his people, outwardly expressed in the effects, wrought by his power for
their good: So, Isa. 40. 11. it is said, he will gather the Lambs with his arms,
etc. Thus then, to be set as a seal on his heart, does imply, 1. Exceeding
great neernesse to Christ, even to have a special room and seat in his heart.
2. It imports, a settlednesse in that condition, that she may be set there, as
the Lord says of Jerusalem, 2 King. 21. 4. there I have put or set my Name,
and as it is, Psa. 132. 14. there will I dwell. 3. To be set as a Seal on his
arm, takes in further, that, as she would be always minded by Christ, and have
him loving her; so would she have him in all his dispensations making that
manifest, and that (as it were) they may bear it engraven upon them, that he
minds her; like that expression, Isa. 49. 14. I have graven thee upon the palms
of my hands, whereby he expresses his mindfulnesse of her, that he could look
to nothing in all his works, but he saw (as it were) her name engraven
thereupon; for, all his works express love to her. In sum, we conceive the
words look to one, or both of these similitudes, or allusions: 1. In general,
to men who had such respect to their Seals or Rings, that they wore them on
their fingers, and carried them still about with them; Now, she would be
carried about on his heart, and have him sympathizing with her in every thing
that she meets with. 2. And more especially, it may allude to Aaron's
Brestplate, whereby he did carry the names of the children of Israel on his
heart, Exodus 28. 12, 29. which ingraving is said to be like the ingraving of a
Signet, in which the High Priest was certainly a type of Christ: However, this
is certain, that she would be established in her union with Christ, so that
neither desertions on his part, nor backslidings on hers, might mar that; but
that she might be fixed as to her union with him, and made to abide in him, as
the impression of a Seal is fixed upon the Wax, and made to abide in it. Obs.
1. True love to Christ, will be bold, pressing and importunat, in it is suits to
him; It will not stand to seek any thing that may endear him to the soul, to
have him as a brother, and to be worn upon his heart, etc. 2. Christ's heart
and inside, is most heartsome to the believer, who has had any discovery
thereof made unto his soul; and true love can settle no where, till it get a
lodging in his very heart, that is the proper resting place of a beliver, and
that is the refreshing, which can make the weary to rest. 3. Love to Christ
would not only be near him, but would be fixed and established in neernesse
with him. 4. A stayed, immovable condition, or frame of heart, in the enjoying
of communion with Christ, is most desirable and profitable; and therefore, it
is no marvel it be longed for. 5. There is no staying or settling of a
believer, till he be admitted to dwell (as it were) in Christ's heart, that is,
to dwell near him in the believing and enjoying of his love; all other grounds
are wavering, but this is stable; and dwelling here, if it were pressed after,
would bring more establishment.

This seems to be a peremptory suit, she does therefore give two reasons to
press it, both which show that it will not be unpleasant to Christ, nor can it
be condemned in her; for (says she) the love that presses me to it is of such
a vehement nature, I cannot resist it, more than death, the grave, or fire can
be resisted. This reason is contained in the rest of the sixth verse. The
second reason in the following, wherein she shows, that the love that pressed
her, was of such a peremptory nature, and so untractable (if we may so speak)
as to this, that there was no dealing with it, if it did not obtain it is
desire, no other thing could quench or satisfy it. The strength of her love is
amplified in the sixth verse, by three steps, in several similitudes. By love
here, is understood that vehement, ardent desire, after Christ's presence,
which is kindled in the heart of the believer. And first, it is called strong,
in respect of it is constraining power, whereby the person that loves, is led
captive, and brought down as weak under it, so that he cannot withstand it:
Says she, love masters and will undo me, if it be not satisfied;
Love-sicknesse so weakens the soul, when it once seazeth on the heart, till it
be cured with Christ's presence. Next, it is called strong as death, which is so
strong, that it prevails over the most powerful, wise, mighty and learned in
the world, Eccles. 8. 8. there is no discharge in that war; neither can the
most mighty Monarch encounter death, and stand before it: So (says she) I can
no more stand against the strength of this love, it overpowers me, and is like
to kill me, if it be not satisfied. The second step or degree of this love, and
the similitude illustrating it, is in these words, jealousy is cruel as the
grave: It Is the prosecution of the same purpose, only, what she called love
before, is here termed jealousy; Jealousy may be taken in a good sense, or an
evil: In a good sense, jealousy is the highest degree of love, or love at it is
height, and and is the same with zeal: Thus the Lord is said to be jealous for
his glory: And it imports, 1. ardent affection. 2. Desire of enjoying. 3.
Impatiency of delay. 4. A deep measure of grief, mixed with love, for any
seeming appearance of a disappointment in the enjoying the person they love,
or, when they do not meet with love again from the person whom they dearly
love: So jealousy in this sense is applied to both God and men, but properly
it agrees only to men; for, there are no such passions in God, though he,
condescending to our capacity, speaks thus of himself, after the manner of men.
Now this jealousy is said to be cruel, or hard: It Is called, Prove. 6. the rage
of a man; and this was the jealousy, or zeal that did eat up David, Psa. 69.
and so it is compared to the grave, which, Prove. 30. is the first of these four
things that are never satisfied, but wastes all the bodies that are laid in it:
So (says she) this love of mine, being at a height, torments me restlesly, as
if it were cruelly persecuting me, till it be satisfied with a good answer from
thee, O! my beloved. In an evil sense, jealousy signifies not a simple fear of
missing the thing men desire, or a suspicion of their own short-coming in
attaining of it, but a groundless suspicion of them whom they love, as if they
did not entertain their love as they ought; and thus, jealousy is called the
rage of a man, Prove. 6. 34. and so here, this cannot be altogether excluded;
jealousy thus taken, having in it some unbelief, which torments believers
horribly, when the suspicion of Christ's not taking notice of them grows; and
this is frequently to be found in the Saints cases, in times of desertion; they
are then very apt to suspect God's love, and this exceedingly disquiets them,
the want of the faith and sense of his love being a death unto them, Psalm. 77.
8, 9, 10. And so the reason runs thus, let me be admitted to thy heart, for my
love will be satisfied with no less; and if this be not obtained, jealousy
and suspicion of thy love may steal in, and that will be torturing and
tormenting: And therefore, she puts up this suit, that she may be set as a Seal
upon his heart, to have that prevented; for, she cannot abide to think of it.
3. She compares this jealousy to coals of fire (the coals thereof are coals of
fire) for their vehement heat, tormenting nature, and consuming power; all
which are to be found in this strong and jealous love, it is vehement for heat,
painful and destructive as fire is: yea further, it is compared to coals that
have a most vehement flame, or as it is in the Original, the flame of God; for,
so the Hebrews do name any thing that is superlative in it is kind, and this is
added, to show the horrible torture that Christ's absence, and love-sicknesse
has with it, to a tender loving soul, especially when carnal unbelieving
jealousy enters and prevails, they cannot abide it, but would choose any rod
before that, if it were at their election. Obs. 1. Love to Christ, where it is
strong and vigorous, will make strange and mighty impressions on the heart,
which others are not acquaint with, and will break out in such expressions, as
men of the world may wonder what they mean, none of them having any such
feeling or sensiblenesse of Christ's absence or presence. 2 Where true love to
Christ is, it is a most constraining thing, the soul that has it, cannot but
pursue for Christ, and go about all means which may any way further it is
communion with him. 3. Where love begins to pursue after Christ, the longer it
be in meeting with him, it increases the more, where it is real; and the more
disappointments it meet with, it grows the more vehement, till it break out in
jealousy and zeal. 4. Believers that have true love, are ready to fall in
jealousies of Christ, and to be suspicious of his love, especially in his
absence; This is supposed here, that where true love to Christ is, there may be
jealousy of him. 5. Where jealousy enters, is cherished and prevails, it is
not only dishonorable to Christ, but exceedingly torturing to the believer:
There is not a more vexing guest can be entertained, than jealousy of Christ.
6. Jealousy of Christ's love may be where there is little cause, and often
where there is least cause, it is most ready to enter; The reason whereof may
be taken from the ardency of the souls love to him, joined with the mistakes
they have of his way, So, Isa. 49. 13, 14. For, considering what is gone
before, it might be thought, that whatever any other might seem to have, the
Bride had no cause of jealousy. 7. Believers would endeavor to prevent all
jealousy of Christ and his love, and by all means seek to be established and
confirmed in the says of his love to them, as that which can only keep and
guard the heart against these sinful suspicions and jealousies. 8. Though this
jealousy be vexing, yet sometimes the believer cannot rid himself of it, it
will so prevail, and is so cruel against him. 9. In the similitude of death and
the grave, that is here made use of, it is employed, that no man shall escape
death and the grave, they are as strong and mighty Conquerours, that prevail
over all that come in their way: It Is clearly hinted here, that the believer
carries this conviction in his heart, that sometime he will be prevailed over
by death and the grave, This is no ill impression, the graves are ready for me,
and, I have said to corruption, Thou art my father; to the worm, thou art my
mother, and my sister, Job, 17. 1, 14.

Her second reason is contained, verse. 7. and it is taken from the
peremptorinesse of her love; for, her love is such as it will have love from
Christ again, or no other thing will satisfy it. This is two ways illustrat,
1. From it is invinciblenesse, which appears in this, no opposition can
extinguish it, many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it:
Waters will quench fire, but nothing will quench this love. By waters in
Scripture, often (as Psa. 42. 7. and 93. 4. and frequently) are understood
afflictions, crosses, and even spiritual desertions, Psa. 42. 7. all thy waves
and billows have gone over me, Psa. 109. 1, 2. And so here it says, Love to
Christ is of that nature, and is so strongly fixed on him, that no cross or
rod, nay not the blackest dispensations and desertions can make it alter; but
it will stick to him through and over all, as, Romans 8. 35. neither famine,
sword, pestilence, etc. can do it, but it triumphs over all, though floods of
trial and opposition were let out upon it. The second way how the
peremptorinesse of love is illustrat and proven, is, that it rejects all
offers, that may be made to it by any other that would have Christ's room:
There are two sorts of trials, that ordinarily carry souls away from Christ,
The first is on the left hand, from crosses; and when these will not do it, but
the thorny ground will abide the heat of the Sun; yet, the second sort of
trials, to wit, the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches, which
are tentations on the right hand, may choke the word, and carry the soul away:
But (says she) true love to Christ, will be prevailed over by neither, it will
tryst and capitulat with other lovers upon no terms; nay, though a man would
give it all the substance of his house; that is, all that can be given, though
he would leave nothing behind, but give it all to one that loves Christ, for
love, that is, to purchase and buy away the souls love from Christ, that it may
be given to some other thing that comes in competition with him, so to bud and
bribe the souls love from Christ, that it may settle on some other thing that
is offered in his place: What entertainment would be given to such offers and
treaties? True love (says she) in so far as it is true, and lively in exercise
(otherwise where something of true love is, the soul may often be ensnared)
would utterly contemn it, or as it is in the first Language, contemning it
should be contemned; that is, not only would all such alluring offers be
rejected, but with a holy disdain and indignation, they would be despised,
abhorred and abominated, as unsuitable once to be mentioned: So that true love
to Christ, will not once enter to capitulat, what to have in Christ's room; but
all possible overtures, which may be made by the flesh and the world to divert
it, will be abhorred and loathed utterly, and accounted as loss and dung,
Philip. 3. 8. And therefore, the reason concludes, at thy heart I must be, for
my love will neither be boasted from thee, nor bribed or allured to be
satisfied with any other thing in thy room; but thee I must have upon any
terms, and must not be refused of this my suit, of being set as a Seal upon
thine heart: And this sort of peremptorinesse from love, will not be accounted
presumption by Christ, nor is any-wayes displeasing, but most acceptable to
him. Obs. 1. Where true love to Christ is, there will be many essays to cool
it, or to divert it, and draw it away from him: It Is no easy thing to get love
to Christ kept warm; for, the devil and the world, will especially aim at the
throwing down of this hold and bul-wark, that maintains Christ's interest in
the soul. 2. The devil has several kinds of tentations, which do all drive
especially at this, to cool the believers affections in the love of Christ: and
these tentations may be contrary, some of them mustering the difficulties that
follow these that love him, and such as the tempted seekers of Christ may be
oftentimes exercised with; for, they often meet with reproaches, or other
afflictions in the world: Others of them again, alluring the heart to embrace
some other thing in Christ's room, and making fair offers of advantages to
these that will take the way of the world in following of them. 3. The lovers
of Christ may be assaulted by both these extrems successively, and when
tentations from the one hand fail, then tentations from the other begin, so
that the believer would constantly be on his guard. 4. The tentations that come
from the right hand, and entice the soul with the offers of worldly pleasure,
honor, riches, etc. are more strong and subtle than the other, and more
frequently do prevail, yea sometimes when the other may be rejected; Therefore,
this is mentioned after the other, as being that wherewith the soul is
assaulted, when the first cannot prevail, and so the devil leaves this till the
last; when he was permitted to tempt Christ, having tried him with several
tentations, at last he makes offer of the world to him, Mat. 4. 9. 5. Tentation
will sometimes make great offers, as if nothing more could be offered, even all
the substance of the house; and still it offers more than it can perform, when
it is in it is offers most specious: The devil at once offered all the world to
Christ, Matthew. 4. 9. though he had not power of himself to dispose of one of
the Gadarens swine. 6. The great scope of the worlds courting a man with it is
offers, is to gain his love from Christ; This they had need to look well to, on
whom the world smiles most, for then the tentation to this ill is strongest. 7.
It Is a proof of true love to Christ, when it can endure and hold out against
tentations upon all hands, and that when they are most speciously adorned. 8.
Where love is true, although it may be sometimes (as it were) violented, or the
soul in which it is circumveen'd and beguiled by tentations (as the experiences
of Saints do clear) yet when it is at it self, or in good case, it will not
deliberatly capitulat to admit any thing in Christ's room, but will reserve it
self wholly for him: where love ceds, and yields finally, it is a sign that it
was never true. 9. Tentations though most pleasant, yet tending to divert the
love of the soul from Christ, should be with indignation, at their first moving
and appearing, rejected. 10. Love will not only refuse a consent to some
tentations, but will have a great abhorrency at the moving of them; whereas
others, though they may, as to the external actings, resist these tentations,
yet their wanting of this indignation, bewrayes their want of love. 11. As it is
good to be acted in doing of duty, from a principle and motive of love; so is
it good and commendable, to reject tentations upon that same account.

Verse. 8. We have a little sister, and she has no breasts: what shall we do for
our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?
The Brides third petition, for these that are not yet brought in to Christ,
follows in this eighth verse: Her love is strong in pressing for the
enjoyment of Christ, and seeing it has two arms, as it reaches out the one to
embrace Christ, so it reaches out the other to bring others in to him: Love is
very desirous to have others enjoying him with it self: And by this arm of
love, the Bride is pulling in these that are yet strangers, that they may be
engaged to love Christ; and she forgets them not, even when she is most serious
for her self; this being an undoubted truth, that when ever our love is most
fervent after Christ for our selves, it will also be most sensible and
sympathizing, in respect of the condition of others; when love is hot and
fervent the one way, so will it be the other way also, and when it cools to the
one, it also decays in respect of the other. We may take up this verse in these
three, 1. She remembers and propounds her little sisters case to Christ. 2.
There is her suit, in reference thereunto. 3. This suit is qualified, in the
last part of the verse. First, her little sisters case is proposed in these
words, We have a little sister, that has no breasts: Here much love and
sympathy appears in these three things, 1. That she is called a sister, 2. our
sister, 3. ^ little sister, and without breasts, which do express much
tenderness of affection and sympathy. By sister, is sometimes understood, more
strictly, such as are renewed converts to the says, whether in profession
only, or really, 1 Cor. 7. 15. but that is not the meaning here; for, the
sister here mentioned has no breasts, and is not yet spoken for. Again, sister
may be more largely taken, for one, or all of these three, 1. For all men, as
partaking of one common nature. 2. For men of one stock and nation, so Samaria
was sister to Jerusalem, etc. Ezekiel. 16. 46. 3. For the Elect who are yet
unconverted, who are sisters in respect of God's purpose, as they are Christ's
sheep, Joh. 10. 16. and sons of God, Joh. 11. 52. even before their conversion;
for which cause, the sister here spoken of, is said to have no breasts, as not
being yet changed from her natural condition; and so we take this especially to
look to the unrenewed Elect, not secluding the former two. The sense then is,
There are yet many who have interest in, and many that belong to, thy election,
yet (...). Now, it is their in-bringing, and the making of them ready to be
Christ's Spouse and Bride, that she breaths after, and prays for. Next, it is
said, We have a sister, and so she is called our sister, that is, thine and
mine, Christ's sister, because of his purposed respect to her; the believers
sister, not only because of their native and kindly sympathy, but also because
of the common adoption, to which they are designed. She is called a little
sister, and that has no breasts, 1. To show the sad condition that the
unconverted elect are in, like little young children that are unfit to do any
thing for themselves, and altogether unmeet for the duties of marriage, as
these at age, who have breasts, are: Thus, Ezekiel. 16. 7. the wretched condition
of that people, before they were taken in to God's Covenant, is set out by
this, that their breasts were not formed; and the good condition that followed
their being in Covenant is expressed thus, that their breasts were fashioned.
This then is the scope here, to show that this little sister was yet in nature,
unmarried to Christ, yea, (as to many of the unconverted elect) not spoken for,
or called. 2. She is called little, to express the Brides pity and sympathy,
as one would say of a young one, that cannot do any thing for her self, what
will become of her? she is a little one.

2. The suit is, What shall we do for our sister? This is a petition, that
seems to have more affection than distinctnesse in it: It Is proposed by way of
question, the better to express her sympathy; where she disputes not, but
again asserts his relation to her, and puts no question but he will be tender
of her; and withal acknowledges that there is a duty lying on her self, in
order to the case of her little sister, but would be informed and taught by him
in the right discharge of it: and so this question supposes necessity and
wretchedness in this sister, affection and duty in her self, but unclearnesse
how to discharge it. Now the way she takes to be helped in it, is the putting
up this petition to Christ, What shall we do? says she; Not as if Christ knew
not what he would do, but it shows her affection to this sister, and her
familiarity with him, and also that she will not separat his doing from hers
but looks upon it as her duty to co-operat with him, in bringing about the
conversion of their little sister.

The qualification of her suit is, What shall we do for her, in the day that
she shall be spoken for? This phrase, to speak for her, is in allusion to the
communing that is used for the attaining women in marriage: We find the same
phrase in the Original, 1 Samuel 25. 39. David sent messengers to commune with
Abigail, that he might take her to wife: Now (says she) our little sister is
not ready, nor spoken for, but when she shall be suited or communed with, what
shall we do then? This communing, is the Lord's dealing by his Ministers in the
Gospel with people to marry and espouse his Son Christ Jesus, so it is often
called, Matthew. 22. 3. He sent forth his servants, to call them that were bidden
to the wedding: The Ministers of the Gospel are his Ambassadors, to tryst this
match, and to close it, 2 Cor. 5. 19. and 11. 2. The day when they shall be
spoken for, is either whilst the means are amongst people, and so that is the
acceptable time, 2 Cor. 6. 2. or more especially, when the means have any force
on them, and God seems in a more than ordinary way to treat with them, then
it is the day of their visitation, as it was in the days of Christ's Ministry,
though that people were treated with before. In sum, the meaning of the verse.
is this, There are many who in thy purpose are designed to be heirs of life,
who yet are strangers, and not suited or engaged; now when the Gospel comes
amongst such, or, by stirring them now and then, puts them in some capacity to
be dealt with, what shall we do for them, to help on the bargain, that the
marriage be not given up, when it has come to a treaty, and thou have by the
Gospel bespoken them, and propounded it? It may look to sister-Churches, and no
question the believing Jews, who understood the Prophesies of the Gentiles
conversion, did then long for their in-gathering, and the in-Churching of them
(for we were then to them a little sister without breasts) yet we cannot astrict
it to that, but now, and to the worlds end, it speaks out the believers desire
of the perfecting of the Saints, and the building up of Christ's body, as well
as it spoke out their desire after this then: And by the same sympathy, the
converted Gentiles long, and should long for the in-bringing of the elder
sister, the Jews, who now have no breasts, and also of the fullness of the
Gentiles, who are as yet unconverted; And according to the strain of the Song,
it takes in the believers respect to the conversion of other Church Members,
who being indeed not converted, and not effectually called, they are without
breasts, and so to be helped forward in the time when God is bespeaking them,
and trysting with them.

Obs. 1. There may be relations betwixt one in grace, and these who are yet in
nature, which grace does not dissolve, but sanctify; the little sister is a
sister, though unrenewed, and the Brides desire is to have her gained. 2. There
is a jointness, and community of relations betwixt Christ and the believer,
they have common friends and interests, and as it is betwixt husband and wife,
the sister of the one is the sister of the other. 3. Before men be by faith
married to Christ, even the Elect in that estate are lying in a most miserable,
wretched condition, as we may see, Ezekiel. 16. 3. They are loathsome before God,
and indisposed and unfit for being fruitful to Christ in any duty, as a little
damosel without breasts is unfit for marriage. 4. The converted Elect should be
tenderly affected with the sad condition of the unconverted, especially of
these that are in any relation to them, and to whom God has respect in his
secret purpose, though definitly they be not known unto them: And this tender
affection ought to appear, in sympathizing with them, pitying of them, holding
up of their condition to God, and praying for them, as the Bride does for the
little sister: And when the case of believers is right, they will be making
conscience of longing, and praying for the gathering in of all the Elect, that
Christ's work may be throughed and perfected, and that his Kingdom may come in
the earth. 5. It Is a most difficult business, how to get the conversion of
sinners promoved, and Christ's Kingdom advanced; Believers will be nonplussed
in it, as being put to say, What shall we do? 6. The Lord has a way of
espousing, and marrying to Christ Jesus, even such as are by nature most sinful
and loathsome; It Is such that he futes, wooes and speaks for, that they may be
married to him. 7. Christ's great design in the Gospel, by sending Ministers
from the beginning, was, and is to espouse a bride to himself, and to make up a
spiritual marriage betwixt him and such as by nature were lying in their blood.
8. He has a special time of carrying on this treaty of marriage, a day before
which he treats not, and after which, there is no opportunity of a treaty of
grace; It Is the day of sinners merciful visitation, and an acceptable time for
a people. 9. In this treaty, by the Ministry of his Ordinances, the Lord will
sometimes more effectually drive the design of the Gospel, namely the matching
of sinners to Christ, than at other times, and will bespeak them more plainly
and convincingly, as he does, Chap. 5. 2. 10. When the Lord presses closing
and matching with Christ home upon sinners, there is great hazard lest it
miscarry, and be given over unconcluded, through their own default. 11. It Is a
main and special season for believers to step in, to further the engaging of
others to Christ, when the Lord is putting home upon them the suit and offers
of the Gospel, and when they are put to some stir, and made something serious
and peremptory about it. 12. It Is a great happiness to be spoken for to
Christ, every one is not admitted to that privilege; and it is our great
concernment, to see how we make use of that our day, when he treats with us.
13. There is nothing wherein a belivers love to his friends, or to any others,
will appear more, than in endeavoring their conversion, and in longing to have
them engaged to Christ. 14. As God's call in the Gospel, is a wooing, or
bespeaking for marriage betwixt Christ and sinners, so believers believing, is
their consenting to accept of Christ for their husband, according to the terms
of the contract proposed; and this closes the bargain, and makes the marriage;
for, then the proposed offer of matching with Christ is accepted of.

BRIDEGROOM.
Verse. 9. If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if
she be a door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.
This verse contains the Bridegroom's answer unto the Brides last petition: Our
Lord loves to have his people praying for others, as for themselves, and
therefore, he so accepts this petition for the little sister, that instantly he
returns an answer thereunto, by a gracious promise; in which we are to consider
these four things, 1. The party to whom the promise is made. 2. The promiser.
3. The promise it self. 4. The condition that it is made upon. First, the party
to whom this promise is made, is employed in the words, she, and her, that is,
the little sister yet unconverted, who is mentioned in the former verse. 2. The
promiser is, we, that is, the Bridegroom and the Bride, to whom this sister
stands in relation, verse. 8. Or rather, we, the Father, Son and Spirit (as we
took the like expression, Chap. 1. 11.) for, this work which is undertaken and
engaged for in the promise, does belong especially to them. 3. The promise is
in two expressions (as is also the condition) 1. We will build upon her a
palace of silver: A palace (if the word be so rendered) is a place for dwelling
in; and here it signifies the adorning of her to be a mansion for his Spirit,
and wherein himself will dwell, which is a privilege that the believer in him
is admitted unto, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. and 6. 19. and this is more than to be a
wall, which is an house, but not so completed and adorned. He is no common
Guest that is to dwell there, therefore it is no common palace, but of silver,
both precious, and also durable, and stately for it is matter, which he must
have to dwell in: We will make her such, says he. The condition proposed in
this part of the promise, is, If she be a wall: A wall is different from
stones, considered in themselves, and supposes them to be built on a
foundation: Now Jesus Christ being the only foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 10. upon
which the believer, who is the spiritual Temple, is built. This to be a wall
suppones her to be by faith united to him, whereby she becomes fixed and
settled as a wall, who before was unstable: And so the sense runs thus, If she,
the little sister, when she shall be spoken for by the Gospel, shall receive
the word, and by faith close with Christ, then (says he) we will thoroughly
adorn her, as a mansion fit to be dwelt in, and we will make our abode with
her, Ioh. 14. 23. If we render the word, towers, We will build on her towers of
silver, it comes to the same scope; Walls are for defense, and they are
defective till towers be built on them: And so the promise is to strengthen and
adorn her more, if Christ be received by her. The second part of the promise,
is, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar: Cedar was a precious wood, and
durable (as has been often said) And to be enclosed with it, signifies the
adorning of her, and strengthening of her more. The condition annexed to this
part of the promise, is, If she be a door: Doors makes way for entry, and are
the weakest part of the wall: The opening of the heart to receive Christ, is
compared to the opening of a door, Psa. 24. 7. and Chap. 5. 4. here he says,
although she be weak (possibly like a door of ^ir) yet if she be a door, and
give entrance to Christ (for, all, without says, are as houses without doors
to Christ, that cannot receive him) we will not only adorn her, but also fix
and strengthen her more. From all which it appears, that these two things are
clearly to be found in the scope, 1. That there is an access, and addition of
beauty and strength promised to the little sister, even so much as may fully
perfect her beginnings, and carry them on unto perfection; as a palace, or
towers of silver, are beyond a wall; and boards of Cedar, beyond an ordinary
door. 2. That these things promised, are here made to hang upon the condition
of her receiving Christ, and being by faith united unto him, and built on him.
That this is the meaning of the supposed condition, is clear, 1. From the
promise that is annexed to it, faith in Christ is the condition, upon which all
the promises of increase of grace, and establishment, do hang; and the thing
promised her can be no other thing: therefore, the condition must be her union
with him by faith. 2. It agrees with Scripture, to expound her being a wall, to
signify her union with Christ; for, Christ being the foundation, and believers
being the wall, there must be supposed an union betwixt them, otherwise these
names could not denote that relation which is betwixt Christ and the believers,
even such as is betwixt the wall and the foundation: Now this union, by which
believers are built on him, is made up by coming to him, which is believing, 1
Pet. 2. 4, 5. To whom coming as unto a living stone (or foundation) ye also as
lively stones, are built up a spiritual house: Their coming to him builds them
upon him, as the foundation: And, Ephesians. 2. these that are by nature aliens to
the Commonwealth of Israel (as the little sister is here, while she has no
breasts) are by their believing on Christ, said to be of the household of faith,
and to be built on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles doctrine,
whereof Christ is the chief cornerstone, verse. 19, 20. etc. 3. It Is clear by
the opposition employed; for, to be a wall supposes her to be that which she is
not now, when she has no breasts; and what that is, is clear from the next
verse, where the Bride says, I am a wall, and my breasts like towers, and so I
have found favor in his eyes: Therefore, to be a wall, is to be a believer,
whatever it includes more; for, none is a wall but the Bride, and who find
favor in his eyes, as her argument will conclude; and therefore, to be a wall,
must include faith. So then, the meaning of the words comes to this, I tell
thee (says he) what we will do with our little sister, when she shall be
spoken for, if she by faith come to Christ, and be built to him, we will
perfect that work, for her eternal communion with him; yea, though she be weak
and unstable, yet if she yield to Christ, we shall make her grace to grow, till
she be stable and firm, even as thou by becoming a wall, has thy breasts made
as towers, and has found favor to be friendly dealt with, so shall she, and
upon the same terms.

Obs. 1. That receiving of Christ by says, puts them that have been strangers
to him in that same capacity, for acceptance and communion with Christ, that
his Bride has, or that these who were formerly believers have by their union
with him. 2. All that are bespoken by the Gospel, have not interest in the
things promised, nor can they apply them, till by faith they be united to
Christ, and fulfill the condition to which the promise is annexed, and that is
says. 3. One may really close with Christ, and so be a wall, and yet have many
things to be perfected: Grace is not perfect at the beginning, but that wall
has a palace or tower to be built upon it. 4. The believers growing in grace,
even after his union with Christ, is a great mercy, and is as such promised
here. 5. Growth and increase in grace after conversion, is no less a work of
Christ's, and a gift of Gods, than conversion it self. 6. Christ has given a
promise to the believer, for furthering and perfecting of his sanctification,
as well as of his justification. 7. Where there is any honest beginning or
foundation laid by real union with Christ, although it be weak, yet it will be
perfected, and that may be expected; for, Christ's word, is here engaged for
it. 8. There are none of the promised blessings that can be expected from
Christ, without performing of the condition of believing in him, and they who
rest on him by faith may expect all.

BRIDE.
Verse. 10. I am a wall, and my breasts like towers: then was I in his eyes as
one that found favor.
In this tenth verse, and the two verses that follow, the Bride comes-in
speaking and accepting the Bridegrooms gracious answer and promise: And first,
she does confirm the truth of it from her own experience, verse. 10. and then,
she does more fully clear and strengthen her experience, by laying down the
grounds from which she draws that comfortable conclusion ( of finding favor
in his eyes) in reference unto her self, verse. 11, 12.

First then, in the tenth verse, the Bride brings forth her experience, for
confirmation of the truth of what the Bridegroom had spoken: That they are the
Brides words, we conceive is clear; for, this I, is she that put up the suit
for the little sister, and by her description is opposed to her, as being a
wall, and having breasts as towers, which she, the little sister had not; and
there is none other that has found favor in Christ's eyes but she. What the
scope is, shall be cleared when we have opened the words; which have three
things in them, 1. A short description of her own good condition. 2. An
excellent advantage that followed thereupon. 3. The connection of these two.
First, her condition is set forth in two expressions, 1. I am a wall: That is,
what the little sister was not, and what the condition, proposed by the
Bridegroom in the former verse, required: In a word, that condition is
fulfilled in me (says she) by faith I am built on Christ, and like a wall
stand stable on the foundation. The second expression, setting forth her
condition, is, and my breasts like towers: This supposes a growth, and further
degree of her faith and other graces, as having not only breasts, which the
little sister had not, verse. 8. but breasts like towers, i.e. well fashioned,
Ezekiel. 16. 7. and come to some perfection; and so she is a wall with towers.

Next, the privilege, or advantage which accompanies this her good condition,
is held out in these words, I was in his eyes as one that found favor, or
peace: To find favor in his eyes, is to be kindly and affectionatly dealt
with, and to have that manifested by some suitable evidence: So it is said,
Esther found favor in the eyes of the King, and he held out the golden Scepter
to her, Esth. 5. 2. The thing that Moses pitcheth on, as the evidence that he
and the people found favor in Gods eyes ( Exodus 33. 16, 17.) is, that his
presence might go with them, whereby (says he) should it be known that we have
found grace in thy sight, is it not in that thou go with us? So then, to
find favor in his eyes, is to have his presence in a gracious manner
manifested to his people, as, Ioh. 14. 23. And in sum, this expression implies
these three, 1. Love in Christ's bosom to her. 2. His manifesting of this by
his complacency in her, or his making the delight which he had in her, manifest
in the effects of it on her. 3. Her being comforted and delighted in the favor
that she found from him.

3. The connection of this comfortable attainment, with her gracious state, is
employed in the word then, Then was I, etc. That is, when I was a wall, and by
faith rested on him, I found this favor, and not before: It holds out no
causality betwixt the one and the other, but a peremptory connection of order
and time; for, though Gods love of benevolence, whereby he purposes good to us
(such as was his love to Jacob, before he had done good or evil, Romans 9. 13.)
and also his love of beneficence, whereby he actively confers, and brings about
our conversion and regeneration, go before our believing in him, and our love
to him, and is the cause of our loving of him (who love him because he first
loved us) yet his love of complacency, whereby he shows himself delighted with
the graces, which by his love he has bestowed on us, does follow, in order of
nature, upon our faith in him, and love to him: So, Ioh. 14. 21, 23. He that
loves me shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and what is meant
by this love, the words following clear, I will manifest my self to him, and
so, verse. 23. having said, my father will love him, it is added, we will come
and make our abode with him. This then is the sum of this verse, I am by faith
founded on him, and united to him, and so am a wall, and have breasts, who by
nature once was not a wall, and had no breasts, by which union my breasts
becoming as towers, I did find favor from him, and had his presence friendly
manifested to me. The scope, as appears from the coherence of this verse with
the former, is to make good from her experience the truth and certainty of the
promises, which he had made for the encouragement of the little sister, and for
comforting of her self, who had been seriously pleading with him on her behalf:
Thus, these promises are faithful, says she; for, in my comfortable experience
I have found it so, I was once without the evidence of his love, as now others
are; but being by faith engaged to him, I have found favor of him, so as
others may be assured of obtaining the like, and on the same terms, if when he
is bespeaking them by the Gospel, they will close with Christ, and by faith
unite with him.

Obs. 1. There are great, real, and discriminating differences betwixt one in
nature, and one that is in Christ; The one is not a wall, and has no breasts,
the other is a wall, and has breasts, which shew^ a great odds. 2. Believers
may come to know that marches are cleared betwixt their estate and condition,
now while they are in Christ, and their estate and condition as it was before:
Or, believers should set themselves to know, whether marches be cleared or not,
or if they may say that of themselves, which cannot be said of others that are
not in Christ. 3. It Is no little advancement, to be able upon good grounds to
assert our union with Christ, to say that I am a wall, etc. each one cannot do
it. 4. Although none ought to be proud of their seize, yet may believers
humbly (where there is good ground) acknowledge the reality of grace in them,
5. Although the Lord loves the Elect, and the believer always, yet there are
special times or occasions upon which, or ways by which, he manifests his love
to them. 6. The believer has Christ's ^avour otherwise let forth and
manifested to him, than it was before his conversion, although this love, as
it is in God himself, be ever the same. 7. It Is a singularly refreshful thing to
find favor in Christ's eyes, and to have that love of his sensibly manifested,
and clearly made out unto us. 8. There is an inseparable and peremptory
connection betwixt holiness in a believers walk, and Christ's manifesting of
his favor thus unto them. 9. These that have felt by experience, the
fulfilling of Christ's promises, are both more clear in the meaning of them,
and more through in the faith of them: Experience is both a good commentary
upon, and proof of, the promises of Christ, which the Bride makes use of here.
10. The experience of one believer in the way of grace, which is founded upon
the essentials of the Covenant, and is agreeable to it, may be an encouragement
to strengthen others, in expectation of the accomplishment of the same thing,
when the same way is taken in sueing for it. 11. Believers that are more versed
in, and acquainted with experiences than others, should fitly and conveniently
bring them out, and communicate them for the benefit of others, who yet have not
attained that length. 12. It Is the duty of hearers, when they hear
Gospel Truths and offers (such as were held forth in the ninth verse) to
reflect on themselves, and try if their experience suit with them, if they have
such conditions in themselves, and have felt the fulfilling of such promises in
their own particular experience: And it is comfortable, when their experiences
and the promises agree so together, that when he says, If she be a wall, we
will build on her; or, who loves me, I will manifest my self to him, they may
groundedly answer, and say,. I am a wall, and so have found favor in his eyes;
I love him, and so he has manifested himself to me.

Verse. 11. Solomon had a Vineyard at Baalhammon, he let out the Vineyard unto
keepers: every one for the fruit thereof, was to bring a thousand pieces of
silver.
Verse. 12. My Vineyard which is mine, is before me: thou (O Solomon) must have
a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred.
It is a great assertion which the Bride laid down, verse. 10, that she was a
wall, and had found favor in his eyes, and it being of high concernment, if
well grounded; therefore, to make out the warrantablenesse thereof, she
proceeds to demonstrat it, verse. 11, 12. thereby to give believers
advertisement, that they should be well seen in the grounds of their own peace,
and to show the solid way how the well groundednesse thereof may be found out:
And because, the conclusions, asserting our union with Christ and interest in
him, follow on premises, whose major proposition is in the word, and whose
assumption is to be searched, and confirmed from the conscience, speaking from
inward experience and feeling, she does formally proceed, First, by laying down
a sum of the Gospel, in a complex general doctrine, verse. 11. to this purpose,
Christ had a Church, which he took pains on, for this end, that it might be
fruitful, and that in such a measure. Then in the twelfth verse, she compares
her practice with that rule, and finds it suitable, therefore the conclusion
follows. We may take it up thus in form, They who improve the trust well that
is put upon them, to bring forth such fruits as Christ calls for in his.
Covenant, may conclude that they are a wall, and have found favor in his
sight: This truth is confirmed in the eleventh verse, because it is for that
very end, and on these very terms, that Christ has appointed the Ordinances in
his house, and made the promises to his people, that they should bring forth a
thousand for the fruit thereof to him, and he will not reject a consequence
drawn from that which he himself has appointed in his Covenant; for, such
grounds, as the Word and Covenant confirm, are only sure to reason from. Then
she assumes, verse. 12. but I have been sincere in that trust which was
committed unto me, conform to the terms of the Covenant, and have a thousand
(according thereto) to give to Christ, Therefore, etc. And because this has
need to be well grounded also, she proves it, partly, by instancing the fruits
that belonged to him and to the keepers, which she had brought forth, to show
that his Ordinances were not in vain to her; and partly, by attesting himself
immediately, in these words, Thou, O Solomon, speaking to him in the second
person, thereby to evidence her sincerity before him, who alone could bear
witness thereof, and that it was not mere external performances (which as
such, are manifest to others) upon which she grounds what she asserts in the
assumption. This is the native series and scope of the words, whereby they
depend on the former, and by which, now before death, leaving this way of
communion with Christ, which she enjoyed here-away mediatly in Ordinances, and
before that eternal and immediate way beyond death (which is prayed for, verse.
14.) she does collect her interest, and confirm her assurance: The particular
exposition of the words will clear it more. From the scope, Obs. 1. That
through persuasion of interest in Christ had need to be solidly grounded, and
believers would be distinct in the grounds thereof, and not go beguesse with
their confidence. 2. The nearer that people come to dying, they would be the
more accurat in this search, and have the evidences of their interest in Christ
the more clear. 3. We may gather from her example, that the solid and only way
to be thoroughly cleared of our title to Christ, is when the grounds thereof are
comprehended in the Lords Covenant; as he that believes, repents, has the
fruits of the Spirit, etc. he is justified, sanctified, etc. And when the
assumption, bearing the application of these grounds to our selves, will abide
the trial in Christ's sight, and may be instanced before him in the effects
thereof, thus, but it is so with me, Therefore, etc. This is her way of
concluding.

We come now to expound the words more particularly: And first, we conceive it
is out of doubt, that they are mystically and spiritually to be understood,
That is, by Solomon, Christ is meant, and by the Vineyard, the Church, etc.
for, so the strain and nature of the Allegory throughout this Song, and the
manner of speaking all along does require; And there being but one Solomon that
is spoken of in this Song, his having of a Vineyard must be understood as his
making of a Chariot, Chap. 3. 9, 10. which being paved with love, could not be
a piece of work framed by David's son: We are not therefore, curiously to
enquire here, what place this is, called Baal-hammon: Or, whether Solomon had
such vineyards or not, let out at such a rent? these things make not to the
scope.

Again, that they are the Brides words, is clear not only from the scope and
matter thereof, but also from these things, 1. She not only speaks of Christ
(by the name of Solomon) in the third person, verse. 11. but to him, Thou, O
Solomon, etc. in the second person, verse. 12. It cannot therefore be the
Bridegroom that here speaks, but the Bride, as personating a believer. 2. She
is differenced from strangers and hypocrites, in this, that she has fruit to
give him, and has that proposed to her self for her end: and she is
differenced from the keepers of the vineyard, the Ministers, verse. 12. they get
from her two hundred; It must therefore be the Bride, as personating a
believer, who was speaking in the former verse, and continues here in
speaking. 3. The expressions, verse. 12. where she applies to her self what she
had in the general asserted, verse. 11. agree well to her, as the opening of
them will clear.

The words do contain the proof of a believers sincerity and reality in the
Covenant of God, made out by two things put together, 1. By laying down
distinctly the nature and terms of the Covenant, verse. 11. 2. By comparing her
self exactly and impartially therewith, verse. 12. The general doctrine of the
Covenant, verse. 11. runs on three heads; The first looks to the sum and end of
all, that Christ had a Church or Vineyard, committed or given him. The second
looks to Christ's administration in his Church, by external Ordinances, he let
it out to keepers. The third holds forth the ends of his letting out this
Vineyard, or the terms upon which it is lea^ed, Every one was to bring for the
fruit thereof, a thousand pieces of silver.

For explaining of the first, we are first to remember, that by Solomon, we are
to understand Christ; for, as ever hitherto, so here, the Allegory is
continued, to express and set forth Christ in his way with his Church, under
that name. Next, the Vineyard here is (...) Church, Isa. 5. 7. etc the visible
Church in some respect is his Vineyard, as she is separat from others, and
appointed to bring forth ^ruits to him; but especially the Church invisible and
elect, who in a peculiar respect are Christ's as given to him and purchased by
him, and so frequently in this Song, the believer is called a garden or
vineyard. 3. The place where this vineyard is planted, is called Baal-hammon;
which is the name of no proper place any where mentioned in Scripture, but is
borrowed for it is signification, and it signifies father of a multitude, and
so it points out that Christ's vineyard is planted in a foil that is fruitful,
and bringing forth much; and it is on the matter the same with that, Isa. 5. 1.
my beloved had a vineyard in a fruitful hill, or, horn of oil, as the word
there in the Hebrew signifies, to show that it was well situate in a good
soil, and did lie well, and was by his industry well fitted for bringing forth
of fruit. Now, Christ is said, and that in the preterit time, to have had this
vineyard, which shows his interest and propriety therein, and title thereto,
and that by an eternal right, and a far other kind of title than he has to the
rest of the world beside: Now this right of Christ's (in respect of which it is
said he had this vineyard) is not to be understood with relation to his
essential dominion and sovereignty, whereby with the Father and holy Ghost, he
created all things, and so as Creator, has a conjunct interest in them; but
this looks to that peculiar title, which Christ has to the Church of the
Elect, especially as Mediator, by the Lords giving of such and such particular
persons to him to be saved, Ioh. 6. 38. 39. etc. for, he has this Vineyard as
distinct from the world, and claims title to the given ones, when he disclaims
the world, John, 17: 6, 8. They are mine (says he) because thou gave them to
me: yet, in so far as the visible Church is separated to him by external
Ordinances (and so all Israel are said to be elected, Deuteronomy. 6.) they may be
said to be Christ's; but it is these who are by Gods election separated from
others, given to Christ, and undertaken for by him, in the Covenant of
Redemption, that especially are intended here: And it is necessary to advert,
that there are four diverse parties, to which the Church in diverse respects is
said to belong, 1. She is the Lords, the Father, Son, and Spirit, his by
eternal Election; This is the first right, Ioh. 17. 6. Thine they were, to wit,
by thy eternal purpose: And from this flows the second, to wit, the Mediators
right, and thou gave them me; The Father is the owner and proprieter of the
Vineyard, Matthew. 21. 40. called, Ioh. 15. 1. the husband man; for, the Church
is first his, and next Christ's, who as Mediator is the great Deputy, and
universal Administrator of grace, to whom the Elect are given as to the great
Bishop and Shepherd, and to whom all the ordering of what concerns their good
is committed: This right is by donation, and differs from the former. 3. The
Vineyard is said to be the Brides, verse. 12. and Chap. 1. 6. in respect of the
believers particular trust, with oversight of, and interest in, these things
that Christ has purchased for them, and bestowed on them, which they are to
improve and trade with; In which respect, Mat. 25. and Luke 19. the talent is
said to be not only the masters, but also the servants, because the right
improving of it, brings advantage unto the servant more properly than to the
master: and each believer in some kind has a Vineyard, because each of them
shares of all the graces, privileges, benefits, etc. that are saving. 4. The
Vineyard is also the Ministers, they have a title as underkeepers, overseers
and dressers, therefore it is said to be let out to them by Christ; they are as
farmers: Hence, when Christ, Rev. 2. 5. writs to the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, speaking to the Angel, he calls the Church, thy Candlestick, and Chap.
2. 15. while the vines are called our vines, the Ministers interest is asserted
as well as Christ's; so all these interests mentioned in these two verses are
well consistent. Obs. 1. That our Lord Jesus has some who beyond all others
are his, by peculiar right and title; and he had this title to them before ever
actually there was a Church, this Vineyard did belong to him otherwise than
others in the world, even before it was, which could not be but the Fathers
giving the Elect to him. 2. Christ has a notable right to, and propriety in,
these Elect who are given to him, so that the Vineyard is his, and it cannot be
that one of these perish, without the imparing and prejudice of the propriety
of our Lord Jesus. 3. There is an old transaction, concerning the salvation of
the Elect betwixt the Father and the Son, which can be no other thing but the
Covenant of Redemption; for, the Son's having an interest in some and not in
others, supposes that some were given to him and accepted by him, as that
word, Ioh. 17. 6. bears out. Thine they were, and thou gave them to me, and
so they are mine. 4. Christ's Church or Vineyard, has the only choice soil in
all the world to live into, it is Baal-hammon where they are planted, though
often their outward lot be not desirable, yet their lines have fallen in
pleasant places.

The second part concerns Christ's managing of his Church, when he has gotten
it; He does not immediately dress it by himself, but he lets it out to keepers,
as a man having purchased a field, or planted a Vineyard, does set it, or farm
it for such a rent; So has Christ thought good to commit his Church to
keepers, that is, to watchmen and farmers, that by their Ministry, he might in
a mediate way promove their edification and salvation, which he accounts his
rent: The very same parable, almost in the same words, pressing this scope, is
recorded, Matthew. 21. 33. A certain householder planted a Vineyard, and let it
out unto husband men, and sent servants to gather the fruit; The husband men
are the ordinary Office-bearers in the Church (the Scribs and Pharisees did
fill that room for the time) the servants are extraordinary Prophets raised up
of God, to put them to their duty; so here the keepers are the Ministers, who
are entrusted with the Churches edification under Christ, as Stewards are with
distributing provision to the Family, or shepherds with feeding their flocks,
or a farmer with the laboring of his farm that he possesses: And this name of
keepers given here to Ministers, agrees well with the names that Ministers
have in Scripture, watchmen, overseers, stewards, builders, husbandmen, etc.
and also with the nature of that office, which, 1 Cor. 3. is to plant and water
this Vineyard: And lastly, with the scope of this and the like parables,
whereby Christ's mediat way of building up of his Church, by the intervention
of Ordinances and Ministers, is expressed. Particular Professors are as Vines,
the Ordinances like the press that presses the grapes, the Ministers like the
dressers that dig, dung, prune and water the trees, and put the grapes in the
press, and gather the fruits, by applying of these Ordinances convincingly to
the consciences of hearers. Next, his setting of this Vineyard, or Church to
the keepers, is borrowed from a proprieter, his farming of his heritage, and
giving of a lease, or tack under him, to some other, both for the better
laboring of his land, and for the furthering of his rent; and this is opposed
to his immediate laboring of it himself: So here, as Christ is the proprieter
(whose own the Vineyard is) Ministers are the farmers: Which implies, 1. that
the Minister has a title and interest in the Church of Christ, which no other
has, he is a farmer and keeper of it. 2. It supposes, that it is but a
subordinat title the Minister has, he is not as a Lord of Christ's Vineyard,
or master of the faith of God's people, but as a farmer or subordinat overseer,
he is to be a helper of their joy. In sum, the sense comes to this, That this
trust that was put on Christ of governing his Church, he thought meet not to
discharge it all immediately, but has appointed some others as instruments
under him, to promove their edification, whom singularly he has entrusted for
that end. Obs. 1. Since our Lord Jesus had a Church militant, he has thought
good to guide it mediatly, by a standing Ministry and Ordinances; and that is
to set out his Vineyard to keepers. 2. There ought none without Christ's tack
or lease, enter upon the Ministry, and become keepers of his Vineyard; for,
they are but tacksmen, and what right they have it is from him: Thus that which
is here called his setting a lease, is, Mal. 2. 4, 5. called the Covenant of
Levi. 3. Although Christ employ Ministers, yet he makes them not masters, but
he reserves the propriety of his Church to himself, and they are such as must
give an account. 4. Though Ministers be not masters, yet are they keepers, and
have a special trust in the Church; they are entrusted with the affairs of
Christ's house, for carrying on of his peoples edification; which is a trust
that no others have committed to them.

The third thing in this verse, is the end for which he lets it out, or the
terms upon which; and these are, that every one may bring a thousand pieces of
silver, for the fruit thereof: And so the condition upon which it is set out,
is, that he might have a competent revenue and fruit, as is clear from, Isa. 5.
and, Matthew. 21. and the rent is agreed on by himself, and it is a thousand
silver lings, which is mentioned, Isa. 7. 23. as a great rent. The number is a
definit for an indefinit, saying in sum, that Christ's scope in letting out his
Church, is thereby to make her fruitful, that by his servants Ministry he
might have rent from her, as he says, Job. 15. 16. I have chosen you, and
ordained you, to go and bring forth fruit, etc. Which is especially to be
understood in respect of their Ministerial-fruit (to say so) or the fruit of
their Ministry. The sum required is alike to all, that every one may bring,
etc. not implying, that all Ministers will have alike fruit in effect, or de
facto, but to show, that all of them have one commission, and de jure, or of
right, ought to aim at having much fruit to the Landlord, and would by no
means seek to feed themselves, but seek the Masters profit. The words aim at
these four things, 1. That Christ's great design in planting of a Church, and
sending of a Ministry, is to have souls saved, that is the fruit which he aims
at, for the travel of his soul: And so to have his people brought on toward
Heaven, by every step of knowledge, conversion, faith, repentance, holiness,
till they be brought completely through. 2. It supposes the peoples duty, that
they who are planted in the Church, should be fruitful: This Vineyard bears
well, else the keepers could not pay so much. 3. The Ministers duty is here
employed also, and it is to crave in Christ's rent, that is his office, as a
Factor, or Chamberlane to gather it in; So, Matthew. 21. 31. he sent his servants
to gather in the fruits of the Vineyard, Ministers are to labor amongst the
people, and either to bring fruit, or a report of ill success unto Christ. 4.
What ever fruits the Minister have to render to Christ, he must return a
reckoning; So the word, bring, imports a returning of an account to the owner
that sent him* The last thing is the peremptorinesse of this lease, in respect
of the fruits or rent, which is held forth in two things, 1. It Is determined it
must be a thousand: which says, 1. It is not ^ree to Ministers to call for, or
to accept of what they will* or what men will, as enough for Christ's due; he
must determine himself what he will have, and none other, and he has
determined it. 2. There can be no alteration of the terms which Christ has set
down and imposed, it is definit in it self what every one must bring. Again 2.
It Is peremptorinesse appears in this, that every one, none excepted are put at
for this rent: This is the great a^ticle in all their lea^es, fruit, fruit.
Obs. 1. Every Minister of the Gospel has a weighty trust put on him, in
reference to the C^urche^ edification. 2. Ministers right discharging of their
trust, may have much influence on a peoples thriving, and Christ's getting of
his rent from amongst them. 3. All Christ's Ministers have every one of them
the same commission, for the same end, and every one of them should endeavor
fruits proportionable thereto. 4* The Lord has every Ministers fruit, as to
the event, determined, as well as their duty is appointed them. 5. Though all
Ministers have not alike success, in respect of the number of souls brought in
by their Ministry; yet, where there is honesty and diligence, the Lord will
account it a thousand, as well as where the fruit is more: Therefore are they
alike in his reckoning, though not in the event. O! but an unfruitful Minister,
and unfaithful also, who, beside what fruit a common Christian should render,
ought to render a thousand for his Ministry, will be much in Christ's debt,
when he shall reckon with him! Let Ministers consider well this double
reckoning.

Having laid down the general doctrine, verse. 11. she does now in the twel^th
verse make application thereof to her self; and this she does, 1 By asserting
of her own sincerity. 2. By proving it in two instances. Her assertion is, My
Vineyard, which is mine, is before me: The Brides Vineyard is the particular
trust which is committed to her, in reference to her souls estate; called a
Vineyard, 1. Because every particular believer, entrusted with his own souls
concernment, is a part of, and of the same nature with the Church of Christ,
which is called a Vineyard in Scripture. 2. Because of the variety of graces
bestowed on her, and the Ordinances and privileges, whereof she is a partaker
with the whole, as is said. It Is called hers, because she must make a special
account for her own soul, and the talent that is given to her, according to the
trust that is put on her. We have almost the same phrase, Chap. 1. 6. where the
Bride calls it, mine own Vineyard: This Vineyard is said to be before her,
which is like the expression, Psa. 18. 22. all thy judgments were before me,
which the scope, by the words foregoing and following, shows to be, not a
pleading of innocence, but of sincerity and watchfulness in keeping himself
from his iniquity; and it is to be understood in opposition to departing
wickedly from God, mentioned verse. 21. And thus to have her Vineyard before
her, signifies watchfulness and tenderness, as these who have their eye
always on their Orchard or Vineyard. And it does import, 1. Watchfulness, as
has been said. 2. Diligence and carfulness, so it is opposed to the hiding of
the talent, Luke 14. she did not so, but had the talent she was entrusted with,
still before her, and among her hands, that she might trade with it. 3. It
imports tenderness and conscienciousnesse, and so is opposed to men's casting
of God's Law behind their backs, Psalm. 50. 16. This she did not, but the work
God had appointed to her, and the trust which was committed to her, was always
in her eye. 4. It implies sincerity, and honesty in aiming at her duty, and
that by a constant minding of it, as suffering it never to be out of her sight:
All which being put together, holds forth the sense of the words, Christ has
given every one in his Church a trust (which is, as it were, the Vineyard that
every believer ought to have before him) and that (says she) which was
committed to me, I have been singly and conscienciously careful to do my duty
in reference thereunto, so as I have a testimony in my conscience of it: And
thus her case is far different from what it was, Chap. 1. 6. where she
acknowledges that her own Vineyard she had not kept. Obs. 1. It Is no matter
how well one be acquaint with the general truths of the Gospel, if there be not
a conformity of practice: Whatever knowledge Christians have, it will never
further their peace, except their practice be suitable. 2. Every member of the
Church, and every believer, has a particular trust committed to him, and he
must be countable for his carriage in reference thereto. 3. The right
discharging of) this trust, calls for watchfulness and diligence, and it will
require, daily oversight and attendance, that so the believers Vineyard may be
always before him. 4. They who assiduously wait upon the work committed to
them, may through grace make good progress in it, and attain to a good
testimony from their own consciences thereanent. 5. It Is exceeding comfortable
to believers, when they have a testimony within them, that they have been
diligent and careful in the duty committed to them. 6. Believers would reflect
on their carriage in the trust committed to them, that they may be able to make
some distinct report concerning the same. 7. They who are most tender in their
duty, are also most diligent to search how it is with them, that they may know
the condition of their Vineyard, whether it thrive or not. If it be moved here,
how she could assert so much of her condition, seeing, Chap. 1. 6. she
acknowledges the contrary, that her own Vineyard, or, the Vineyard which was
hers, she had not kep^^ And it is evident, Chap. 5. 3. that she was under a
great measure of security; in which case she sell into many escapes? I answer,
both may be true, in diverse considerations, 1. A^ David in one place
acknowledged sin, yet, Psa. 18. 21, 22. etc. pleads sin^erity, so doth' she
here. Obs. 1. There may be a just ground of a plea for sincerity, where there
is much guilt to be acknowledged* These are not inconsistent, otherwise she
could not assert her sincerity so confidently here. 2. Believers plea for peace
in the discharge of their duty, and the testimony of their conscience
thereanent, is not founded on perfection of degrees, but on sincerity. 2. Ans.
Chap. 1. 6. contains the Brides case at one time; This speaks of her case
afterward, when by repentance she was recovered and restored to his friendship.
Obs. 1. There may be a great difference in the way of one and the same
believer, in respect of different times: At one time (possibly in youth) most
unwatchfull, ^t other times tender and serious. 2. These that sometimes have
been under many challenges for unwatchfulness, may through God's blessing
afterward attain a good outgate, both from their sins and challenges. 3. Bygone
failings, will not, nor should not, mar a present favorable testimony from
the conscience, when God has given to one the exercise of faith, repentance
and true tenderness. 3. Ans. Since these failings, Christ has spoken peace to
her, and therefore now she remembers them not, for marring of her peace, though
otherwise she has regrated them for her humbling. Observe. When Christ speaks
peace, believers would not obstruct it, by continuing the resentment of former
provocations and quarrels to the prejudice thereof, though they should still
mind them for furthering of their own humiliation.

She comes, in the next place, to make out this assertion: which is done, 1. By
the matter of her words, while she instanceth the fruits, that belonged both to
the owner and to the keepers. 2. By the manner of he^ words, while she turns
her speech over to Christ himself, Thou, O Solomon, shall have a thousand (for
so it will read as well as must have, etc. seeing either of the words, shall, or
must, may be supplied) and this shows both what he should have, and with what
cheerfulness she bestowed it on him. And, 1. she instanceth the fruits that
Christ should have, and these are a thousand: By the thousand that Christ is to
get, is understood that which was appointed and conditioned in his lea^e of the
Vineyard, find is mentioned, verse. 11. It Is, in a word, thou shall have what
thou have appointed, the terms shall not be altered by me. Hence it appears,
that the thousand which the Minister was to bring in as the revenue of the
Vineyard, is the engaging of souls to Christ, and the making of them fruitful;
for, then gets Christ his rent from his people, when this is effectuated by the
Ordinances. Obs. 1. That fruits are the best evidence of sincerity. 2* That
thene can be nothing offered to Christ as fruit, or which can be an evidence or
proof of sincerity, but that same, for the matter and manner, which is
prescribed by him in his Covenant; our fruits must be suitable to what is
called for, and accepted by him, or they will be no ground of peace. 3. True
sincerity will never alter the terms that Christ has set down in his Covenant,
no^ lessen his rent, which he has prescribed as his due, but will think that
most suitable which he has prescribed, and will think it is mercy to have that
to render to him.

The second instance, proving her fruitfulness, holds ^orth what the keepers
should receive; the keepers shall have two hundred: Two hundred is a definit
number for an indefinit. The scope is to show, that she acknowledged Christ's
car^* in providing Watchmen and Ordinances to her, and as they were not (...)
to her, but were blessed for her good; so he should have honor, and their
pains taken on her, by her fruitfulness, should redound to their commendation
and glory, yet (as it becomes) in a lesser degree than to the master, and
without wronging of the rent due to him; this two hundred (says she) ought
not, and shall not diminish his thousand. Now, this may relate either to the
reward that faithful Ministers shall have from Christ, spoken of, Dan. 12. 3. O
what joy and glory will result to them, from the peoples fruitfulness (amongst
whom they have labored) in the day of the Lord! that they have not run in
vain, but with much success, will bring them much joy in that day; So, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19, 20. What is our hope (says the Apostle) or crown of rejoicing,
are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming? For ye
are our glory and our joy. It Is a piece of their life and satisfaction, to see
the work of the Gospel thrive amongst the people: We live (says Paul) 1 Thessalonians.
3. ^8. if ye stand fast in the Lord* Or, 2. It may look to that which is called
for from a people to their Ministers, even here, they are to acknowledge them
that are over them for their works sake, to obey and submit to them, yea, to
give themselves to them by the will of God, having given themselves first to
Christ, 2 Cor. 8. 5. and this being a testimony of believers sincerity, it
looks like the scope; and so the sense is, Thou shall have (says she) that
which is called for, as thy due, and the keepers shall have what respect and
encouragement is due to them, for thy sake.

This two hundred belonging to the keepers, is added here, and was not
mentioned in the former verse; because there the terms that were required of
the keepers themselves were set down, here the duty of every particular
believer is expressed, which is to give Christ his due, and in doing that, to
give to his Ordinances and Ministers as commissio^^t from him what is their
due; and this is to be given the^* not as men, nor as believers, but as
keepers; which though immediately it be given to them, as to the Ambassadors of
Christ, yet that obedience, submission, etc. being to his Ordinance, and given
them only for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. it is rent also due to him, and
called for by him.

If it be asked, why her giving of two hundred to the keepers, is subjoined to
the giving of him a thousand? The answers to this are so many observations from
the words, and the first is, That these who are trusted by Christ to be keepers
of the Vineyard, and his Ministers, ought also to be respected by the people
over whom they are set; and Christ allows this on them. 2. Where Christ is
respected and gets his due, there the keepers will be respected and get their
due: If Christ be made welcome, the feet of them that bring glad tidings will
be beautiful, Isa. 52. 7. 3. It Is a good sign of honesty and sincerity before
Christ, when Minsters and Ordinances are respected in their own place, with
subordination to the respect that is due to Christ; Therefore is it mentioned
here. 4. It Is no burden to an honest believer to acknowledge Christ's
Ministers, to obey their doctrine, and submit to their censures; For, sincere
believers both willingly do this, and engage to do it, as the Bride does here.
5. The respect that is given to Ministers, should be given to them as to his
Ministers, without derogating from, or incroaching upon, that which is the
master's due; Therefore, his thousand is reserved whole for him, and this two
hundred is no part thereof. 6. Where Christ gets his due amongst a people, and
where his Ordinances be received, there, and there only do Ministers get their
due; for, it is (as Paul says) not yours, but you that we seek? and less will
not be accepted by faithful Ministers: they will never think they get their
(...), if the Gospel be not taken well off their hand.

The last thing in the verse, is the way she takes to prove her uprightness,
by attesting Christ to bear witness to the sincerity of her fruits; and this
is held forth in the change of the person, from the third to the second, Thou,
O Solomon (says she) shall have a thousand: which, in short, is done for
eviden^ing of her sincerity, that it was such as might abide his trial and so
she does pass sentence upon her self, as in his sight, who knew what was
truth: And this does not proceed from boasting, but from humble confidence,
being desirous that he would accept of it, and approve her in it. Obs. 1.
Sincerity gives one boldness in approaching to Christ. 2. It Is a good evidence
of sincerity, when believers are not very anxious, and careful what is the
judgment of men concerning them, if they may have Christ's approbation; and
therefore they consider their case and practice as speaking to Christ, and
before him. 3. It Is delectable, in the most spiritual passages of our inward
walk, to turn them over into addresses to Christ, and to speak them over
betwixt him and us. 4. It Is best gathering conclusions concerning our
condition, and best learning how to esteem of it, when we are set as in
Christ's presence, and are speaking to him: Every thing will then be best
discerned, and the soul will be in the best posture for discerning it self.

BRIDEGROOM.
Verse. 13. Thou that dwell in the Gardens, the Companions hearken to thy
voice, cause me to hear it.
The thirteenth and fourteenth verses contain the last part of this kindly
conference, that has been betwixt these two loving parties, and express their
farewell and last suits, which each of them has to the other. He speaks in this
verse, and being to close, as a kind husband, leaving his beloved wife for a
time, he desires to hear frequently from her till he return; this is his suit:
And she, like a loving wife, entreats him to hasten his return, in the next
verse, and this is the scope of both these verses. That the words in this
thirteenth verse are spoken by him, appears by the title he gives the Bride,
Thou that dwell, in the Gardens, which in the Original, is in the feminine
gener, as if one would say, thou woman, or, thou bride, or, thou my wife* Or,
take it in one word, as it is in the Original, it may be rendered, O inhabitresse
of the Gardens; which can be applied to none other, but to her; and therefore,
these words must be spoken by him to her, and thus the scope laid down is clear.

There are three parts in the verse, 1. The title he gives her. 2. A
commendation, that is insinuated. 3. A request made to her, or duty laid on
her. The title is, Thou that dwell in the Gardens: By Gardens, in the plural
number, we understand (as Chap. 6. 2.) particular Congregations, where the
Ordinances are administrat; called Gardens in the plural number, as
contradistinguished from the Catholic Church, and from a particular believer,
who are also called a Garden in the singular number. To dwell in, or inhabit
these Gardens, imports three things, 1. A frequenting of these meetings. 2. A
continuance in them ordinarily, as if there were her residence. 3. A delight in
them, and in the exercises of his worship and service there. And in sum, the
meaning is, Thou, my Bride, who frequent^ and loves the assemblies of my
people, and my public Ordinances, etc. Obs. 1. That Christ Jesus loves to
leave his people comforted, and therefore, is distinct in this his farewell,
that there be no mistakes of him in his absence: And this way he used also with
his Apostles, John, 14. 13, 14, 15. etc. before his ascension. 2. Christ has
ordinarily ever preserved the public Ordinances, by particular assemblies, in
his Church. See, Chap. ^. 2. 3. Where God's people are in good case, there the
public Ordinances are most frequented and esteemed of; and still the better in
case they be, the Ordinances are the more prized, and haunted by them; for,
this is a special character and property of such, that they love to dwell among
the Ordinances, Psa. 27. 4. Also, this is pleasant and acceptable to Jesus
Christ, and the title he gives the Bride here, shows his approbation thereof.

The second part of the verse, namely the commendation he gives her, is
infinuate in these words, The companions hearken to thy voice: By companions
here, are understood particular believers, members of the Church, called also
brethren and companions, Psalm. 122. 8. and the ^rother-hood, 1 Pet. 2. 17. So
also, Psalm. 45. 14. and 119. 63. I am a companion of all that fear thee, etc.
and this title is given them for these two reasons, 1. Because there is
joyntnesse and communion amongst them, in all their interests, both of duties
and privileges, and also in sufferings, etc. and so John, Rev. 19. calls
himself their brother and companion in tribulation: They are all
fellow-citizens of one city, Ephesians. ^. And* ^. because they have a familiar way
of living together, according to that joint interest, by sympathizing with each
other, freedom to each other, and kindlinesse of affection to one another;
opposite to that strangeness and particularnesse that is amongst the men of
the world: And this is the right improving of the former, and results from it.
Next, by the Brides voice, is here understood her instructions admonitions, and
such parts of Christian-fellowship which tends to edification, wherein that
companionry (so to speak) does most appear: An example whereof we find in the
instructions she gave to the daughters, Chap. 5. The companions their harkening
to her voice, is more than simple hearing (for harkening and hearing are much
different, and have different words in the Original) and It implies, their
laying weight on what she said, by pondering of it, and yielding to it, as the
daughters did, Chap. 6. 1. to which this may relate. And so the meaning is, thy
fellow-worshipers (says he) with reverence and respect, receive thy words,
thou speaks so weightily unto them. And this does import not only the practice
and duty of the Bride and her companions, but also a commendation of them, both
which we may take up in the doctrines. Observe. 1. That there is a most friendly
union and familiar relation amongst all believers; they are companions in this
respect, though their may be many differences in externals, which this takes
not away. 2. Believers; ought to walk friendly together, according to that
relation; and it is pleasant when they converse together as such* Psalm. 133. 3.
Believers ought not to be useless in their fellowship and mutual conversing
one with another, but would be speaking, by instructions, admonitions and
exhortations, that others with whom they converse may hear their voice. 4.
Believers would not only hearken to public Ordinances, and the word spoken by
Office-bearers in the Church, but also to that which is spoken by a companion,
when it is edifying. 5. It Is a thing pleasant to Jesus Christ (who takes notice
how companions walk together) when there is conscience made of mutual
fellowship* with fruit and freedom amongst his people: This were good
companionry. 6. God's making the stamp of his Spirit on a particular believer
to have weight on others, so as their fellowship with them has success,
should provoke the believer to pursue more after fellowship with Christ
himself; which is the scope of this part of the verse, compared with that which
follows.

The last part of the verse, containing his desire to her, or the duty he
lays on her, is in these words, cause me to hear it: The words, as they are
in the Original, are, cause me to hear me; which occasioneth a twofold reading,
1. Cause me to be heard, and let me be the subject of thy discourse to others,
^eing they give ea^ unto thee, improve that credit which thou have with them
for that end: Thus this same phrase is rendered, Psalm 66. 8. make the voice of
his praise to be heard, or, as it is in the Original, cause to be heard the
voice, etc. 2. They may be read as they here stand, cause me to hear it; and
thus Christ desires, he may be the Object spoken unto, as by the former reading
he is to be the subject spoken of: So this same phrase is rendered, Psalm. 143.
cause me to hear thy loving kindness: And this translation agrees well with
the scope here, where before he brake off communing with the Bride, as in the
first part of the verse he had commended her for her frequenting of public
Ordinances, and in the second, for her keeping fellowship with others, in both
which her duty is insinuated; so here he calls for her keeping of fellowship
with himself, by her sending frequent messages to him in prayer; which he not
only requires as a duty, but now requests for as a savor (to speak so) that he
may hear often from her, which he will account as much of, as any man will do
of hearing from his wife in his absence. And, thus, to make him hear her voice,
is by frequent prayer to make addresses to him, as, Psalm. 5. 3. In the morning
shall thou hear my voice; and, Chap. 2. 14. of this Song, speaking to the
Bride, Let me hear thy voice, says he. Observe. 1. That though Jesus be a great
Prince, and sometimes be absent to the sense of his people, yet has he laid
down a way how his Bride may keep correspondence with him, and let him hear
from her when she will, in his greatest distance: He has, as it were, provided
posts for that end, prayers, ejaculations, thoughts, looks, if wakened by his
Spirit, which will carry their message very speedily and faithfully. 2. The
Bride ought to be frequent in sending posts and messages to her blessed
Bridegroom, that he may hear from her; and both duty and affection call for
this. 3. Messages from the believer are most welcome and acceptable to Jesus
Christ, they are as messages from a loving wife to an husband at a distance,
and believers may expect that such messages shall be well entertained; they
cannot be too frequent in suits and prayers to him, when these duties are
rightly discharged; and there will be no letter sent to him so short, or ill
written, but he will read it: And sure, the neglecting of this, is a sin does
exceedingly displease and wound our kind Bridegroom. 4. In this verse,
frequenting public Ordinances, fellowship with believers, and much
corresponding with Christ in secret prayer, are all put together, to show, that
they who rightly discharge the duties of public worship, and the duties of
mutual fellowship, and the duties of communion and corresponding with Christ in
prayer, must necessarily join all together; and when it goes well with a
believer in one of these, they will all be made conscience of; and this last is
subjoyned, as the life of both the former, without which they will never be
accepted by him.

BRIDE.
Verse. 14. Make haste, my Beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young
Heart upon the mountains of Spices.
The last verse has in it the Brides last and great suit to her Bridegroom,
that he would haste his return: As in the former verse the Bridegroom compended
all his will, as it were, in one suit to the Bride; Let me often hear from thee
that I may know how it is with thee, said he: So here, she sums up all her
desire in one suit, which to her is both first and last, I beseech thee (says
she) my Beloved, make haste and do not tarry. In the words there are, 1. her
suit. 2. The title she gives him. 3. Her repeating and qualifying of her suit.
Her request is, make haste: The word, in the Original, signifies flee away,
importing the greatest haste and speed that may be, so would she have Christ
hasting his coming in the most swift manner; whereby the holy impatience of her
affection, that cannot endure delays, does appear; therefore abruptly she
breaks out with this as her last suit, and that which especially her heart
desires of him. That it is for a speedy return, the scope, her love that
expresses it, and the manner which she uses through the Song, does clear; and
there being two comings of Christ spoken of in Scripture, 1. His coming in
grace, which already she had prayed for, and it is promised, John 14. 21, 23. 2.
His coming in glory at the last day to judge the world; we conceive that it
will agree with her scope here, to take in both, but principally the last, that
is, her desire, that Christ Jesus would hasten his second coming: Not that she
would have him to precipitat, or leave any thing undone that is to go before
the end; but her desire is, that in due time and manner it may be brought
about, and that what is to go before it, may be hastened, for making way for
it: For, the phrase, haste, my Beloved, is indefinite, and therefore it may
look both to his second coming, and to all that must necessarily preceed it;
and therefore so long as there is yet any thing to be performed, as previous to
his coming, she bids him hasten it. ^. We take this desire to look mainly to
his second coming, because that only can perfect believers consolation, and put
an end to their prayers: Till he come, their consolation cannot be full, and
all shadows are not away, Chap. 2. 17. There is ever something to be done, and
therefore they have ever something to pray for (to wit, that his Kingdom may
come) till that time. 3. This is the great, joint, and main suit of all
believers; they all concur in this, Rev. 22. 17. The Spirit and the Bride say,
Come, etc. It Is essential to all who have the Spirit, to join in this suit; and
the Bride cannot but be supponed to love the last appearing of our Lord Jesus,
which will perfect all her desires: And this coming of his, was prophesied of
by Enoch, the seventh from Adam, Jude v. 14. and was delighted in by believers
( Psalm. 96. 12, etc. Psalm. 98. 6, 7.) before Solomon wrote this.

2. The title which she gives him, is, my Beloved, That which ordinarily she
gave him, and is here insert, 1. To be a motive to press her suit, and it is
the most kindly motive which she could use to him, that there was such a
relation betwixt him and her, and therefore she prays, that he would not
leave her comfortless, but return again. 2. It Is made use of as a stay to her
faith, for sustaining of her against discouragement: And that there is such a
tie standing betwixt him and believers, is a notable consolation, seeing he is
faithful and kind in all his relations; and by this she sweetens this her
farewel-wish. 3. It Is an expression of her affection, she cannot speak to him,
but her heart is kindled, and must speak kindly: And it shows, that their
patting is in very good terms, like friends. 4. It shows her clearness of her
interest in him, on which she grounds this suit, so as heartily she thereby
makes ready, and prepares for his coming, knowing that he is hers.

3. The qualification of her suit is in these words, Be thou like to a Roe, or
a young Heart, upon the mountains of Spices: Roes and Hearts frequent mountains,
and do run swiftly, speedily and pleasantly on them, as has been often said:
See upon Chap. 2. 8. 17. the allusion and scope here is, as Roes and Hearts run
swiftly over mountains, so, my Beloved (says she) make haste to return with
all diligence: or, because the mountains of Spices signify some excellent
mountains, such as it may be, were not ordinary for Roes and Hearts to run upon
(though in these countries it might be so in part) therefore we may read the
words, thus, my Beloved, be thou upon the mountains of Spices, like a Roe, etc.
and so Heaven may be compared to such savory and refreshful mountains. The
scope is one, and speaks thus, Now my Beloved, seeing there is a time coming,
when there will be a refreshful meeting betwixt thee and me, never to be
interrupted, therefore I entreat thee, so to expede thy affairs which are to
preceed, which in reason I cannot obstruct, that that blessed and longed-for
meeting may be hastened, and thou may come to receive thy Bride at the last
day. From all these, Observe. 1. which is supposed, that there is a final and
glorious coming of our Lord Jesus to Judgment, which will be when all that he
has to do in the earth in perfected; otherwise this could not be prayed for by
the Bride. 2. It is employed, that this coming of Jesus Christ, is a most
comfortable and desirable thing to believers; There is nothing that they more
aim at and pant for, than his company; and that being so desirable here, it
must be much more so hereafter, when all his people shall be gathered to him,
and the Queen shall be brought to the King in raiment of needle work, and shall
enter into the palace with him, there to abide for ever: That cannot but be
desirable, and therefore it is pressed as her farewel-suit. 3. This suit of the
Brides implies, that this glorious coming of our Lord Jesus is much in the
thoughts of his people, and uses to be meditated on by them; for, this prayer
of hers, is the expression of what uses to be in her heart. 4. It implies,
that believers ought to be established in the faith of Christ's second coming,
so as it may be a ground of prayer to them. 5. Even the thoughts of this second
coming, which flow from the faith thereof, long ere it come, will be refreshful
to the believer. 6. It Is peculiar to the believer to be delighted with, and to
be longing for Christ's second coming; for, it agrees with this relation the
Bride has to him as her Beloved: And whatever others may say, yet this coming
of Christ Jesus, really is, and will be dreadful to them: And therefore are
believers differenced from all others by this name, that they are such who love
his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

That we may further consider this prayer of the Brides, we may look upon it,
first, more generally, and so gather these. Observe. 1. Faith and love will
compend much in few words, and will thrust together many suits in a short
expression: There is much in this same word, flee, or haste; It Is not the
longest prayer that is made up of maniest words. 2. Faith in Christ, and love
to him, where they are in exercise, will make the believer to meddle in his
prayers with things of the greatest concernment; so does this prayer of the
Brides, it looks not only to his second coming, but also takes in the
overturning Satan's kingdom, the calling of Jews and Gentiles, the dissolution
of Heaven and Earth, etc. which go along with, and before, Christ's coming:
These are great things, and yet that they may be accomplished, is that which
she here prays for. 3. Faith will look far off in prayer, it will be minding
things that are to be performed long after the persons removal out of this life.

Again, we may consider this suit as it follows on the former long
conference, and goes before the off-breaking thereof: And so, Observe, 1. That
the most lively and longest continued enjoyments of Christ, that believers have
here upon earth, may, and will have their interruptions and off-breakings for a
time: Uninterrupted communion is reserved for Heaven. 2. Believers that have
been admitted to familiar access unto, and fellowship with Christ Jesus, would
endeavor to have it distinctly breaking off; so that although they cannot
entertain it always, yet they would be careful that it slip not away, and they
not knowing how, nor understanding in what terms their souls stand with Christ;
neglects here occasion many challenges. 3. These who are best acquainted with
fellowship with Christ here-away, and are clearest of their interest in him,
will be most desirous of, and most pressing after, his second coming: And the
little acquaintance that many have with him here-away, is the reason that so
few are taken up with this suit. 4. When believers have been admitted to much
sweet fellowship with Christ, before their sun decline, or before his sensible
presence be withdrawn, they ought to have a new design and desire tabled for
his returning; and this is a good way to close such sweet and comfortable
conferences with Christ, by referring distinctly to a new meeting, especially
to this last, which will never admit of a parting again. 5. When temporal
enjoyments of Christ break off, believers would endeavor the clearing of their
hope of that eternal enjoyment which is coming, and would comfort themselves in
the expectation of that, which no time will put an end unto.

3. We may consider the words in themselves, as this particular prayer holds
forth a pattern and copy of prayer to believers, and as the Bride evidenceth
the nature of true love by this suit. And so we may, Observe. 1. That it is the
duty of a believer to long and pray ^or Christ's second coming, and when they
are in a right frame and case, they will do so: Love to Christ himself, who at
his appearing is to be glorified; love to the Church in general, which that day
is to be adorned as a bride for her husband, and fully to be freed from all
outward crosses and inward defects; and love to a believers own happiness,
which that day is fully to be perfected, do all call for this. 2. This second
coming of our Lord does fully satisfy the believer in all respects; they have
no suit nor prayer after this, when that day is once come, there will be no
more complaints, all sorrow and fighing flies then away; there will be then no
more prayer, for there will be no more necessities and wants, but all they can
desire will be then enjoyed, and praise will be the work of that blessed world,
amongst all the Saints to all Eternity: There will be no such use of the
promises and of faith, as we have of them now, but all will be in possession;
Our warfare will be ended, and our victory completed, when we shall see him as
he is, and be like him: It Is no marvel then that the Spirit and the Bride say,
come, and cry constantly, haste, my Beloved, until this desire be fulfilled.
Even so, come, Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

