GOSPEL-COMMVNION In the Way of GODLINESS: Sued for by The Protestant Churches
in Germany, unto the Churches of Great Britain and Ireland: In a Letter
written and sent hither to that effect.

ALTVM SAPERE NOLI printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden-hall-street, 1654.

Ecclesiarum Magnae Britanniae atque Hyberniae Patronis and Antistibus
Primariis, Eximiis Dei servis atque Ecclesiae Laborantis in Germania fautoribus
Colendissimis: Sit Gratia and Pax a Deo Patre, and Domino nostro Jesu Christo
per Spiritus sancti Communionem, AMEN.
DIversa Spiritus Dei dona membris Ecclesiae diversis esse concessa, and sacra
oracula testantur, and res ipsa loquitur; finem tamen eundem Communis
Aedificationis mutuaeque utilitatis liquet Patri luminum, datori omnis doni
perfecti, propositum esse in omnium donorum largitione. Apostolus enim dicit,
Unicuique datam esse Spiritus declarationem (...): and alibi jubemur, Ut
quisque accepit donum, ita alius in alium illud subministret, ut decet bonos
gratiae Dei diversae (...). Talentum enim quod a Deo singuli accepimus, fidei
nostrae commissum est, ut illius dispensatores facti, non illud defodiamus, ut
nequam ille servus, in terram; sed ad Domini emolumentum impendamus, ut cum
fideli^^^ ^jus servis, plura tam Domino quam nobis ipsis lucri^acere talenta
possimus.

(...) spectant, Illustres, Clarissimique Viri, Reverendissimique, atque
Reverendi in Christo Patres and Fratres, ut, cum (...) cer^^ innotuerit inter
Eccles^as Magnae Britanniae ^^^^i^am Theologiae Practicae, multorum p^e
Doctorum Ecclesiae ^^strae Ant^stitum publicis scriptis egregie exeultum esse,
atque ad usum Popularem insigniter accomodatam, atque eam solummodo linguae
vestrae Cancellis tanquam reconditum ab exteris Nationibus, thesaurum
contineri, and asservari, maximamque utilitatem ad omnes Ecclesias Christianas,
praesertim autem Evangelicas redundaturam, si quae vobis in hoc genere
peculiaria sunt, publicentur, ita ut ab it is quoque legi and intelligi possint,
ut (inquam, cum haec ita se habeant) Illustritatibus atque Reverentiis Vestris
votum nostrum ac desiderium aperiamus, atque per sanctae Communionis in Christo
vinculum, fraternaeque libertatis Parrhesiam rogemus, vos presertim quotquot
inter Ecclesiarum Rectores, Protectores and Fautores, estis aedificationis
Publicae vere studiosi, ne permittatis hoc Talentum tam pretiosum ulterius
abscondi and occultari ab Exoticorum manibus and oculis, sed velitis pro
prudentia vestra, pro ferventis erga fraternas Ecclesias Charitatis, ac
liberalis studiierga Dei gloriam in Evangelii propagatione, pio zelo and
affectu vestro rationem aliquam inire commodam, qua Medulla Auctorum in illo
genere apud vos extantium and eminentium ex omnibus collecta in volumen aliquod
conjiciatur, sive locorum communium, sive Systematis Theologiae practicae, quod
publici juris sit, and omnium manibus teri possit lingua nota and doctioribus
communi. Audivimus pauca quaedam in Belgicum sermonem esse translata, quae
magno usui sunt ill is Ecclesiis and Theologiae studiosis.

Nuper etiam inter nos Germanico idiomate editus libellus ex Anglico versus de
Praxi Pietatis ita afficit omnes Pietatis Cultores, ut inde religioni quae in
pura modes^dque veritatis coelestis professione consistit, accessionem
permagnam fiericonstet. Ideoque sperare nobis licet, si huic nostro voto
accedat per vos favor requisitus, ut fa^ile inter vestrates (quibus ad haec and
similia: beneficia Ecclesiae suae praestanda pr^ aliis tranquillitatem in hisee
turbis, and facultates concessisse videtur divina clementia) inveniantur
aliqui, qui colligendis, transferendis, digerendis, atque evulgandis Auctorum
praecipuis scriptis and meditationibus practicis non gravate suas impendant
operas, suumque talentum si id suadebitis; unde futurum confidimus, ut insigne
Regnum Dei incrementum accipiat, si corpus absolutum talis doctrinae existet ex
vestris scriptoribus, in quo tam in Theologia Tyrones studii sui, quam
Ecclesiarum varii Pastores Concionum suarum materiam invenire possint,
aedificationi multo utiliorem quam illa est quae hodie in scriptis Polemicis
occurrit: ita a studio contentionis ad Charitatis non fictae affectus revocari
poterunt multorum animi, ex quo tandem futurum sit, ut ad Deum imprimis gloria
and gratiarum actio, ad Evangelii professores cum Sanctitatis and Pietatis
studio Pax and Concordia, ad Ecclesias publica adificatio, ad simpliciores pia
Eruditio, ad pios and afflictos, solida Spiritus Consolatio; ad errantes and
devios, salutaris Conversio; ad securos and carnales, vivida conscientiae
exsuscitatio; ad Hypocritas and obstinatos, clara perversitatis suae convictio;
ad omnes etiam posteros, major lux veritatis perveniat; and ad illos denique,
qui suum in hoc studio Talentum col^ocabunt ad Regni Dei Promotionem, accedat
illa vox quondam gloriosa and beata a Domino, qui rationem accepti Talenti
conferet nobiscum: Been est, Serve b^ne and Fidelis, in exiguo fuisti fidelis,
super multa te constituam: Ingredere in Gaudium Domini tui.

Quod gaudium omnibus iis quibus postulatum hoc nostrum patefiet, and gratum
erit, cum omni corporali f^elicitate ex animo vovemus. Valete in Domino Viri
Excellentes, atque omni honor nobis colendi. Dabantur Hanoviae 24 Febr. Anno
1633.

Joannes Daniel Wildius, Verbi Divin* Minist. and Ecclesiae Hanovicae
Inspector, M.P. Theodorus Leurelius, Ecclesiae Hanovicae Minist. Conradus
Ammonius Concionator Aulicus, ibid. Paulus Tossanus, S. Theolog. D. and Senatus
Ecclesiastici in inferiori Palatinatu Electorali Assessor. Clemens Boecius,
Ecclesiae Gallicae Neo-Hanovicae Pastor. Isaacus Boots, Pastor Ecclesiae
Flandricae, quae Christo colligitur Hanoviae. Matthaus Rowyer, Ecclesiae
Gallicae Neo-Han. Pastor M. Philippus Pareus Davidis Filius Illustris Gymnasii
Hanoviensis Rector and Professor.
Praeter hosce qui Hanoviae huic Epistolae subscripserunt, alii etiam eidem
Herbornae, and alibi subscripserunt, in Martio and Aprili, eodem anno 1633,
quorum nomina hic addita sunt.

Petr^^^ Streithagen, Sereniss. Regis Bohemiae beatae memoriae Concionator
Aulicus. Job. Moriaen, V. Div. quondam apud Vbi^s Minister, subscripsi
Francofurti 23 April. 1633. Philippus Snabelius, Hoingae Solmensis Patriae
Pastor. Johan. Conradus Hopfius V.D. Minister in Comitatu Hanovics, in
Marchabel Exul Palatinus. Perutile hoc Propositum and commune fratrum
Germanorum votum, mea quoque subscriptione confirmare volui: Ego Henricus
Meerbottius P. F. Pastor S^reshe^mi Ladenburgicus, in Elect. Palatinatu. Johan.
Irlin, Theol. Doctor, Scholae Herbonensis Rector and Professor, Ecclesiae
ejusdem Pastor, and Vicinarum Nassovicarum Inspector, M.P. Mr. Casparus
Stippius, Ecclesiae Sieginensis Archidiaconus; qui suo and reliquorum fratrum
in Comitatu Nass^vico Siegenensi, nomine subscripsit. Johannes Arcularius,
Ecclesiae Beilsteinsis Pastor, qui suo and reliquorum fratrum in Comitatu
Nassovico Beilstemensi and Orzensi subseripsit. Thomas Dorn, Pastor
Altenkirchensis nomine Ecclesiarum Comitatus Sainensis, M.P.
In English it speaks thus: To the Chief Patrons and Rulers of the Churches of
Great Britain and Ireland, the eminent Servants of God, and most respected
favorers of the distressed Church in Germany: Be Grace and Peace from God the
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, through the Communion of the Holy Ghost,
Amen.
ALthough it is attested by the holy Oracles: and the thing it self does speak
it, that to the several members of the Church several Gifts of Gods Spirit
are bestowed; yet it is evident that the Father of Lights, the Giver of every
perfect gift does in the distribution of all his Gifts propose unto himself but
one and the same end, which is the common edification and mutual usefulness
of all unto each other.. For the Apostle says, that The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every one to profit withal: and elsewhere we are commanded,
As every one has received the Gifts, even so to minister the same unto one
another, as good Stewards of the manifold graces of God. For the talent which
every one of us has received of God, is committed to our Trust, that we being
made distributers thereof, should not dig it in the ground, as that
unprofitable servant did; but employ it to the advantage of our Lord: that with
such servants as are faithful unto him, we may gain more Talents both to our
Masters use, and to ourselves.

These things, Illustrious and Renowned Gentlemen, most Reverend, and Reverend
Fathers, and Brethren in Christ, are alleged; to the end we may acquaint you
with our wishes and desires, that seeing we are certainly informed, that in the
Churches of Great Britain, the doctrine of Practical Divinity by the public
Writings of many godly wise Ministers of your Churches, is brought to a great
perfection, and that it is excellently fitted for the use of the Common People,
but yet kept up as a hidden treasure from the eyes of foreign Nations within
the bounds of your own language alone, and that a very great benefit would
accrue unto all Christian Churches, and chiefly to those that profess the
purity of the Gospel, if so be those things which are peculiar unto you, were
published, so as by them they might also be read and understood: seeing (we
say) these things are so; our purpose is to acquaint your Honors and Worships
with our wishes and desires; and by the bond of holy communion in Christ; and
with that confidence of speech which our Brotherly freedom does suggest; to
entreat (you chiefly, who being Rulers, Protectors and Favorers of the
Churches, are truly desirous to edify the Public) that you would not suffer
so precious a Talent to be hid and concealed any longer from the hands and eyes
of foreigners: but that you would according to the pious zeal and affection of
fervent Charity, which you have toward Brother-churches: and the bountiful
care which you have for the glory of God in the Propagation of the Gospel take
some convenient course by which the marrow of those Authors, which in that
kind are extant amongst you, and are of chief note; may be gathered out of all
into one Volume, either of Common Places, or of a Body of Practical Divinity:
which may be published and made use of by all in a tongue known and common to
the Learned.

We have heard that some few things have been translated into the Low Dutch
Language; which are of great use unto those Churches, and their Scholars of
Divinity.

Of late also there is a little Book of the Practice of Piety, translated out
of the English into our Germane tongue; which has taken so much with many
godly souls; that we find thereby wrought in them, a very great growth of that
Religious disposition, which does consist in a pure and modest Profession of
Heavenly Truth: for which cause (we hope) that if our wishes may obtein by your
means the favor which is desired, that some of your men (to whom God seems
mercifully to have given, in the midst of these troubles both quietness, and
means to confer these and such like benefits unto his Church) will easily be
found, who without difficulty will at your Persuasion, bestow their pains and
their Talents to collect, to translate, to digest, and to publish the chief
Practical Writings and Meditations of your Authors. Whence we are confident
this will come to pass, that the Kingdom of God will receive a notable
enlargement, if a Complete Body of such Doctrine out of your Writers were put
forth; wherein as well the young Scholars of Divinity for their studies: as
many Pastors of the Churches for their Sermons, might find matter far more
useful unto edification, then that is, which now a days is met withal in
Controversal Writings: So that by this means, the minds of many men may be
drawn back from the endeavors of strife, unto the affections of unfeigned
Charity; whence afterward this will follow; that unto God in the first place
Glory and Thanksgiving will redound; and then unto the Professors of the
Gospel, with the care of Holiness and Piety, Peace and Concord; to the
Churches, public edification; to the simpler sort, Pious learning; to the
Godly and afflicted, sound spiritual comfort; to the erring and such as go
astray, saving Conversion; to such as are secure and carnal, a lively wakening
of their conscience; to the Hypocrites and stubborn sinners, a clear discovery
of their Pervesnesse; and to all the Generations to come, a greater light of
Truth will be advanced; and lastly, unto those that shall bestow their Talent
toward this Endeavor, for the Advancement of Gods Kingdom: when he shall call
us to an account of the Talent, which we have received from him; that glorious
and blessed voice shall then come from the Lord unto them: Well done, thou good
and faithful servant, thou have been faithful in a few things, I will make thee
Ruler over many things, enter into the joy of thy Lord: which joy we wish from
our heart, together with all temporal happiness; to all those, to whom this our
Request shall be made known; and with whom it shall find acceptance.

Farewell in the Lord Excellent Gentlemen, whom with all respect we are bound to
worship. Given at Hanaw 24 Febr. 1633. By John Daniel Wildius Minister of Gods
Word, and Inspector of the Churches of Hanaw. M.P. Theodorus Leurelius,
Preacher of the Church of Hanaw. Conradus Amonius, Preacher to the Court in the
same place. Paulus Tossanus, Doctor of Divinity, and Assessor of the
Ecclesiastical Senate in the lower Electoral Palatinate. Clemens Boecius,
Pastor of the French Church in New Hanaw. Isaacus Boots, Pastor of the Flanders
Church, which is gathered unto Christ in Hanaw. Matthew Rowyer, Pastor of the
French Church at New Hanaw. Mr. Philip Pareus son to David, Rector and
Professor of the famous College of Hanaw.


At Herborne in March and elsewhere in April, in the same year 1633, the same
suit was renewed by these:

Petrus Streithagen, Preacher to the Court of the most Illustrious King of
Bohemia, of blessed memory. John Moriaen, formerly Preacher of Gods Word
amongst those of Collen. I did under-write this at Francfortt 23 April 1633.
Philip Snabelius of Hoing in the County of Solms, Preacher to his native
Church. John Conradus Hopfius, Minister of the Word of God in the County of
Hanaw in Merchabel, an exiled Palatine. I Henry Meerbottius, for the present
time Pastor of Schesheim Ladenburg in the Electoral Palatinate: am willing to
confirm also with my Subscription, this most profitable intention and common
wish of our Brethren of Germany. John Irlin, Doctor of Divinity, Rector and
Professor of the School of Herborn, Pastor of the Church of the same place, and
Inspector of the neighboring Churches of Nassaw. M.P. Mr. Casparus Stippius,
Archdeacon of the Church of Siegen, who subscribed in his own name, and in the
name of the rest of his Brethren, in the County of Siegen in Nassaw. John
Arcularius Pastor of the Church of Beilstein, who subscribed in his own name,
and in the name of the rest of his Brethren, in the Counties of Beilstein and
Orzen in Nassaw. Thomas Dorn, Pastor of Altenkirck, in the name of the Churches
of the County of Sainen. M. P.
THis Letter does speak sufficiently for it self, and the persons who did*
write it were in these parts none of the least considerable in these times; nor
is their number small, if you take notice of the Churches in whose names the
Subscriptions are made; and although the time since this Letter was sent, may
seem somewhat long, yet because that which hitherto could be done to obtein
their desire has not bin neglected, though by several invincible impediments
obstructed, because the expectation of obteining it is not vanished, but at
this time raised, and because such a Suit as this can never be out of date till
it be fulfilled, nay, although the first Petitioners should all be dead, it
ought not the less conscionably to be regarded by those to whom it is made;
because it does not at all concern any temporal, or so much the particular
convenience of those that make it, as the spiritual edification, and general
benefit of all the Churches of God, and of the ages to come in the Gospel: I
say because of all these considerations; and more that might be added;
therefore I am willing to second their request, as many ways I am bound to do:
and to that effect that the accomplishment of their desire may be obtained with
more readiness and facility, I have added hereunto a Summary Platform of the
heads of such a Body of Divinity as they sue for, which may give the
Undertakers some occasion to think further upon the matter, which (I hope) God
will bless in their hand; whereunto the endeavors and prayers shall not be
wanting, of their

Humble Servant in Christ, John Dury.


