A RELATION Of the Most Remarkable Transactions Of the Last CAMPAIGNE, IN THE
Confederate Army, Under the Command of His Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN; AND AFTER,
Of the Elector of BAVARIA, IN THE SPANISH NETHERLANDS, Anno Dom. 1692.

LONDON: Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's-Arms, in the Poultrey. 1693.

To the Right Honorable John Earl of Bathe.
Viscount LANS DOWN, Baron Granville of Kilkhampton, and Biddiford,
Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Devon and Cornwall, Governor of Their
Majesty's Royal Citadel of Plymouth, Colonel of one of the English Regiments
of Foot in the Low Countries, and one of Their Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, etc.
My LORD,
THE desire I have to do something as may express that Respect I owe to your
Lordship, is the chief reason that I have undertook the Relation of the last
Campaigne; for since those Years which your Lordship has so signally spent in
the Service of the Crown, and those important Governments you have in this
Kingdom, at this Juncture of time, do not only dispense, but even oblige your
Lordship not to be present with your Regiment in the Low Countries; I hope this
Relation may be acceptable to your Lordship, in which your Regiment has not had
a small share, in the most remarkable Occurrences of the Campaigne.

There may be some Solaecisms in Soldiery in this Relation; but I hope your
Lordship will be pleased to Pardon them, since they proceed from a Clergyman,
who may be allowed such Mistakes, and who ventures upon so Foreign an
Undertaking to his Function, (which ought to have been performed by abler Pens,
to express the Honor of Englishmen) to assure your Lordship, that I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble and obedient Servant and Chaplain, ED.
D'AUVERGNE.

TO THE READER.
WHEN I drew up this Relation, I was far from designing to publish it: What I
did was for the particular Satisfaction of some. Persons to whom I am obliged.
But since I have finished it, a great many Friends have desired Copies of it,
which I found both tedious and chargeable to get written over. This is the
particular Reason as makes me comply with their Desires to have it Printed. For
I declare, that it is with some Reluctance that I appear in public in this
case. However, since it is done, I must needs let the Reader know, that as I had
no Design of having this Relation public, so first, this is the Reason that it
has been so late coming out, when the French by their early and active Motions
do already enter upon the following Campaign: And besides, this is the reason
that I have expressed my self with more Freedom in the following Relation,
which, though it is an Argument of its being so much the more impartial, yet it
may be the less taking for it.

As I am a Clergyman, I think that there is a greater. Obligation upon me to
speak Truth, and nothing but what is Truth: And therefore, if there is any
thing in this Account that is not so, or if I have said any thing that may
detract from the Reputation of any Man or Country; or if I have done them any
Injustice in not publishing their Merits, I shall be very ready to give both
them and Truth Satisfaction as publicly as I do them wrong. However, I think
my self obliged to declare, that I have endeavored to know the Truth; and what
I do not know of my self to be so, I have in that made use of creditable
Informations from Parties concerned.

If I say little of Foreign Nations concerned in the Alliance, and which made
by far the greater Number of our Army, it is not out of any Principle of
Partiality to my own Contrymen, but it is because I cannot be so well
informed of their Actions as of our own, they being Strangers to me.

What I say of Grandval concerning his having killed the Mares chal de Humieres
Nephew, and his Adventures in Savoy; as also what I speak concerning the Prince
of Brabancon, and of the Elector's Design to take him into the Field the last
Campaigne, to withdraw him by this piece of Policy from the Government of
Namur, I would have no more stress laid upon the Truth of it, but as a common
Report.

If the Public does kindly accept these my Endeavors, it will oblige me to be
more exact and curious the next Campaign, if God grants me Life and Health; and
I shall be more early in satisfying my Country with it. And I pray God so to
unite the Hearts, Counsels and Powers of our Allies, under the Conduct of our
glorious Monarch, as may answer his Endeavors and our Expectations, that we
may see the French Power reduced to such Limits as may procure a lasting Peace
to Christendom.

A RELATION Of the Most Remarkable Transactions Of the Last CAMPAIGNE.
HIS Majesty endeavoring to be beforehand with the French this Campaigne, came
very early over from England to the Hague, about the beginning of April, where
having spent some time in Conferences with the Ministers of the Allies, His
Majesty afterward went to Loo, to take some Divertisement, before he entered
upon the Fatigues of the ensuing Campaigne, expecting till matters were in a
readiness to take the Field; which proved not so early as (may be) was
designed, both by reason of the foul Weather that happened the latter end of
April, and the beginning of May, and of the great remoteness, as well as slow
motion of some of our Confederate Forces.

The French King, who owes his great Success, chiefly, to that quickness and
activity wherewith he can execute his Undertakings, and which is proper to the
Nature of his Government, began very early to move with his Forces, threatening
both Flanders with some considerable Siege, and England with an Invasion, to
restore the late King to his pretended Dominions. To this end he causes most of
his Forces to march toward Flanders, and to rendezvous about Mons, leaving the
Rhine entirely destitute of Troops, to render the Army in Flanders the more
powerful and formidable, being pretty secure both by the slowness of the
Germans to take the Field, and that Interest he had among some of the Princes
of the Empire, that nothing could be undertaken upon the Rhine by the
Confederates, before the execution of his Designs in Flanders; to compass these
vast Undertakings, the French King not only drew off his Forces from the Rhine,
but likewise most of those he had in Savoy and Piedmont, leaving Monsieur
Catinat so weak, that he has not been able to attempt any thing this
Campaigne, but even to suffer the Duke of Savoy to enter into Dauphine, and to
leave it exposed to the Fury of the Germans, who have plundered burnt and
destroyed, wherever they have been in it.

By this means the French King has not only been able to bring a very numerous
and powerful Army in Flanders, to undertake so considerable an Attempt as the
Siege of Namur, but also to think of restoring the late King to the Throne of
England; to this end he causes an Army to march toward the Coasts of Normandy,
pretending at first, that it was to secure his Coasts from a Descent, of which
they spoke very much in England, and for which they made some Preparations.
This Army consisted of between 16 and 20000 Men, both French and Irish, which
encamped at the Hogue, a little Village by the Seaside, between the Cape of
Barfleur, and the Bay of Caen.

The French King to cover this Invasion, as well as to help the transport of
his Troops, made all possible diligence to set out his Fleet, to execute this
great Design, before ours and the Dutch Fleet could be in a readiness to join;
which probably might have been, if a contrary Wind had not kept Vice Admiral
Count D' Estrees in the Mediterranean twenty one days together, with the Toulon
Fleet. The French King therefore seeing that Tourville had already staid so
long for the Toulon Fleet, that the English and Dutch were ready to join,
ordered Admiral Count De Tourville, to sail with what Fleet he had ready, and
to enter the Channel, the Troops being embarked in Normandy, and he only
expected to transport them over to England; with this Order Tourville came into
the Channel with Fifty four Men of War, making strait to Normandy, to join the
Transportships.

In the mean while, every body wondered to see the King so unconcerned at Loo,
and his Kingdoms so nearly threatened with an Invasion; every body thought, that
His Majesty would not be so sollicitous for the Safety of the Low Countries,
but that he would at least go over for England, and look after the preservation
of his own; which (may be) was the very thing the French King would have, and
which he more designed in this Project, than the Restoration of King James:
for it is very plain, that His Majesty's Presence, and his English Troops in the
Spanish Netherlands, put a great stop to his Proceedings; whereas in the other
War, when the English were not in the Alliance, Cambray, Valenciennes* and St.
Omer, would be the work but of a Month's Campaigne, but now his Conquests
cannot go on so fast, in a Country which he pretends of Right to belong to the
Dauphine.

However, though His Majesty was at Loo, yet his Cares were not from England in
this dangerous Conjuncture, but he sent my Lord Portland (who in this Voyage
was accompanied by his Son-in-Law, the Earl of Essex) over to England, with
some Instructions to the Queen, to prevent this intended Invasion, about which
Her Majesty had already taken very effectual Cares, in setting out our Fleet
with all speed, in raising the Militia of the Country, and seizing such Persons
as were most liable to suspicion in this matter: His Majesty on this side of
the Water took the same care of the Dutch Fleet, and ordered Colonel Selwyn's,
Beveridge's and Lloyd's Regiments to be sent back to England, to reinforce our
Army there; and likewise countermanded several Regiments of Horse, which His
Majesty had ordered over for Flanders. Thus by the Cares of Their Majesty's in
England and Holland, the two Fleets joined time enough to oppose the execution
of the French King's Designs upon England, and sooner than His Most Christian
Majesty expected; for not thinking that the English and Dutch could be so soon
joined, he ordered Monsieur Tourville to fight, and engage with our Fleet
wherever he met it, if they offered to oppose his Undertaking in England,
with that Number of Men of War he had then along with him; which he afterward
did accordingly; and I think pretty well to the French King's Cost. Things
began now to look with a little better aspect in England, and to promise the
French King but little success in his Invasion, the English and Dutch Fleets
being joined, and being in a better Condition than ever to do business,
considering the number and bigness of our Men of War, and the Seamen they had
on Beard; whereas Tourville was in our Channel with about Fifty Four Men of
War, which could give us but little reason to fear his Undertaking.

This was the Posture of Affairs about the opening of the Campaign, the King
having left Loo, and passed by Breda, came to Duffel, where his Majesty tarried
two or three Days, and the Elector of Bavaria went there to wait upon the King,
and to Complement him upon his Arrival in the Spanish Netherlands, as well as
to confer upon the present State of Affairs: But the French Army growing daily
in Number about Mons, and the French King being come to head his Army in
Person, obliged the King to hasten to Brussels to forward the Rendezvous of our
Forces, which gathered part between Anderleck and Dilbeck, having Anderleck
upon the Left; and the other part between Dendermonde and Ghendt, under the
Command of Major General Zuylesteyn; and after a March or two, they were joined
by Lieutenant General Mackay, who took the Command of them.

The King coming to Brussels, May
lay one Night at his own House, (l'autel d'Orange) a Palace belonging of old
to the Counts of Nassaw, and Princes of Orange, not far from the Court, and
which his Majesty has of late bestowed upon Prince Vaudemont: The next Day the
King took his Quarters at Coukelbergh, a little Chateau or Castle without
Flanders Port, where his Majesty remained till the marching of the Army from
Brussels. The French at this time gave us by their Motions equal Reasons to
suspect Charleroy and Namur, as the Place before which they would set to form a
Siege; wherefore the Elector of Bavaria ordered the Counts of Thian and Brouay,
the first to Namur to assist the Prince of Brabancon the Governor, and the
other to do the same thing at Charleroy with the Governor of that Place,

The Army having left Anderleck, May 17./27.
marched this day through Brussels to Deegham toward Louvain, whilst
Lieutenant General Mackay, with about 16000 English and Dutch which had
rendezvous'd about Dendermonde and Ghendt, came up very near the Army in order
to join it the next March; the French at this time leaving us but little reason
to doubt, but that Namur was the place they intended to attack.

This Day the Army marched, 18./28.
and came pretty near Louvain, the King taking his Quarters at Bethlehem-Abbey.
This Day we were likewise Joined with the Forces under the Command of
Lieutenant General Mackay, they incamping in the Line with the rest of the
Army. His Majesty was informed in this place of a Design against his Life,
which though it had miscarried the Year before, was again set on foot by the same
Persons, viz. one Grandval, Levendael, and Du Mont, of which we shall give an
Account, when we come to speak of the Execution of Grandval at Hall-Camp, he
being the only one of the Three that suffered the Punishment due to so
villainous an Attempt. The Second merited the King's Pardon, by his discovering
of the Plot to one of his Relations in Holland, who immediately gave an Account
of it to my Lord of Athlone. Du Mont gave an Account of this Design much at the
same time to the Duke of Zell, who likewise gave Notice of it to the King,
which, as it was an Argument of his Sincerity in discovering of it, and
likewise upon the Duke of Zell's Intercession, he was also pardoned. The said
Du Mont came up afterward to the Army, to give his Evidence, upon the
Assurance his Highness of Zell gave him, of a safe Conduct. This Du Mont having
given Grandval the meeting at Endhoven, not far from Bois-leduc; upon
Levendael's Discovery, my Lord Athlone sent a Detachment of 110 Horse thither,
who seized both the Prisoners, I mean, Levendael that discovered it, and
Grandval, and carried them to Boisleduc to the Prince of Nassaw Sarbruck
Governor of the Place. Grandval at first made as if he were very ignorant of
the matter, and altogether innocent; but when the Prince of Nassaw Sarbruck
asked him if he knew one Du Mont at the Court of Zell, the other owned the
matter, and replied, That his Life was in his Majesty's Power.

The French King having at last invested Namur, May 22./June 1.
opened the Trenches before the Town, attacking of it with all the Vigor
imaginable, and the Besieged on the other side making a stout Resistance. This
Town is situated upon the Brabant-side of the Sambre: The Castle is very
strongly seated upon the Ascent of a Hill, which makes a Nook of Land, caused
by the meeting of the Sambre and the Meuse; looking toward the Town, and
opposite to the Castle on the other side of the Meuse, as you go up to Dinant,
is a small Suburb of Old Houses. This Garrison was composed of Ten Dutch and
Brandenburgh Battalions, which had been there all Winter in Quarters, besides
some Spanish Regiments, between which there happened, during the Siege, some
Discord, which forwarded very much (as it is said) to the yielding of the Place.
It Is very probable that the French King designed this Siege very early in the
Spring, if the foul dirty Weather that followed the Rigor of the last Winter
had not prevented it; or even in the Winter it self, if it had not been so
severe; for he had gained in his Interest the Baron de Berse Lietenant,
Governor of the Place, a Gentleman (if I may call a Traitor so) born in the
Franche-Conte, and who had been (as is reported) Forty Five Years in the King
of Spain's Service. The Inhabitants of Namur relied very much upon him; and
indeed, more than the Prince of Brabancon their Governor, whom they suspected,
because a great part of his Estate lay in the French Conquests between the
Sambre and the Meuse. This Lieutenant Governor was so much trusted, that he
took care of all the Magazines, Provisions and Ammunitions that were in the
place, and such Care, that he left them almost unprovided. Whether it was, that
things were ripe for the Design, if a kind Season had seconded it, or that he
saw that he had gone so far, that he could stay no longer in the place for fear
of being discovered, he took occasion one day to go and visit some Out-posts,
and by this Pretext got himself intercepted by a Party of the Garrison of
Dinant, where he was carried Prisoner, to cover the Plot; but his being so
easily persuaded to take the French Service, does very plainly prove, that his
being taken Prisoner was but a Sham. It is said* he did very great Service in
this Siege, in directing the Attacks where he thought they would be must
convenient, who knew so well the State of the Fortification. Upon this
Treacherous Governor's deserting of the Place, which gave reason to suspect
some Design, the Magazines were immediately visited, and found in a very had
Condition; upon which Orders were sent to the Governor of Maestricht, to send
forthwith a Convoy of all sorts of Ammunition, as Powder, Ball, Match, etc. and
Seven Pieces of Canon, which was sent under the Escorte of a very strong
Detachment of the Garrisons of Maestricht, Liege, and Huy, and Quarters
thereabouts, being commanded by Count Cerclaes of Tilly, who safely got the
Convoy into Namur, about the latter end of February, or the beginning of March
last.

But to return to our Army: Whilst we were encamped at Bethlehem, the Elector
of Bavaria, with the King of Spain's Troops, lay encamped within two Miles of
us, on the way, between Louvain and Brussels, which afterward, with his
Bavarian Curiassers, made our Right Wing of Horse, that being still the
Elector's Post of Command.

The King, May 23./June 2.
early in the Morning, had by an Express the happy News of our Victory at Sea,
by Admiral Russel, over the Count de Tourville, the French Admiral, which though
it gave but a confused Relation as yet, of the French loss, and our advantage
over them, the Express being sent immediately after the French Fleet began to
make off; yet it was a Victory of such consequence, that in the Evening the
King caused all the English Artillery (which had joined us but little before,
if not that very day) to be drawn upon the top of a Hill, upon the Right of our
Army, looking toward Namur; the Dutch Artillery was likewise placed on the
same Hill, upon the Left of ours; and Orders were given for the drawing out of
the whole Army in the Evening, to express our Joy for the Victory, by the
triple Discharge of our Artillery and Small-shot, and at the same time to give
Notice of it to the French, who were very busy in prosecuting the Siege of
Namur, the Wind standing very fair for that purpose. The whole Army in
expressing their Joy for this Victory, showed such an alacrity and eagerness to
be with the Enemy, to second this great Success of our Fleet, and not to be
behind-hand with our Maritime Forces, that we had all the reason in the World
to expect great Matters, if they had been set on the Enemy.

This day we were likewise joined by the Danish Troops, commanded by Prince
Wirtemberg, consisting of Eight Battalions of Foot, and a proportionable number
of Horse; Col. Earl's Regiment came in likewise the same Day, and Orders were
given out this Night, for our marching the next Morning.

We marched from Bethlehem to Park, 24./June 3.
another Abbey on the other side of Louvain, as you go to Namur; in this March
the Second Line moved through the First, because we marched upon the Right, and
fronting another way at Park, toward the Enemy. The Second Line by this motion
remained in the Rear, when we came to our ground; where we halted the next Day,
in which we were joined by the Bavarian Curiassiers, about 1400 strong, who
took their Post in the Right Wing of Horse, immediately upon the Right of the
English Foot-Guards. The King resolving to use his utmost endeavor to raise
the Siege of Namur, gave Orders this Day for all the heavy Baggage of the Army,
as Carts, Wagons, and Coaches, to be sent away to Arschot, a Captain of every
Brigade in the Army, with a proportionable number of Men, being commanded to
guard it, and Orders were likewise given this Evening, for the Army's marching
the next day.

The Army marched to Meldert, 26./June 5.
making our way toward the Mehaigne, as well in order to join the Elector of
Brandenburgh's Forces, and those of the Bishop of Liege, under the Command of
Baron Fleming, Velt-Mareschal General to his Electoral Highness, and of Count
Cerclaes of Tilly, the Bishop of Liege's General; which Junction the French
Army could otherwise have hindered, if we had marched the direct Road to Namur,
these Forces coming from the Paiis de Juliers, and that of Liege, so that the
French would have remained between them and us: As also because the French Army
had destroyed all the first Forage about Gemblours, where they encamped for a
considerable time. This Day His Majesty by a Second Express, which came to him
upon the March, received the Particulars of our Sea-Engagement, together with
the Account of Admiral Russel's, having burnt Thirteen Men of War at the Hogue,
and Sir Ralph Delaval the Royal Sun, and his Two Seconds, at Cape Wyke; which
good News His Majesty was pleased to order those about the Court, to disperse
about the Army that Day: which was likewise confirmed to Prince Vaudemont, in
several Letters from France, to the Princess his Wife, Daughter to the late
Duke of Elboeuf, of the House of Lorrain.

The Army having decamped from Meldert, 27./June 6.
marched to Lissam, where the King first formed the Corpse de Reserve, ordering
in the March Twelve Squadrons, and Six Battalions to encamp in the Rear of the
Line, which at that time covered His Majesty's Quarters at Lissam; this Corpse
de Reserve, as I have now said, consisted of Twelve Squadrons of Horse and
Dragoons, and Six Battalions, viz. Churchil, Bath, Saxe Gotha Two Battalions,
Friesem, and Anhalt; this Body was then put under the Command of Count de
Lip, the Landtgrave of Hesse's General, who before the opening of the
Campaigne upon the Rhine, had come to offer his Service to His Majesty, as a
Voluntier, who had Baron Wartensteben for his Lieutenant General, and for
Brigadier the Prince of Anhalt.

This Day we were joined by the Brandenburg and Liege Forces, May 28./June 7.
about 14000 strong, under the Command of Baron Fleming, and Count Cerclaes of
Tilly; for which reason the Army made a motion, to bring them within the Line,
as also the Spanish Forces, under his Electoral Highness of Bavaria, which
hitherto had made a Camp apart, marching still as we did, and incamping at a
small distance upon our Right; the Army therefore to bring these Forces within
the Line, moved toward the Left. In this motion we could perceive, that the
French Army, under the Command of Marshall de Luxemburg, was marching toward
the Mehaigne as well as we, by the great Dust it raised in the Air, it being
now dry and hot Weather; thus by the joining of these Forces, our Line of
Battle was formed, we being computed about Fourscore thousand strong, the King
commanding the Main Body, the Elector of Bavaria the Right Wing, and Prince
Waldeck the Left; and Orders were given for our marching the next Day, without
Quarter Masters, to go before and mark out our Camp, we being then too near the
Enemy.

We marched on toward the Enemy, 29./June 8.
and about Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, we came in sight of one another,
the Mehaigne remaining between us; our Left Wing, which in this March had the
Van, being something more forward than the Right of the French Army; upon our
coming near the Mehaigne, we immediately possessed ourselves of all the Posts
upon the River, so far as our Lines reached, in order to pass it over, as soon
as the Bridges could be made. But the French on the other side, were possessed
of two Villages, about a quarter of a Mile from the River, which were
surrounded with strong Hedges and Thickets, between which Villages was a small
Plain, not half a Mile broad, where several French Squadrons had advanced
themselves, coming very close to the Riverside; but we having raised a Battery
of Cannon on our side, we soon dispersed them, and obliged them to retreat to
their Body, which kept out of Cannon-shot: at the same time we planted
Batteries of Cannon at all those Posts upon the River, as we had possessed
ourselves of, placing an Officer and a proportionable Guard at every Post, by
which means we were so far Masters of the River, that the French Soldiers could
not come for a drop of Water.

The King, during this Camp, took his Quarter at Villeer, otherwise Ville, an
old rotten Village not far from Hannuy, a decayed Market Town, surrounded with
ruinated Ramparts; in the Evening His Majesty gave Orders for the building of
Bridges over the Mehaigne, in order to pass it the next Day, to attack the
Enemy; the Picquet-Guard of the Army being drawn out to cut down Trees and
Timber, and such other Materials as they could find in the Woods, Barns, or
Houses fit for that purpose; every Regiment as they stood, first and second in
the two Lines, being to build a Bridge for to go over, that thus the whole Army
might pass the River in a Front, and at the same time.

Though things were so well disposed to attack the Enemy the next Day, 29./June 8.
yet this glorious Undertaking was soon hindered by the great Rains that begun
that very Evening; this being St. Medard's Day, it being an observation among
the People of this Country, that when it Rains upon this Day, it holds more or
less for the Forty Days following; which proved not altogether false this Year:
for whilst we were encamped in this place, for eight Days together, it rained
almost continually, the Wind blowing at the same time very boisterously, which
quickly swelled this little River, so that though it be very deep, and pretty
high Banks, yet it soon overflowed the neighboring Meadows, so that as we
could not keep our Bridges over the River; so at the same time, the ways by the
excessive Rains, became impracticable for our Cannon.

This River Mehaigne has its Spring about Gemblours, a Mile or so W. N. W. and
is there but a little Brook, as a Man may very easily leap over; but by the
help of several other little Brooks which fall into it, particularly from that
side of the River which lies toward Namur, after a course of four or five
Miles, it makes a very deep, though narrow River, and at length falls into the
Meuse, about a League higher than Huy. The Left of our Line in this Camp,
reached as far as Lattine, within five Miles of Huy, which being flanked by the
Corpse de Reserve, the General Count de Lip had his Quarter in this Village.
From this Village, as far as the Meuse, the Mehaigne runs between very steep
Hills, which renders it impassable below this place, as the Meuse lies between
Namur and Liege. The Line of our Army extended itself from this Village very
near six Miles upon the Right, having left a Bottom empty behind a rising
Ground, where our Troops could not have been seen from the Enemies Camp;
therefore to make our Line appear the longer to the Enemy, we left in this
place an Interval in the Second Line, which proved almost between the Body of
the Army, and the Left Wing of Horse; by this Method, the Left of our Line
outwing'd considerably the Right of the French.

Whilst the two Armies were thus facing one another, the Mehaigne lying between
us, abundance of Deserters came daily from the Enemies Camp, sometimes Two or
Three hundred a Day, not only Foreigners, as Suissers, Germans, and
Montferrins, but a great many of their own Native Troops, all complaining of a
general want of Forage and Provisions in the French Camp: for they had laid so
long already about Namur, that they had consumed most of the first Forage; and
their Provisions coming to them from Mons, Maubeuge, and Philipville and
Dinant, they were daily molested by Parties from the Garrison of Charleroy, so
that they could not come but very seldom, and that under the Escorte of very
strong Convoys. We were likewise told, That the Marshall de Luxemburg to make
his Army the greater, and in a condition to oppose ours, drew out all the
Troops that were in the Lines at Namur, relieving the Lines of Circumvallation
and Trenches from his own Army from time to time, the Left being not far from
Namur; so that though our Army was so strong and numerous, yet Luxemburg out-did
us in number. As for our side, very few Deserters went over to the Enemy:
whether it was, that we so mastered and commanded the River, that they could
not pass, or their own inclinations that kept them in their Duty; for deserting
is a very common thing on both sides, when Armies are near one another.

Whether it was true or not, that Provisions were so scarce in the French Army,
however they soon had plenty, by the surrender of the Town of Namur, which was
yielded to the French during this Storm of Rain and windy Weather, which had
hindered us from doing any thing for its Relief, and before they were obliged
to it by any stress of their Condition; but the commanding Officers thinking
that they could make a longer Defense in the Castle, if they did not harrass
their Forces in the defense of the Town, were induced by this Consideration to
deliver it to the French, and to withdraw all the Garrison in the Castle for
its defense: the Condition upon which the Town was surrendered to the French,
was, that a kind of Neutrality should be observed between the Town and the
Castle, whilst the French attacked the letter place; that is, that the French
should not annoy the Castle from the Town, nor the Besieged to do any prejudice
to the Town from the Castle. The yielding of this place proved at last the loss
of the Castle; for though the Besieged might be in a better condition to make a
vigorous defense in the Castle, by yielding the Town, yet that deprived us even
of a possibility of doing any thing, in which we could expect success, to
relieve the Castle; whereas the relieving the Town was not a Work so difficult,
but might have been done by our Troops, who all showed a very great eagerness
to be with the Enemy: for whilst the French besieged the Town, they had very
large Lines of Circumvallation to keep, which were likewise commanded by
several Eminencies about the Town, which they must either yield to us, if we
had attempted to raise the Siege, or defend with their own Troops; which would
have lessened the Number of the Enemies Army we should have had to engage, and
if we had beaten, the Siege must have been raised of course; so that by
yielding of the Town, Luxemburg had all those Troops which were employed in the
Lines at Namur, to reinforce his Army, which now covered the Siege of the
Castle, where the French King was in Person to Command, taking his Quarter at
the Abbey of Salsen, upon the Sambre. The Castle of Namur (being built upon
that Nook of Land which is made by the meeting of the Sambre and the Meuse) is
a Fortification consisting of three parts within one another, going up from the
meeting of the Rivers, till you come to the Descent of the Hill on the other
side, which makes almost the Figure of Three Horn-works within one another.
Toward the Sambre lies an Eminency or little Hill, which because it was so
near the Castle, that it could be very prejudicial to it in case of a Siege,
Colonel Coehorne commanding a Dutch Regiment in this Garrison fortified it
lately with a Horn-work, An. 1691.
which was called William's Fort, or the Coehorne, and brought it within the
Communication of the Castle by a covered way; beyond all this, toward the Boys
de Marlagne lay a kind of Redoubt or Block-house, called the Devil's House;
that side of the Castle which lies upon the Mues being a mere Precipice, is
liable to no Attempt upon that side, either for taking or relieving of it.

Much about the same time Count de Lip, the Landtgrave of Hesse's General,
and Lieutenant General Baron Wartensteben left the Command of the Corpse de
Reserve, to go to their proper Command upon the Rhine, the Confederates
beginning now to take the Field there, and making two separate Bodies, the one
commanded by the Landtgrave of Hesse, and the other by the Marquess of
Brandenburgh Barieth. Count de Lip having left the Corpse de Reserve,
Brigadier Iselsthein had the Command of it. June 6./16.
Prince Waldeck being indisposed, went from this Camp to Maestricht, whereof he
is Governor, being but six Leagues from this place.

The Army marched this day upon the Right as far as Perteys, June 7./17.
the King taking his Quarters at Ramely, otherwise Ramey, and our Left
extending it self to the Pass of Brancon upon the Mehaigne, the French marching
at the same time on the other side of the River, halted with us, to form their
Camp on that side of the River. When we came both to our respective Grounds,
the Left of our Army, and more particularly the Corpse de Reserve (which was
just upon the Pass of Brancon, which it had upon the Right, slanking the Left
of our Line) was almost within Masquet-Shot of the Enemy's Right; but when they
came to pitch their Camp, they retreated considerably toward a Wood that was
in their Rear. His Majesty coming this Evening to view the Lines, found the
Infantry of the Corpse de Reserve too much exposed to the Enemies Canon,
particularly Brigadier Churchill and the Earl of Bath's Regiments, which were
encamped just upon the very River side, ordered them to decamp in the Night,
and to march on the other side of the Grand Causey, which they had just upon
their Left; this being a Causey-way that goes, as it is said, from Cologne, by
Maestritcht, to Mons and Cambray, and so to Paris: This Causey-way being very
high in this place, covered then very well the Corpse de Reserve.

The French having their Camp in this place upon a rising Ground, June 9./19.
making a Descent from their Front toward a River, and in their Rear toward
the Wood, made a Motion one Afternoon, which made us believe they had a Design
to March, upon which Orders were immediately given for the drawing out of the
Piquett Guard of our Army, and the whole Army to be in readiness to march; but
we found quickly that it was but a Faint, their Design being only to retreat on
the other side of the Rising Ground toward the Wood, to remove their Camp out
of our sight, that thus they might march when they pleased, without our
Knowledge. They left in this Motion Five or Six Squadrons upon their Right,
facing toward our Camp, as if it had been their Rear-guard upon this March:
Whereupon my Lord of Athlone was commanded with 10 Squadrons to pass the River
at Brancon, and to observe them, being accompanied by the Dukes of Ormond and
Richmond, my Lords Portland, Overkirk, Essex, Hide, Dalkeith, etc. as
Volunteers. Ours and the French Squadrons faced one another a quarter of an
hour, wheeling sometimes one way, and sometimes another: But the Earl of
Atholne finding that the French Army was encamped just on the other side of the
Rising Ground, did not think it fit to charge the French Squadrons; and thus
commanded back his Ten Squadrons to our Camp; no Act on happening in this
business, except the firing of a Carabine or two.

At the same time as Luxembourg made this Motion, we observed that the French
were very silent about the Castle of Namur, their Fire having ceased this day,
which inspired us with very different Passions of Hope and Fear of the Sieges
being raised, or the Castle surrendered; but we heard afterward, that the
reason was, because they had changed their Attacks upon the Coehorne or
William's Fort, (as it afterward proved) in a more successful place.

The Garrison of Charleroy hearing that a great Convoy of Bread, Meal, Oxon and
Sutlers, went from Mons and Maubeuge to the Enemy's Army, made a very strong
Detachment, which fell so successfully upon the Convoy, that they took most of
the Wagons, laden with Wine, Meal, and other. Provisions, and about 150 fat
Oxen, making a very considerable Booty.

The French Army having marched upon the Left toward Gemblours, Juns 10./20.
their Right, which is made up of their best Troops, being then not far from
the Right of our Army; and the Mehaigne being here very narrow and
inconsiderable, the King ordered the Infantry of the Corpse de Reserve to
interline in the Right Wing of Horse, under the Duke of Bavaria's Command, to
reinforce it. A day or two after we heard a very terrible Blow at Namur, like
a Clap of Thunder, and a great Smoke rising afterward, gave us reason to fear
the blowing up of some of the Besieged's Magazines.

This day the Army marched to Sombref, June 12./22.
going through the Right of that Ground, in which the French had encamped the
Day before, and leaving in this March Gemblours upon the Left Flank of our
Columns, where a Brandenbourg Trooper shot a French Safeguard that Luxembourg
had given to the Abbey of this place, which, as it was an Infraction of the
Rules of War, it was reported, that his Majesty would send the Trooper to the
Marshall of Luxembourg to punish him as he pleased. In this March we heard
that the French had made themselves Masters of the little Fort, called the
Devil's House. We rested at Sombref the next day, nothing happening
extraordinary.

This Day the Army marched from Sombref to Melle, 14./24.
having Fleury upon our Right, where the Elector of Bavaria took his Quarter.
About this time the Coeborne or William's Fort was yielded to the French,
12./22.
by a special Capitulation, the like, may be, having been hardly heard of
before, that an Outwork should make a particular Capitulation for it self,
which indeed was not very honorable, the Troops that were in it being to go to
Ghendt; but making a long turn through most of the Frontier Garrisons, as Dinant,
Philipville, Maubuge and Mons, as so many Triumphs to proclaim the French Kings
Glory. Colonel Coehorne being very much indisposed by his continual Fateigues
in the Defense of his own Work, refused to Sign this Capitulation. The Besieged
say for themselves in this business, That the French having cut off the
Communication between this Fort and the Castle, they were obliged to make this
separate Capitulation: For the French finding all their Attacks unsuccessful
upon this Horn-work, changed them upon the covered way, that made the
Communication between the Castle and the Fort; and at length, after many
Assaults, they lodged themselves between the Fort and the Castle, and forced by
this means the Coehorne to surrender.

We made a considerable Detachment from our Army to cover our Foragers, June
20./. 30.
who went about Tresigny on the Sambre; and we made this Detachment so much the
stronger, that the next, in which we had some other Designs than to cover our
Foragers, should give no suspicion to the Enemy. Captain Luke of Brigadier
Churchill's Regiment, being in this Detachment, had the Misfortune to be taken
Prisoner; he was posted with a Guard upon the Wood, in which (it seems) there
was a French Party, who beat both the English and Scotch March, as if they had
been some of our own Detachments: One of their Soldiers came, and when he was
challenged by the Sentry, he desired in English to speak with the Officer.
Whereupon Captain Luke coming to him, he was thus drawn in an Ambuscade, that
made him Prisoner just by his Guard, and was afterward carried to Namur.

This Evening we heard a great Firing in Luxembourg's Army, 20./30.
the meaning whereof we soon suspected, that it was for the Surrender of the
Castle of Namur, which capitulated this day very early in the Morning.

Capitulation of the Castle of NAMUR, June 20/30, 1692.
Articles proposed by the Prince of Brabancon, in behalf of the Garrison and
Inhabitants.
I. THat His Most Christian Majesty shall maintain the Burgers and Inhabitants
in all their Privileges.

II. That the Prince of Brabancon shall have twenty four hours time, to let the
Elector of Bavaria know the State of the place; after which time, if he is not
relieved, he shall deliver one of the principal Ports to the King's Troops.

III. That he shall have two days time to put the Garrison in a readiness to
evacuate the place.

IV. That the Garrison composed of Walloons, Spaniards, and Brandenburgers,
shall leave the place, the Infantry to march out of the Breach, Drums beating,
etc. and to be conducted the nearest way to Louvain, under a sufficient
Escorte, to secure them from all Insultations and Hostilities.

V. That the Garrison shall have granted them a sufficient Number of Wagons,
of six Horses each, for the carrying away their Baggage, Effects, and all other
Equipage.

VI. That those Effects shall not be visited, particularly three covered
Wagons, in which the Governor shall send out what he thinks convenient, with
all security.

VII. That the Intendant, Treasurer, and the rest of the King's Officers, shall
be comprised in this Captialation.

VIII. That the Officers and Soldiers of the Garrison, shall have the liberty
to retake what they left in the Town, when they surrendered it, to retire in
the Castle.

IX. That the Garrison going, shall not be obliged to the Payment of any Debts,
and that they shall have leave to buy in the Town what they shall want.

X. That the sick and wounded as shall not be able to go to Louvain, shall
remain in the Hospitals of the Town, and shall be nourished and looked after, at
His Most Christian Majesty's Expenses, and after they are recovered, they shall
have Passes granted them to retire where they shall think fit.

XI. That the Garrison shall march out with Six Pieces of Cannon, and Four
Mortars, with all things necessary to carry them to Louvain, besides powder and
Ball for Six Shots.

XII. That all Persons whatever, without any exception or distinction of the
Dependencies of Namur, as shall be willing to leave the place, that they shall
have liberty to go where they please, with their Goods and Effects.

XIII. That the Prisoners made on both sides during the Siege, shall be
released without any Ransom.

And as for Major General Wymberg, commanding the Dutch Troops, as made part of
the Garrison.

XIV. That His Most Christian Majesty shall allow thrity Barks, or other
Vessels, with a good Convoy, to conduct safely the Officers and Soldiers in the
States Service, with all their Effects, by the Maes to Liege.

XV. That he shall have Four Pieces of Canon, and as many Mortars, etc. as in
the 11th Article.

ARTICLES granted by the French King.
I. GRanted.

II. That the Governor shall have but Six Hours time to regulate his
Capitulation: and that for this effect, he shall deliver to His Majesty's
Troops, one of the Stairs of the Dungeon, and the right of the Court, the rest
remaining for the Garrison.

III. That the Governor shall be obliged to evacuate the place the first of
July, at Three in the Afternoon, and that then the Castle shall be delivered in
His Majesty's Hands.

IV. That the Garrison, made up of Spaniards, etc. shall march out of the
Breach, Drums beating, etc. the Horse to go through the Town, and that they
shall be conducted in four Days to Louvain; upon Condition, that they shall not
serve in the Allies Army in three weeks time; that they shall have Ammunitions,
and other Necessaries for their Subsistence given them by the King, till they
come to His Catholic Majesty's Territories.

V. Granted: And because His Majesty has not Wagons enough at present, they
shall have them in a Fortnight's time, viz. three Wagons with four Horses per
Battalion, and one for the Field Officers.

VI. Allowed; and since these Wagons are not yet ready, the Effects of the
Garrison shall be put in such places of the Hospitals, or Monasteries, as His
Catholic Majesty's Intendant shall find convenient, there to be kept, and till
then, with all safety, and that His Most Christian Majesty's Troops shall not
touch them.

VII. That the said Officers shall remain Hostages, till the Inhabitants of
Namur, and Dependencies, shall be reimburs'd of all those Sums, as they have
advanced for his Catholic Majesty's Use.

VIII. Tho His Majesty had declared all such Effects forfeited, as the Officers
and Soldiers who withdrew into the Castle had left in the Town, nevertheless he
is willing they should have them again without impediment, upon condition, that
neither they nor their Wives or Children shall have liberty to remain in the
Town.

IX. Granted: That they shall have leave to buy in the Town, etc. but that six
Officers per Battalion shall remain Hostages for the payment of their Soldiers
Debts.

X. Granted: And that His Majesty's Officers shall not force them (after they
are recovered) to quit the Service of the Allies.

XI. That they shall have but four Pieces of Cannon with the King of Spain's
Arms, and two Mortars, etc. in ten days, to be conducted to Louvain, and Powder
and Ball for six Shots.

XII. That for fifteen days time, every Body, without distinction, shall have
leave to withdraw themselves with their Effects: and what they shall not be
able to sell within that time, to be forfeited to the King; the other
Inhabitants that are absent shall be recalled.

XIII. Granted: Except those who are the King's Subjects, who shall be retained.

XIV. Refused: And it is His Majesty's Pleasure, That the said Wymberg, with the
Dutch Infantry under his Command, shall march out of the Breach, Drums beating,
etc. with the rest of the Garrison, to Louvain, that their Effects shall
likewise be kept safely in such place as they shall desire till Wagons can be
provided.

XV. That they shall have but Two Pieces of Canon with the States Arms, if such
can be found, to be carried to Louvain. Other Demands to be regulated according
to these Articles.

Given at the King's Camp before Namur, the 30th of June, about Noon.

Thus the French King became the quiet Possessor of Namur, covering by this
means his Conquests with the Meuse and the Sambre, and securing all that he
has between them from the Incursions of the Enemy, which before were very much
molested by the Garrison of Namur. By this Conquest Brussels is left open to
the Enemy, and Charleroy as good as blocked up between Namur and Mons, and the
Winter Quarters the French have settled at Fleury and Gemblours, which cuts all
Communication between it and Brussels. This indeed seems to be one of the
greatest Actions that the French King has ever done, to take this, which was
reckoned the strongest place in the Spanish Netherlands, and a Man may say, the
very Key of it; a place which had been never taken before, Vide du Maurier in
the Life of William I.
unless we reckon it taken when surpised by Don John of Austria, who
pretending to visit the Queen of Navarre as she passed through this place,
going to the Baths of Aix la Chapelle, Prince of Orange.
wrested this place by surprise out of the Hands of the States of the Seventeen
Provinces, contrary to the Pacification of Ghendt, and the perpetual Edict,
which renewed the Wars of Flanders; and not only that the French King should
take this Strong Place, but in the Presence of the best and finest Army that
the Confederates have ever had in the Field, which, as the French devise upon
the Medals stamped for this occasion, served only as a Witness of the French
King's Victories.

But if we consider the Complication of Misfortunes that prevented our Attempts
to raise this Siege, the Action will not appear so great; as, the Deluge of
Rains that overflowed the River Mehaigne, just when we came to it; the
Surrender of the Town during those Storms, which made us absolutely incapable
of relieving the Castle, without defeating Luxembourg first, who, though he was
more numerous before, yet his Army increased now to a far more considerable
Number, by the Junction of those Troops, which were employed in the Siege of
the Town; and without Besieging and taking the Town afterward, or hazarding
our Army, the other side of the Sambre, in the Defiles of the Bois de Marlagne,
between the French King and Luxembourg's Armies; in which case we must have
beaten both, or been ruined our selves: So that the Surrender of the Town may
be reckoned the Fundamental Misfortune, which occasioned the Loss of the
Castle, which was then in a manner invested by its own Situation between the
Sambre and the Meuse, leaving but very short Lines of Circumvallation for the
French King to keep. Let us likewise consider the weak Defense of the Castle,
after the Loss of William's Fort and the Devil's House, yielding when there was
scarce a Breach in the first Envelope of it; and therefore in almost as good
Condition as it was in the beginning of this War, before the building of
William's Fort.

It is certainly a very surprising and wonderful thing, that a place of such
Importance, in which, as several Walloon Officers say, there was to be a
constant Magazine of Ammunitions and Provisions for Ten Months for 8 or 9000
Men, should now be forced to yield, after a Fortnight or three Weeks Siege, for
want of it; and particularly, when before the surrendering of the Town, 'twas in
their power to command as much Provisions from the Town, for the subsistence of
the Castle, as they thought fit themselves. This is too plain an Argument of a
wilful Negligence; for though there was no probability of relieving the Castle,
after they had surrendered the Town, yet we could expect, that they would make
the more vigorous Defense for it in the Castle, as 'twas pretended, when they
yielded the Town to the Enemy: And nevertheless we find it surrendered, when the
Body of the place remained entire, hardly a Breach being made in the outermost
Work of the Three. The Besieged say, that their greatest Want was Water, which
the Enemy spoiled by the Directions of the Baron de Berse to level their Bombs
to the Well. It is likewise reported, that the Dissentions between the Spanish
and Auxiliary Troops did not a little contribute to forward the Surrender of
the place.

Whatever the Prince of Brabancon the Governor might have to justify his
Conduct in this Siege, yet since he lies under Confiement in the Citadel of
Antwerp, till the Court of Spain be informed of the matter. Yet it is thought,
that though he were guilty, yet being of the House of Aremberg, one of the most
considerable of the Low Countries, and Allied with most of the Grandees of
Spain; and besides, being Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece, which
exempts him from all other Judicatures in Criminal Cases, but that of his
Knights Companions of the Order, with whom he has very much Interest, by
reason of his great Alliances: (I say) that for these Reasons it is thought he
will very soon be restored to his Liberty.

It has been reported by some, who pretend to understand the Affairs of the
Court of Brussels, that the King had desired the Elector of Bavaria to withdraw
this Prince of Brabancon from his Government of Namur, acquainting the Elector
at the same time with the Reasons his Majesty had to suspect his Conduct; and
that this might be done without disobliging the Prince, who is so considerable
both in this Country and Spain, by reason of the great Alliances of his Family,
it was agreed, That the Prince should be desired to make the Campaign with the
Elector. And this went on so far, that the Prince was at Brussels in order to
accompany the Elector in the Field; but the French threatening to set down
before Namur before the opening of the Campaign on our side, the Elector could
not refuse his going to his Government when the Prince desired it, lest he
should discover the Mistrust he had of him. However, at the same time the Duke
of Bavaria ordered the Count de Thian, Major General of the Spanish Forces, to
accompany him in this Siege, giving him some particular Instructions.

We made a very strong Detachment, June 22./July 2.
which consisted of Captain, Lieutenant and Ensign, and Sixty Men of every
Battalion in the Army, which were then about a Hundred, and a proportionable
Number of Horse, their pretended business being to cover our Foragers the next
day; but the real, to endeavor to surprise Mons, of which we had some Hopes,
by the Intelligence we had amongst many of the considerable Inhabitants, who
being still Spaniards in their Hearts, longed to be delivered from the French
Yoke, and who informed, that the Garrison was weak, and most of them Swissers,
who would be as willing as they to join in the business. Therefore as soon as
our Foragers were returned the next Day, Scaling-Ladders, Provisions, and other
necessary Materials were sent, with a Re-inforcement, to Prince Wirtemberg, who
commanded this Detachment: A Sergeant of Fagel's Regiment, who had been in Mons
when it was besieged, being to show the way, and the Attempt to be made upon a
Breach, as the French had not repaired since they took Mons. According to these
Directions Prince Wirtemberg marched the 23 d all Night, and came about One of
the Clock in the Morning, the 24 th, within an Hour of Mons, where having made
an Halt, he sent for Sir Robert Douglas and Colonel Farrel, who commanded the
English, to come and speak with him; but as they went back, it being very dark,
they went a little too much upon the Right, and fell amongst a Party of Horse
of the Garrison of Mons, who made them Prisoners, and carried them away with
all speed to their Garrison; for they confessed themselves as much surpised as
the Prisoners themselves, to be even within our Out-guards. Captain Francis
Sterling, who accompanied Sir Robert Douglas as a Voluntier in this Action, was
of the number of the Prisoners. The Count de Vortillac Governor of Mons, being
informed of our Design the Overnight, had sent out but an hour before this
Detachment of Horse, under the Command of a Captain, to hear News of us, he
himself sitting up all Night to be ready, in case of an Attack. But Prince
Wirtemberg hearing that the Marquess de la Vallette was hard by the Town, with
a strong Detachment of Fifty two Squadrons of Horse, returned back the Twenty
Fourth to the Army.

The French upon our March to Melle, in case we should have a Design upon Mons,
had ordered this Detachment to go toward it, and to receive Orders from the
Count de Vertillac Governor of Mons, when he should have occasion for them;
who accordingly, upon the first Notice of our Design, sent an Express to the
Marquess de la Vallette, to require him to come to his Assistance; who made no
delay, but came immediately, and arrived at Mons as soon as Sir Robert Douglas
himself; and the Party that made him Prisoner and they came to Town between
Three and Four in the Morning.

Sir Robert Douglas and the other two Prisoners being come to Mons, were
treated with a great deal of Civility, the Governor coming himself to give
them a Visit, and took them afterward with him in his Coach to Dinner, after
he had given them the Liberty both of their Swords and the Town; but they could
not make much use of the latter, by reason they were so much taken up in the
Civilities of the Governor, Intendant and Major, that they had scarce time to
see it; but yet they saw enough to find, that the Garrison was not in that case
as had been represented; that there was but two Swisse Companies in the place,
and five or six French Regiments; that it was true, that whilst we were upon
the Mehaigne, the Garrison had been weak, but re-inforc'd upon our March to
Melle.

Whilst we were in this Camp, six or seven days before we left it, our heavy
Baggage which we had sent to Arschot, from the Camp at Park, came to us under
the Convoy of a Detachment of Horse and Dragoons, that had been sent for that
purpose.

The Corpse de Reserve was ordered to march to Genap, June 2^./July 5.
to guard the Train of Artillery, which was sent before, because the ill
Weather which continued hitherto, had made the ways so bad, that 'twas
impossible for the Army and Artillery to march in the same day. The whole Army
followed the next day, and encamped in the little Plains of Genap, 26./6.
a very difficult, and therefore strong Ground, by reason of the Woods that are
upon the Right and Left, and the Bois de Sogne in our Rear, and the Ground
itself very unequal, by reason of the many little Hills that are in some places
very steep; as we had in this Camp the Bois de Sognes in our Rear, so we had
the little River Dyle in our Front, which rising something higher than this
place, goes through Genap, and so to Louvain, and Macklen, and at length falls
into the Scheld. The King had his Head-Quarter at Genap, our Right reaching to
the Castle of Bromel, where the Elector had his Quarter, and was flanked by the
Corpse de Reserve, which faced thus to the Duke of Bavaria's Quarter; the Left
of the Army reaching to Boutauneuf.

At the same time as the Army marched from Melle to Genap, Baron Fleming with
the Brandenburg Forces, and Count Cerclaes of Tilly, with those of Liege, were
sent back to pass the Meuse, to cover the Paiis de Liege, which now lies quite
open to the Enemy, since the taking of Namur; however, by the Junction of the
Newbourg Troops, and those of the Elector of Cologne, which were sent to join
Fleming, the Bishop of Liege's Country has been so far secured, that the
French have not been able to undertake any thing in it, and that we have
possessed ourselves of all the Winter Quarters there, by which means we shall
be able to put Huy, the next Garrison upon the Meuse, in a good posture of
defense, against the next Campaign.

This day His Majesty took a Review of the Fifteen English Battalions of the
Army, June 29./July 9.
in the Elector of Bavaria's Presence; with which his Electoral Highness, as
well as His Majesty, seemed to be very well satisfied: The English Battalions
were, Two of the First Regiment of Guards, One of the Second, Two of the Dutch
Guards, Churchil's, Trelawney's, Fufileers, Bath's, Hodges's, Fitz-Patricks,
Castleton's, Earl's, Cutt's, and the Prince of Hesse's; Sir Robert Douglas came
likewise to the Camp this day, having his Liberty by paying his Ransom, as
likewise Col. O Farrel, and Captain Sterling, having been but three days
Prisoners, if Gentlemen can be called so, when they were treated with so much
Civility by the Governor of Mons, and the Intendant of the place. The next day
His Majesty reviewed the Danes, and other Foreign Forces, upon the English
Establishment.

This day a Detachment was ordered of ten Regiments, July 3./13.
and a proportionable number of Horse, under the Command of Count Horn,
General of the Dutch Artillery, who marched to Brussels, and from thence to the
Pais d' Alost, and so to Ghendt, where he encamped for some time, just out of
the Town, toward the Canal of Bruges, till we came to the Scheld; this motion
was made, as is supposed, to secure the Forage of this Country for the latter
end of the Campaigne. This day, likewise in the afternoon, His Majesty, in the
Elector's Presence, reviewed the Scotch Infantry, which consisted of ten
Battalions, viz. Two of the Guards, two of Sir Robert Douglass's,
Lieutenant General Mackay's, Sir Charles Graham's, Col. O Farrel's, Earl of
Angus's, Earl of Leven's, and Col. Lawder's, most of them appearing very strong
and full.

After that the French King had made himself Master of the Castle of Namur,
Luxemburg, who with the Army under his Command, had observed us, to hinder our
doing any thing for its Relief, passed the Sambre, not only to consume the
Forage there, but also because we lay between him and Mons, and therefore it
was necessary that he should pass the Sambre, to get between Mons and us; where
after he had encamped some time at St. Gerard, and some other place, he
repassed the Sambre above Charleroy, at Bussiere, and came to Soignes, not far
from Mons.

We being to forage this day, July 10./20.
the French made a Detachment from their Army to molest our Forragers, tho
others say, that it was Boufflers, who with his Camp volant, was going back to
repass the Sambre, to observe Fleming; whatever it was, an advanced Detachment
of theirs, of about forty Men, falling unawares amongst part of our Detachment
that covered the Forragers, who thereupon were all taken Prisoners; their
Design was discovered, and the Forragers were all immediately ordered to return
home empty, most of them not having yet forrag'd; and those that had, had
Orders to fling down their Trusses, to remove the quicker out of the Enemies
way: Notice being given of this to His Majesty, he immediately got on
Horseback, and ordered the Pickquet of the whole Army to be drawn out under
Arms, and to Rendezvous at the Hermitage, on the other side of the River Dyle,
to be ready to second our Detachment that guarded our Forragers, in case they
had met with the Enemy; but nothing else happening, they returned home. The
French Parties were indeed very busy this Camp, because of the Woods that lay
particularly upon our Right, where they could come and shelter themselves, so
that very often we had Horses taken by them, grazing just by our very Camp; but
once we having Notice, that one of their Parties lay in a Wood, just by our
Right, not far from the Elector of Bavaria's Quarters, a Detachment was made
from the Corpse de Reserve, to go and clear the Wood of them; it is very
probable, that they had all been taken Prisoners; for when we had discovered
them, and that we came near them, they all cried Quarter, but the Germans
firing immediately upon them, that dispersed them so up and down the Wood and
Thickets, that they made their escape.

The Elector of Brandenburg having removed his Court this Summer to Cleves,
July 16./26.
to be nearer his Forces, te give them such Orders as he thought convenient,
passed the Meuse at Roermoade, and came as far as Vrecklen, not far from
Louvain, to conser with His Majesty upon the present State of Affairs; where
His Majesty went to meet him, about the middle of this Month, being guarded by
a strong Escorte of Horse and Dragoons, After the Conference, the King returned
to the Camp at Genap; and the Elector went to view his Forces that were now
encamped on the other side of the Meuse, near the River Outre, not far from
Liege; and afterward his Electoral Highness having passed by Maestricht,
returned to Cleves.

Much about the same time, the Elector of Bavaria went to Brussels, 17./27.
having a very strong Escorte all along the way, that goes through the Bois de
Sogne to Brssuels, this Wood being generally very full of French Parties, and
more particularly at this time that they expected the Duke of Bavaria's going
to Brussels, to the Procession of the Bloody Host, where the Governors of the
Spanish Netherlands are still used to assist. This bloody Host is kept in the
great Church of Brussels, it was stabbed by a Jew (as they say) in contempt of
our Savior, and immediately there fell from it some Drops of Blood, which
remain upon the Host to this day. The Elector returned the same day in the
Evening, after the Procession, to Brussels, having (as is said) escaped many
dangerous Ambuscades in this Bois de Sognes, by his quick and speedy Riding.

This day the Army decamped from Genap, and made a great March, July 21./31.
as far as Nostredame de Hall, having passed by Nivelle, the Abbey of Bois
Seignerer Isaac, and a very bad Defile at Brain le Chateau, it rained also most
part of this day, which made the ways very difficult and deep, particularly for
the Rear of the Army: by this long March, which lasted from Morning till Night,
we assured ourselves of the Camp at Halle, where otherwise the French might
have been beforehand with us, and thus have hindered (by possessing themselves
of this Pass) the Subsistence of our Army in this unforrag'd Country, and
afterward in Flanders. We encamped this day our Right upon the Senne, our
Corpse de Reserve flanking it, and fronting toward Halle, and our Left extended
itself as far as Brain le Chateau; we passed this day through the Ground that
was marked for the Hanouer Troops to encamp that day, they marching up in all
have to join us.

The next day the Army passed the Senne in several Columns, 22./Aug. 1.
one with the Corpse de Reserve going through the Town, the others upon several
Bridges of Boats, that were laid above it; the King took his Quarters at the
Castle of Lembeck, and the Elector in the Town of Halle; a place famous for the
Devotions made to an Image of our Lady, given about Four hundred Years since by
Elizabeth Queen of Hungary, and a Daughter of the House of Flanders; which, as
the Legend of it pretends, has wrought abundance of Miracles, Pictures being
hung all about the Church that represent them, but none of later date than the
Fifteenth Century. I don't know whether it is because it has not that Faculty at
present, or whether the Reformation has not put a stop to several of their
pious Cheats. This Church is of late given and impropriated to the Jesuits,
that have a very pretty little College by it. The Town of Halle, when we had
passed the Senne, and pitched our Camp, remained in the Rear of our Right Wing
of Horse, where the Hanover Troops afterward took their Post. In this Camp
likewise the Infantry of the Corpse de Reserve was commanded in the Body of the
Army, Brigadier Churchill's and the Earl of Bath's Regiments taking their
former Posts amongst the English

We were likewise joined this Day in the Afternoon by the Hanover Troops,
computed to be between 7 and 8000 strong, Horse and Foot, and all very fine and
gallant Troops, particularly the Horse of his Highnesses Guard, of which there
was two Troops, the one upon Gray, and the other upon Bay Geldings, which being
very well accouter'd, and incomparably well mounted, made a very fine and
martial show. His Troop of Dragoons du Corpse did almost equal his Lifeguard in
fineness and goodness of Equipage, and in their Horses. The next day we were
also joined by two English Regiments of Horse, namely, Colonel Langston's and
the Marquess de Ruvigny, now Lord Gallaway; the first of the two was afterward
(some few days after the Engagement at Steenkirk) broke into our other
Regiments to augment their Complement, the Officers being removed according to
their Posts, into those Vacancies as were in other Regiments, and what remained
being allowed Subsistence, till they are provided for, the same way.

in the Evening Orders were given out for Six Battalions to be ready to march
an hour before day, July 23./Aug. 2.
and to parade at the Head of Prince Waldeck's Regiment. The Battalions were,
the Second of the first Regiment of Guards, the first of Sir Robert Douglas's,
Col. FitzPatrick, Col. O Farrels, a Battalion of the Danish Guards, and the
Queens. Orders were likewise given for Seventeen Men of each Battalion in
Churchill's Brigade to be ready at the same time and place, and to be commanded
by Lieutenant Colonel Manwayring, their business being to make the ways through
the Defiles; they were all to receive a Ducat a Head for their Labor; and as
they were to join with the Vanguard in time of business, they carried their
Arms with them as well as Hatchets and Spades. All this Detachment was to be
commanded by the Duke of Wirtemberg as the Vanguard of our Army. Orders were
likewise given for the whole Army to march very early in the morning, the
General to beat at break of Day, and the Army to be ready to march at Sun
rising. All these Preparations were in order to attack the French the next day
in their own Camp at Enghein, who the same Day as we marched from Gennap to
Hall, decamped from Soignes, and made all haste to Enghein, lest we should get
that Ground from them, and thus oblige them to get farther to their own
Conquests; Luxembourg's Right being at Steenkirk, and his Left at Enghien, he
took his Quarters at Hove.

According to Orders, July 24./Aug. 3,
the Six Battalions paraded at the Head of Prince Waldeck's Regiment, and the
Detachment of 17 Men per Battalion of Churchill's Brigade, and received the
Commandment of Prince Wirtemberg; and very early in the Morning the whole Army
followed them, making their way to the Enemies Camp through nothing but
Defiles, being close Ground all the way, and no other way but such as was made
by our Detachment for that purpose; the Baggage being left behind by order, at
the Camp at Hall. About Nine or Ten in the Morning our Vanguard came to the
Advanced Posts of the Enemy, the Marshall of Luxembourg, (as the Paris Account
gives it) having been informed of our Design by Monsieur de Tracey, (who
commanded a Detachment of Horse that Night between the Enemies Camp and ours)
had taken care to possess himself of the most considerable Posts in the
Defiles; but notwithstanding our Vanguard obliged the Enemy to retreat from
them all, till they came to a little Wood, just upon the Right of the Enemies
Camp, except a small Guard in a Village upon the Left of our Columns, almost a
League from the Enemy's Camp, who upon the March of our Army were all made
Prisoners of War; their number about Thirty Men and an Officer.

Between Ten and Eleven of the Clock in the Morning our Advanced Guards under
the Command of Prince of Wirtemberg lodged themselves in the Wood that fronted
the Right of the Enemy's Army; the Danes and the Battalion of Guards taking
their Post upon the Left in the Wood; and Sir Robert Douglas; Fitzpatrick's and
O Farrel's upon the Right of them; on the other side of the Wood was the
Enemy's Camp, a little Valley remaining between, and a great many Hedges, which
the Enemy resolved to maintain with all Vigor possible, though they yielded so
easily their Advanced Posts. Prince Wirtemberg planted upon a little Rising on
the Left of the Wood a Battery of Canon, which began to play about Eleven of
the Clock; and another upon the Right, by Sir Robert Douglas his Battalion.
Captain Macrackan of the same Regiment, who afterward was killed, pointed a
Canon from this Battery so successfully, that it put a whole Battalion of the
Enemies in disorder, sweeping almost an entire Rank before it.

Whilst Prince Wirtemburg was playing upon the Enemy with these Batteries of
Cannon, the Army marched up to the Head of the Defile (about half an English
Mile from the Wood) where it opened in a little Plain upon our Right, not above
half a League over, which terminated upon the Right of the Wood, where our
Vanguard was, and at the Right of our Army, upon several Rows of high Trees,
which seemed planted in great order, as if 'twas the Avenue of some Person of
Quality's House, which being toward Enghien, makes me suppose, that they may
belong to the Duke of Arschot's House, where these famous Gardens be, as are
said to be the Pattern of Versailles: through these, straight before us, on the
other side of the Plain, we could see the French Infantry drawn up in two
Lines, and making toward their Right to defend the Post upon the Wood. Upon
the Right of this Plain, not far from these Groves and Rows of Trees, there was
a pretty considerab^e Farm, which soon after the Engagement was set on fire by
the Enemy, to cover (as it is said) several of their Battalions by the Smoke,
who were ordered this way, and was afterward engaged with Fagel's Brigade,
between this House and the Wood, where our Advanced Guard was posted. From the
Head of our Defile, upon the Left of the Plain, there went for almost half a
Mile in length, a deep hollow way with high Trees and Hedges upon the Banks of
it, which reached as far as the Wood, where the Vanguard was posted, and where
it branched itself in three other deep ways, one going through the Wood upon
the Left to the Danes Attack, and to that of the Guards; one almost straight
forwards; and the other upon the Right, going along the outside of the Wood;
between these two last was the place, where Sir Robert Douglass, Col.
Fitz-Patrick's, and O Farrel's Regiments were posted. On the other side of the
deep way as went from the Head of our Defile to the Post, where was our
VanGuard, went several narrow Fields, which lay between it all along, and a
part of the Wood which reached as far as from our Advanced Guards to our
Defiles.

When the Army was come up to the Head of these Defiles, and just entering into
the small Plains, they were ordered to halt, except the English Life-Guards,
and Horse and Dragoons, which were commanded upon the right skirts of the Wood,
where was our Vanguard, and my Lord Cutts's, Lieutenant General Mackay's, Sir
Charles Graham's, and Earl of Angus's Regiments, which being interlin'd with
the English Horse, were commanded at the same time to the outside of the Wood,
on this side of that way as branched upon the Right, which made the Figure of
the Arch of a Circle, as the skirts of the Wood did here before us; these four
Regiments were posted here, to be ready to second the Attack of our Vanguard.
Prince of Hesse's, Col. Lauder's, and Earl of Leven's Regiments, who were also
interlin'd with the Left Wing of Horse, were likewise posted upon the side of
the Wood.

Things being thus disposed, and our Army continuing on the halt, Prince
Wirtemberg, after he had Cannonaded for above two Hours, begun the Attack with
the Danes upon the Right, which was immediately followed by the other four
English Regiments as composed our Vanguard, and seconded by Cutts, Mackay,
Angus, Graham, Lauder, the Prince of Hesse, and Leven's Regiments. Certainly
never was a more dreadful, and at the same time bolder firing heard, which for
the space of two Hours seemed to be a continued Thunder, and equaled the Noise
even of the loudest Claps; our Vanguard behaved in this Engagement to such
wonder and admiration, that though they received the Charge of several Battalions
of the Enemies, one after another, yet they made them retreat almost into their
very Camp, so far, that the Second Battalion of the First Regiment of Guards,
possessed themselves of a Battery of the Enemies Cannon, which the Enemy were
obliged to quit by the vigor of our Charge; and Colonel Wacup who commanded
the Battalion, and who behaved himself extremely well in this occasion, placed
a Sergeant and Guard upon it; but the French having cut off the Traces, and
taken away the Horses, we could not bring them off, but were obliged afterward
to leave them: Sir Robert Douglass, with his first Battalion, charged several
of the Enemies, and beat them from three several Hedges, and had made himself
Master of the fourth, where going through a Gap to get on the other side, he
was unfortunately killed upon the spot; all the other Regiments performing
equal wonder, and behaving with the same Bravery, and beating the Enemies from
their Hedges so far, that in this Hedge-fighting their fire was generally
Muzzle to Muzzle, we on the one side, and the Enemy on the other.

But to return to our Army; As soon as we were come to the Head of the Defile,
it was ordered to halt, particularly our Left Wing of Horse, that the Foot that
were interlin'd with them, which were most English and Scotch, and which I have
before mentioned, might march up through the Horse; we were obliged to this
halt, though it was the loss of the day; because the Ground was so straight, and
the Enemy had such Hedges, Copses, and little Woods to cover them, that there
was nothing to do for the Horse; so that when the Vanguard began to engage,
they had none but part of the Infantry interlined with the Left Wing of Horse,
to second them, the Body of the Infantry being almost a Mile in the Rear;
however, as soon as the Action began, the King made all diligence possible to
get the Infantry up, ordering a Brigade to march up to the Wood, and forming a
Line of Battle in the Plain, with that Infantry as could come up; the Soldiers
showed such eagerness to come to the Enemy, that they ran to the Relief of
those as were engaged, even so fast, that they put themselves into some
disorder, which was the reason that they took more time to form their
Battalions, than was at that time convenient: this was the case of those
Battalions as were sent to the Wood, to the Relief of our Vanguard; so that
when they came up, our Vanguard and Infantry of the Left Wing being
over-powr'd by the vast many Battalions of the Enemy, as charged them
successively one after another; and lastly, by the survening of Boufflers's
fresh Troops, they were forced to retreat in great disorder, and to leave the
Wood in which they had lodged themselves, entirely to the Enemies possession.
The Baron of Pibrack's Regiment of Lunenburgers being in great disorder in the
skirt of the Wood, and the Baron their Colonel lying dangerously wounded upon
the place, (which he got in rallying of his Regiment) the Earl of Bath's (one
of the Regiments that was commanded toward the Wood) the other English being
Brigadier Churchil's) was ordered by Prince Casimir of Nassaw to their Relief;
two Sergeants of this Regiment rescued the Colonel, who lay wounded almost in
the Enemies hand, and brought him off in spite of their fire; upon these
Orders of Prince Casimir of Nassaw, Sir Bevil Granville, who commanded the Earl
of Bath's Regiment, marched up to the Relief of this Lunenburg Regiment,
bearing the Enemies fire, before he suffered any Platton of his Battalion to
discharge once; by which method the Regiment lodged itself in the Trench, or
deep way, that lay upon the skirt of the Wood, which it maintained, till it was
commanded off again by the same Prince of Nassaw.

The King having formed a Line of as many Battalions as could come up in this
little Plain, the Enemy upon their Right, and our Left of the Wood as wefac'd,
planted a Battery of about ten Pieces of Cannon, to put them in disorder by
their fire; we at the same time brought another against it, and thus continued
firing one upon another for a considerable time. What mischief we did to the
Enemy by our Cannon then, I cannot tell, but theirs killed several of our
Soldiers, some in the Regiment of Fuzileers, and some in the Battalion of the
Second Regiment of Guards, but the most considerable loss we sustained by it,
was Col. Hodges, who was shot with a Cannon-ball at the Head of his Regiment,
of which he soon after died. There was likewise a Skirmish between some of the
French, and some of our Battalions, between the Wood and that Farm which was
fired by the Enemy, but it did not last long; what Regiments they were I cannot
tell; but I suppose they were some of the Dutch interlin'd in the Left Wing of
Horse, commanded by Brigadier Fagel.

The Van Guard being thus disordered for want of a timely Relief, which was
occasioned by the narrowness of the Ground, and consequently beaten out of
their Post in the Wood, Luxemburg being likewise joined by the Marquess of
Boufflers's fresh Troops, who came time enough to complete the Defeat of our
Vanguard with his Dragoons; and besides, the Night drawing on, the King
ordered the Army to retreat, which was done with admirable Order; for though the
French did follow us for some time, yet they did not fire a shot, such was the
order of our Retreat, that they did not dare venture upon it; the English
Grenadiers brought up the Rear, and whenever the French moved toward us, they
faced to the Right about, and presented themselves to the Enemy; then the Enemy
would halt, and so our Rear-Guard then marched on; this halting and facing, and
then marching, continued for some time, till the Night put an end to the
Enemies farther motion: And thus the Army came back to Halle, on Monday Morning
about Three of the Clock.

We lost in this Action several Pieces of Cannon, some taken by the Enemy, and
some we could not bring off, the Horses being tired, we likewise blew up some
of our Powder-Waggons in the Retreat, which we could not bring off, some having
their Carriages broken, and others their Horses tired. The English lost two
Colors and the Dutch likewise some; we had about Two thousand Men killed, and
about Three thousand wounded, in which number we comprehend the Prisoners taken
by the French, disabled by their Wounds to come off, being about 8 or 900. Of
the English and Scotch twelve Battalions engaged, viz. The Second Battalion of
the First Regiment of Guards, the First Battalion of Sir Robert Douglass's,
Col. Fitz-Patricks, and Col. O Farrel's in the Vanguard; Cutts, Hesse, Mackay,
Graham, Angus, Leven, and Lauder, interlin'd in the Left-Wing of Horse. Of the
Body of the Infantry, the Earl of Bath's. Of the Danes, Battalion of Guards,
the Queen's Battalion, Prince Christians and the Finland Battalion. Of the
Dutch, Waldeck, Fagel, Noyelles, Torsey, L'Fcluse, Nassaw, commanded by Colonel
Goz. Lunenburgers in the States Service, Boisdavid and Pibrac; besides Epingers
and Fitzhardings Dragoons, and the Horse Granadiers, who charged on Foot.
Officers killed of Note were, Lieutenant General Mackay, Sir John Lanier
Lieutenant General of Horse mortally wounded, who died few days after at
Brussels, Sir Robert Douglas Earl of Angus, Colonel Hodges, my Lord Mountjoy,
who had been two or three years in Prison in France, and came upon his Liberty
to serve the King as a Voluntier; he was killed with a Canon Ball at the Head
of Colonel Godfrey's Regiment, Lieutenant Colonel Fullerton, Foxon, Hawley,
Wacup and Hamilton, Major Carre of Angus's Regiment, wounded mortally, and died
soon after. Chief Officers wounded, my Lord Cutts, Colonel Mackay, Lieutenant
Colonel Eaton, Courthop, Major Fox of Fitzpatrick's. Prisoners of Note, Colonel
Lauder, Lieutenant Colonel Eaton, Bristol and Courthop. Several Officers of the
Danes, killed, wounded, and some Prisoners, whose Names I cannot Insert. As
likewise of the Dutch, Lietenant General Tetteau wounded, Colonel Goz,
Commandant of Prince Casimir of Nassaws Guards, and Colonel Moor Commandant of
Torsey's Regiment, both killed.

This is an Impartial Account of the Business of that Day, of which the French,
notwithstanding their TeDeum, have no great reason to brag. All as Impartial
Men can say of their Advantage, is, that we attacked them in their own Camp,
and that they repulsed us, though with the greater Loss both of Soldiers and
considerable Officers on their side. If it had pleased God to have given us the
Victory, we must have been Masters of their Camp, and great part of their
Baggage; whereas the Consequence of the Disadvantage on our side, was not, nor
could not be so: And therefore what ever Honor the French may assume to
themselves in the Repulse, yet it cannot be denied us in the Attack. And indeed
the French Officers (whatever the Paris Gazette may romance) are just in this
respect, and are not unwilling to give the Honor due to the English, and the
rest of the Kings Forces who engaged in this Attempt. What Loss the French
sustained, or what Forces engaged, we cannot so just tell; the Pavis Gazette
says, That the whole Body of our Infantry engaged, and insinuates, That the
French Infantry did the same, since it says, that it gave that day very good
Proofs of Courage, though they were not before valued by their Enemies. Whether
our whole Infantry engaged, as the Account published at Paris as sent to the
French King, I leave the Reader to judge. I am sure none of the Body of Foot
engaged, but three of the Four English and Scotch Regiments, detached upon the
Vanguard, and the Earl of Bath's Regiment, all the rest being interlin'd with
the Left Wing of Horse, except the Four Danish Battalions. But by all the
Informations that I could get, from Officers who were taken Prisoners, and who
have been some time in their Hands both at Mons and Valenciennes, who relate
nothing but what they have had from French Officers, above Fifty of their
Battalions charged that day besides Seven or Eight Regiments of Dragoons. Nay,
their Infantry was so harrass'd by our Fire, that they seemed unwilling at last
to come to the Charge; so far, that the most considerable Princes in the Army
of the Blood, and others, were obliged to head them, and to lead them on by
their Examples and Exhortations; in which Action the Duke of Chartres received
a Contusion in the Shoulder, the Prince of Conti had two Horses shot under him,
and the Prince of Turenne received a Mortal Wound, of which he died afterward
at Enghien. But the coming of Boufflers renewed their Efforts, and his fresh
Troops soon put our Vanguard in Disorder, who had been sufficiently harrass'd
for want of Relief. The French lost on their side a Standard belonging to the
Dauphin's Dragoons, taken by those of Epinger; and we made some Captains, a
Cornet, and some other Officers Prisoners. They have owned themselves to our
English Officers that have been Prisoners amongst them, that they have had 9000
Men killed and wounded: Of the wounded a vast many died afterward, because our
Arms are stronger, and carry better Balls than theirs. I cannot give an Account
of their considerable Officers that they lost, since I have not seen a List:
What I can remember of the Paris Gazette, are, the Prince of Turenne, the
Marquess Tilladet, both Lieutenant Generals killed, and likewise the Marquess
de Bellfords, and Colonel Polier. There are great many others both killed and
wounded, whose Names I cannot remember.

But before I quit this Relation of the Engagement, I cannot omit the generous
Charity of the Princess of Vaudemont at Brussels I wish that all those of her
Communion, as the Popes have Canonized, had as good a Title to be Saints: For
the number of our wounded being greater than could be contained in the Hospital
which the King had at Brussels, a great many on the Monday in the Evening were
lying with their Wounds up and down the Streets; whereupon this excellent
Princess, moved with a Christian Principle of Charity, went in her Coach
attended with a great many Flambeaux, up and down the Streets, to find them
out, and had them conducted to the great Hall of her Palace, where she saw them
dressed of their Wounds her self by her Surgeons, she and the Ladies of her
Attendance giving Linen and other Necessaries for that purpose: And here she
maintained them till they could either be removed to the other Hospitals, or
till they were in a condition to go abroad themselves.

The Day following the Marshall de Luxembourg sent a Trumpet in our Camp, July
25./Aug. 4.
to give leave to Officers Servants to go to the place of Battle, to take care
of their Masters Bodies as were killed upon the place, and likewise to assure,
that care would be taken of all such wounded Prisoners as they had. But Orders
were given out in our Army only for Field-Officers Servants to go, and bring
off the Bodies of their Masters, as lay dead upon the place; by which means the
Bodies of Sir Robert Douglas and Lieutenant Colonel Fullerton were brought off,
and buried in our Camp at Halle. As for my Lord of Angus, his Governor went,
but could not find his Body amongst the Dead, nor hear of him amongst all the
Prisoners. He had a Pass on purpose to go to the French Army to enquire for his
Lord.

Our Army Forag'd toward Haute Croix, and a Detachment of Horse under the
Command of Lieutenant General Sgravenmoor, 26./Aug. 5.
sent to cover our Foragers, met with a considerable Detachment of French
Horse, and was obliged to retreat. The Alarm came quickly to our Army, and it
appeared immediately under Arms; but there was no considerable harm done of
either side in the two Detachments.

This day one Chevalier de Millevoix (so called for his Excellency in Singing,
July 27./Aug. 6.
and a great Master in Music, who by it had got himself to be one of the
Elector of Bavaria's Domestics, and was very much considered of him, insomuch
that he had a very good Pension, and made a very great Figure) was hanged upon
a Tree in the Front of our Right Wing of Horse for a Spy, and for having given,
and endeavored to give Intelligence to the Marshall of Luxembourg, which was
intercepted by the Elector. The Boor he employed bringing two of his Letters,
one after another, to his Electoral Highness; and pretending to Millevoix; that
he had fallen amongst some of our Detachments, and had been obliged to fling
them away. His true Name was Jaquet, born at Lisle in the French Conquests in
Flanders.

The King being advertised that the French Army marched from Enghien to
Gislenhem, Aug. 1./11.
the King marched with all the Army, (except those had been harrass'd at
Steenkirk) to charge them in the Rear; but the Advertisement having been given
too late, his Majesty could not overtake them. The French decamped in great
Secrecy, without any general Beating before, or any Beat of Drum upon their
March, and their Pikes trail'd; which sufficiently shows, they did not care
(notwithstanding their Victory) for a Second Brush. They left all our wounded
Prisoners behind them at Enghien, who were sent the next day in Carts to
Brussels. His Majesty this day went as far as Enghien, and had full view of the
place of Battle, of the Enemies Camp as it was before they marched off, and
before we engaged. Our Army not being able to overtake the Enemies Rear,
returned the same day to Halle.

We Forag'd this day, Aug. 2./12.
and the Detachment was put under the Command of my Lord of Athlene, who being
informed that several of the Enemy lay in Ambuscade in a Wood to steal our
Horses, he ordered a Party to beat the Wood, where Captain Rowland Maikenzy, of
that Regiment as was Sir Robert Dowglas's, now my Lord George Hamilton's, made
Twenty Prisoners, who begged very eernestly for Quarter, though Orders had been
to give none.

This day the Chevalier de Grandval Knight of Malta, 3./13.
Bartholomew Lanier by Name, born at Liniere in Picardy, was Hanged, Drawn and
Quartered, (according to the English Punishment for Traitors) in the midst of
our Camp, for having conspired to assassinate the King, with Du Mont and
Levendael, the first having discovered the business (as we have said before) to
the Duke of Zell, and the second to his Brother in Holland: They were
confronted as Witnesses of the Fact, which Grandval himself confessed and
owned. This Grandval had before killed the Marshall de Humiere's Nephew in a
Duel; and as there is no mercy in France for such Men, he was obliged to fly to
the Duke of Savoy's Country for shelter, where in the beginning of the War he
took Service. But Monsieur de Catenat finding this Grandval Serviceable to the
Duke of Savoy, represented it to the French King, and desired him to give him
his Pardon; being assured underhand, that he would quit the Duke's Service if
he had it. Accordingly upon Catinat's Request, Grandval had the Kings Pardon,
and thus left the Duke of Savoy, and came to Catinat's Army, where he was
immediately preferred to be Major of Dragoons and Adjutant General. Du Mont
having been formerly an Officer in the States Service, and disobliged (I think
cashiered) by our King, he was resolved to attempt a Revenge by the assassinate
of his Sacred Person; accordingly he made the Motion to the then Marquess de
Louvois; and this was designed to be executed in 91. when the King was in the
Field, either upon the March of our Army, or at some other time when the King
rid abroad to view some Posts. The Marquess de Louvous pitched upon this
Grandval to bring the Assassin off, who was to command a Detachment of some
stout desperate Fellows for that purpose: For Louvois thought this Man fit for
the purpose, since he had been so desperate as to fight a Duel, contrary to the
strictest Orders of the French King, and in which there was no hopes of Mercy,
and also because he had been so much obliged by the French King in having his
Pardon, in a case in which the French King had never pardoned before; and
therefore he lay under some Obligation to undertake this honorable Employment.
But Du Mont and Grandval missing of their Design that Campaign, and the
Marquess de Louvois dying some time after, it was laid by, and Du Mont retired
to Hanover. Barbesieux however finding this Project in his Fathers Papers,
would not let it fall, but sent for Grandval, who accordingly entered into a new
Negotiation with Du Mont by Letters at Hanover, and took with him a third
Associate, Levendael, at Paris, and appointed their meeting to execute their
Enterprise at Endhoven near Boisleduc. I need not say any more Particulars, I
refer my self to the Factum printed in several Languages by Authority, to let
the World know so horrible a Villainy, and what the French Court will not
attempt, though it be never so base and unworthy, to rid themselves of a
powerful Enemy; and far more base and horrible than those Designs laid against
the Life of William I. Prince of Orange, his Sacred Majesty's Glorious
Ancestor, as this was carried with a Hellish Secrecy; whereas the King of
Spain had by a public Proscription laid a Price upon the Prince's Life. These
Traitors were invited to this more than Hellish Conspiracy, by the Prospect of
vast Rewards promised them both by the late King and Barbesieux, as has
appeared by their own Confession, and Grandval's own Letter to Mademoiselle
Jure, wherein he desired her to wait upon the Archbishop of Rheins, to acquaint
him, that he had obeyed the Marquess de Barbesieux's Orders at the Expense of
his Life.

My Lord of Athlone, General of the Dutch Horse, was President at the Council
of War, where he was Tried, assisted by Sgravenmoor, Sir John Lanier, and
Talmash, and Mackay; Lieutenant Generals La Forest de Weed, Noyelles, Zobell,
Major Generals. Churchill and Ramsey Brigadiers. But the business of Steenkirk
cut off two of the General Officers present at the Council of War, before the
passing of Sentence, so that their Names are not Signed in it, viz. Lanier and
Mackay. The Sentence was passed and read Monday the 11 th of August, at the
Camp at Lembeck, and Executed the Wednesday following.

This day the Army decamped from Nostredame de Halle and marched to St. Quinten
Lenneck, Aug. 9./19.
a place remarkable only for the Retrenchments which remain there, which Prince
Waldeck caused to be made sometime before the Army's breaking up in 1690. and
the next day we came to Ninove, the first Town in Flanders, situated upon the
River Dender, which passing by Alost, falls into the Scheld at Dendermond. The
French were at the same time encamped between Grammont in Dutch Geersberg, and
Lessines, both upon the same River, about two Leagues higher. The King took his
Quarter in the Abbey of the Town, of the Order of Premonstre or St. Norbet, and
the Elector at a Gentleman's House not far from the Town: The Kings Quarter
lying something too open in this Camp in the Front of our Army, all the English
and Scotch Granadiers were ordered to encamp about the King's Quarters to cover
it.

The day before this last March, (viz. the ^th) the Second Battalion of the
first Regiment of Guards, my Lord Cutts's and the Prince of Hesse's Regiments
were sent to Mecklen, having suffered very much in the late Engagement. Three
Dutch Regiments who suffered at the same time, were commanded toward
Maestricht.

All the heavy Baggage of the Army was commanded toward Ghendt, Aug. 14./24.
under the Convoy of Four Danish Battalions who had suffered at Steenkirk, and
were ordered there to quarter: They were the Battalion of Danish Guards, the
Queens, Prince Christians, and the Finland Battalions. This was in order to the
Armies marching the next day toward the Scheld. The Ways being difficult, and
the Defiles many, the heavy Baggage was ordered to Ghendt. The next day being
St. Lewis's day, 15./25.
the Army marched from Ninove. The French at the same time decamped from
Grammont and Lessines to pass the Scheld as soon as we; this being their Patron
Saint, and reckoned amongst them as a Fortunate day: Our Left Flank laid very
open all this day's March, if they had pleased to attack it; but they thought
it not convenient, and so we came and encamped in very close Grounds at St.
Levinus Haltheim, a pretty large Village, and considerable chiefly for the
Burying-place of St. Levinus, a Scotch Man, and sometimes Bishop of Ghendt, a
Martyr beheaded there, as the Legend will have it, and buried in this Church;
as we came up to our Ground in this Camp, it being all high Trees and
Enclosures, a Party of about 100 French were surpised Prisoners between our
two Lines, the Defiles being such here that one Line could not see the other.

The next day the Army marched and passed the Scheld at Gavre, Aug. 16./26.
a little Town belonging to the Count d' Egmont, where he has an old ruinous
Palace, which gives him the Title of Prince of Gavre; the other side of the
Scheld, between this River and the Lys, is all close Ground, full of Trees,
belonging to the Count d' Egmont, which made such difficult Defiles, that the
Army could march but very slowly; this made the French beforehand with us in
their passage of the Scheld, between Audenarde and Tournay; in this March
before we came upon the Scheld, we had a very fine prospect of the whole
Province of Flanders, which on the other side of the Scheld is all a perfect
Level, not as much as a Hill to be seen, so that the Hills on the Brabant-side
give a full view and prospect of it; we had the Town of Audenarde, and the
Hills and Plains of Tournay, upon our Left, Ghendt upon our Right, and before
us all the Low Flanders, which gave us such a Prospect, that we could see as
far as Bruges and Antwerp; this Night we encamped amongst the Woods, between
the Scheld and the Lys, the King taking his Head-Quarter at Nassaret.

The Army marched toward the Lys, 17./27.
being now joined by that Detachment as was made at Genap, under the Command of
Count Horn, Master of the Dutch Artillery; we had a very difficult March
through the Defiles, till we passed the Lys at Deynse, which was very late in
the Evening, though but a short March, by reason of the narrowness of the ways:
the Army encamped late at Night on the other side of the River; the King took
his Quarter at Grammen, and the Elector of Bavaria in the Town of Deynse,
situated upon the Lys, about three Leagues higher than Ghendt, and gives the
Title to the Marquess Deynse, Colonel of a Walloon Regiment, as we relieved at
Damme. The Saturday following we were joined by three Regiments of Horse lately
come from England, viz. that as was Sir John Lanier's, now Col. Lumley's, my
Lord of Athlone, and Col. Schack's, who then took their Post in the Line.

The Marshall of Luxemburg marching as we did, to observe our motions, came
about the same time with his Army to Harlebec, where he encamped between that
place and Courtray, along the Lys; Luxemburg made the more have to cover
Courtray, a place which lies open all the Summer, and which the French have
hitherto pallisado'd and fortified every Winter for a Garrison, and of which we
might have otherwise possessed ourselves, and made it a Winter-Quarter for our
Troops; here Luxemburg lay ready likewise to cover Ipres or Dunkirk, in case
the Army had marched that way.

The King ordered this day a Detachment of Six Regiments toward the Canal of
Bruges, 21./31.
five being English and Scotch, viz. Bath, Castleton, Mackay, Graham, and
Leven, and the Sixth Major General Wey's Regiment of Dutch, commanded by Count
d' Ohna; this Detachment marched accordingly toward the Canal of Bruges, and
passed it about half way, between Bruges and Ghendt, upon a Bridge of Boats,
and encamped the other side of the Canal, under the Command of Brigadier
Ramsey; the next day the said Detachment continued their March toward Bruges,
and encamped within a quarter of a mile of that place, about Katarina Port,
where they halted the next day to expect Lieutenant General Talmash, who was
detached the 22d of August, O. S. Sept. 1. N. S. from the Army, with five
Battalions, most English and Scotch, viz. his own of Guards, Second Battalion
of Scotch Guards, Col. Trelawney, English Fuziliers, commanded by Col.
Fitz-Patrick, and that Regiment as was Col. Hodges, Aug. 23./Sept. 2.
now Col. Stanley's, who came up to Bruges by the same Road as Brigadier
Ramsey's Detachment had marched, and encamped just under the Walls. The same
day the Dutch Regiment commanded by Count d' Ohna, marched through Bruges, and
joined four Dutch Regiments of the Garrison of Bruges and Sluys, who were put
under the Command of Major General Count de Noyelles, who marched the same day
toward Newport.

This Day the aforesaid Detachment of ten English and Scotch Battalions,
24./Sept. 3.
under the Command of Lieutenant General Talmash. marched through the Town of
Bruges, and so kept along the Canal of Ostend, till they came to Placendael,
where we turned to the Left upon the Canal of Newport, and so encamped at
Oudembourg, an old ruinous Town about half a League from Placendael, where the
Canal of Newport falls into that of Ostend, and so goes on to Bruges: there are
still some ruinated Ramparts about the Abbey of St. Pierre in this old Town, of
the Order of St. Benoist, where Lieutenant General Talmash took his Quarters
for that Night.

This Detachment of ten Battalions from the King's Army, under the Command of
Lieutenant General Talmash, was sent to join the Duke of Leinster, who on the
22d Aug. O. S. Sept. 1. N. S. came with the Transport-Ships, under the Convoy
of a Squadron of our Men of War, into Ostend Harbor, having on board fifteen
Regiments, (viz.) Selwyn, Beaumont, Hastings, Sir David Collier, Tiffeny,
West-Meath, Brewer, Venner, Sir John Morgan, Lloyd, Beveridge, Earl of Argyle,
La Meloniere, Belcastel, and Cambon; these Troops as they landed marched to
Mariekirk, about a League from Ostend, toward Newport, where they encamped
some days to refresh themselves; the Duke of Leinster at his landing, ordered a
Detachment of Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, Officers, and Men
proportionable, out of his Transport-Troops, to keep Guard at all the Passes
along the Canal, from Placendael to Newport.

The Detachment under the Command of Lieutenant General Talmash, Aug. 25./Sept.
4.
marched from Oudenbourg, along the Canal of Newport, and so came to Newendam,
a square Fort within half a League of Newport, where there is a Spanish
Governor, and a small Garrison detached from time to time from the Garrison of
Newport. Majer-General Count de Noyelles, who was since Bruges still a days
march before us, entered this day into Furnes without any opposition, with the
five Dutch Regiments under his Command, and took possession of the place. This
Town lies upon a Canal, between Newport, and Berg St Winnox, within two Leagues
of Newport, three of Berg St. Winnox, and about five from Dunkirk; and in all
the Wars between the two Crowns, since Dunkirk and Berg have been in the French
hands, this Town has still served for a Winter-Quarter to the French, which in
the Spring they still abandoned, to have their Garrison in the Field, and
returned their Pallisades to Berg or Dunkirk, and in the Winter they took care
to fortify it, so as to hold a Garrison for Winter Quarters. It is about the
bigness of Ostend, and has in it a Parish Church, a Collegiate Church of
Secular Priests, the Dean whereof is a Frenchman, two Cloisters of Nuns, one
of Capucins, and an Abbey of White Monks of Premonstre, or the Order of St.
Norbert, and is in the Diocese of Ipres.

Lieutenant General Talmash, Aug. 26./Sept. 5.
with the Detachment under his Command, marched from Newendam, and came to
Furnes, in Dutch called Vuernes, and encamped close by it; and a day or two
after the Boars (that had been summoned about Ghendt and Bruges, with their
Spades and Shoovels, and other Instruments, to remove the Earth, and had been
commanded hither) began to work about the Fortifications, being about 2 or
3000, Col. Cambon being Engineer; nothing new was added to the Fortifications,
but only we renewed those Works as the French had ruined, when they left it the
beginning of this Campaigne. The Duke of Leinster came likewise with the
Transport-Troops, and encamped at Oost Dunkirk, about a Mile from Talmash's
Detachment, and at the same time he was joined by a Detachment from the great
Army, of about thirty Squadrons of Horse, under the Command of Brigadier
Boncourt; so that now we made a Body of about Sixteen thousand Men, besides the
Garrison of Furnes. We made Detachments and Parties almost every Night toward
Dunkirk, but without meeting any of the Enemy's; and as soon as we had put the
Body of that place in a condition to hold an Assault, pallisadoed it, and
cleans'd the Ditch, we left the Boars to repair the rest of the Works, under
the cover of the Garrison; we likewise left some Artillery to put upon the
Ramparts, Sept. 7./17.
and so marched to Dixmuyde, the Battalion of Guards, Selwyn's, and the
Fuziliers, and some other Regiments having been sent over Night to possess
themselves of the place; which was put per Interim under the Command of
Brigadier Ramsey. Upon our March, the Fort of Knock fired three Pieces of
Cannon, supposed to give Notice to the French of our march that way: This is a
little square Fort situated upon the River that comes to Dixmuyde about a
League and a half, and is very advantagiously posted upon a considerable Pass
between Ipres, Dixmuyde, Furnes, Berg and Dunkirk, the Canals between Ipres and
those places meeting all here; so that the taking of this Fort would have cut
off the Communication between Ipres, Berg and Dunkirk, and would have covered
very much our Garrison of Dixmuyde, which did lie now very open by the
Neighborhood of this Fort.

'Twas supposed we had a Design to attack it, since our Train of Artillery,
Mortar-pieces, and other things necessary for an Attack were brought by Water
from Newport to Dixmuyde, and that my Lords Portland and Auverquerque were sent
from the King to the Duke of Leinster here, which looked like a Consultation
about some considerable Enterprise: Besides, Col. Cambon our Engenier was sent
to view the place under the Escorte of a good Detachment of Horse. The Fort
fired upon them with their Canon, but without any loss on our side: But the
French upon our March this way, soon made a considerable Detachment from their
Army to cover this place, who encamped close under the Fort.

When we came to Dixmuyde we encamped just by it, in two Lines, having our
Right at Caeskirk, where the Duke of Leinster had his Quarter, our Left upon
the Town, and our Rear covered by the River Tser, upon which this Town is
situated, and which falls into the Sea at Newport. This Town, since the
growing Power of France, has suffered many Revolutions; it was first taken for
the French (as I have been told by some ancient People of the Town) by the
Marshall de Rantzaw, before the Siege of Dunkirk, and surrendered afterward by
Treaty to the Spaniards: It was then of a far larger Extent than it is now: For
in the Wars of 1672. the Count de Monterey, then Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands, caused the Out Parts of the Town to be pulled down to bring it in
a more convenient Compass for a Fortification, and for a place of Defense, and
so fortified it after the manner as we find it now. But sometime after the
Spanish Garrison finding themselves very weak, and the Enemy not far from them,
they quitted the Place. I was told by the Inhabitants, that it was about that
time as Luxembourg was besieged. All this War the French have had it in their
Hands, making a Garrison of it every Winter, which with Furnes pressed Newport
very much, the Garrison making their Incursions upon the Canals, and sometimes
to the very Gates of Bruges. Every Summer as they took the Field, they pulled
down their Pallisadoes, and sent them by Water to Ipres. This Town has in it a
Parish Church, in which there is a Dean, and some Secular Canons, a Cloister of
Recollects, and two Nunneries, and is in the Diocese of Ipres. Just out of
Ipres Port was formerly a Nunnery of the Order of St. Bernard, which the Count
de Monterey caused to be pulled down, when he brought the Town in the Precinct
of that Fortification it has now, and gave the Nuns another Cloister in
exchange for it in Bruges.

We felt an Earthquake which lasted about two Minutes, Sept. 8./18.
and shook the Earth very violently; it was felt at the same time all over
Flanders, in many parts of England and France, and in other places of Europe:
We had it about Two of the Clock; it caused a great Consternation in our new
Garrison of Dixmuyde, some thinking at first that the French had undermined
several parts of the Town, and were in Ambuscade going to blow them up.

The same day the Duke of Leinster caused the Army to entrench, which was
marked out by Col. Cambon, our Left and Rear being covered by the Town and the
River. Our Retrenchments were drawn from the Bridge upon the River along the
Front of the Army, and round our Right Wing, till they came to join the River
again. (Boufflers marching toward the Knock) this Precaution was taken, in
case he would have endeavored to interrupt our Fortification of Dixmuyde.

About as many Boors were (immediately upon our coming) employed to repair the
Works of this place as we left at Furnes: We did not find the Fortification of
this Town so far ruined as at Furnes, and followed in it (as there) those Works
as the Ruins prescribed, without altering or making any new: We only made the
Ditch next the Body of the place larger, to make our Bastions of a better
height. This Town has five Bastions on that part as is exposed to an Attack
that is from the Windmil between Ipres port and tho River, to the Gate as leads
to Bruges. The West side of the Town is covered by the River, to which it joins
by a Causey-way that leads to it, where it has a Bridge covered on the outside
by a good Bastion, and the inside with a square Sconce, both ditch'd and
pallisado'd. The Canal of Newport goes through the South part of the Town, and
joins the River a little below; and being a perfect Morass on this side, it
does not require much Fortification. The Town is environed with a double Ditch
and covered way, and the Faces of each Bastion are covered with a Half Moon,
besides good spacious Ravelins upon the Curtins. This is what we had to repair;
and to go on with the more Speed, a Detachment of a hundred Men per Battalion
(except the Guards) were commanded to work, under the Inspection of a Captain,
Lieutenant and Ensign, each; so that we had, Sept. 10./20
Soldiers and Boors, very near 5000 Men on work every day. The six Regiments
that were in Town came out and encamped, and six others were ordered in their
places, (viz.) Princess Ann's, the Earl of Bathe's, Lord Castleton's, Col.
Venner's, Col. Mackay's, and Earl of Leven's, and encamped within the Ramparts
of the Town, where, besides the ordinary Guard, a Re-inforcement of the Bewarke
mounted every Night at each Port toward the Enemy.

This day the ordinary Detachments of the Earl of Bathe's Regiment and
Fusiliers, 12./22.
being at work at the Bastion by Ipres part in enlarging the Ditch, found an
old hidden Treasure, which quickly stopped the Soldiers working, who fell all a
scrambling in a heap one upon another, some bringing off a very good Booty,
some Gold and some Silver, several Jacobus's and Sovereins being found by the
Soldiers, and a great many old Pieces of Silver of Henry the Second, Charles
the Ninth, Henry the Third, Henry the Fourth's Coin, which are now hardly to be
found in France. The People of the Town suppose that this Money belonged to one
Elfort a Gentleman, dead many years ago, who buried his Treasure (when the
Marshall de Rantzau took the Town) in the Bernardine Nuns Garden, (this Ground
where the Money was found having been formerly in that Garden) which Count de
Monterey caused to be demolished; and they think that there might have been
about 900 Pound Groot, which makes the value of Four Hundred and Fifty Guineas
English. This Elfort left it by Will to his Children, and the Marks where to
find it, but his Children could never discover it. It Is a wonder that it has
not been found till now, since the French have worked every Winter this War,
and several times before, in repairing the Works of this Fortification; it is
very likely that we should have gone without it too, if we had not enlarged the
Ditch at this time.

Count Horn, Sept. 21./October. 1.
Master of the Dutch Artillery, who has had the Command both of Furnes and
Dixmuyde given him, came to this place with Five Dutch Regiments, and Colonel
Lauders, to Garrison there this Winter; and the other six Regiments that were
there marched out and encamped with the Army: But the Works being now pretty
well repaired, these six Regiments were ordered to march toward Newport under
the Command of Major General Sir Henry Bellassis, 23./October. 3.
who encamped at a Village called St. George, about half a League from Newport,
and on the Mondny following the Duke of Leiuster came to the same place with
the rest of the Forces under his Command. The Train of Artillery was ordered
back to Newport, Sept. 26./October. 6.
under the Escarte of Sir Henry Bellassis's Detachment, where it was put on
board our Transport Ships. The Horse likewise marched away to join each
Detachment their proper Body in the great Army.

All the English and Scotch Battalions as were to Winter in the Country,
29./October. 9.
marched toward their Winter Quarters, under the Command of Lietenant General
Talmash toward Bruges, and were Cantoned that night upon Oudenbourg, and the
next day they Cantoned in the Villages about Bruges, Lieutenant General Talmash
having his Quarter at the Abbey of St. Andrew where the rest of the English and
Scotch that were to have their Winter Quarters at Bruges were detached from the
great Army to join him, (viz.) First Battalion of Scotch Guards, Lord George
Hamilton's two Battalions, Col. O Farrel's and Col. Monro's; the other Troops
under Lieutenant General Talmash's Command, as were to go to Winter Quarters to
Ghendt and Mecklen, marched on through Bruges, and Cantoned some days upon the
Canal, (viz.) Lieutenant General Talmash's. Battalion of Guards, Col. Trelawny
and the Fusiliers. But upon the Enemy's Motion about Charleroy, October. 2./12.
they joined the great Army again at Drongen. The Earl of Bathe's Regiment was
ordered to Damme for Winter Quarters, a strong little Garrison between Bruges
and Sluys, situated upon a Canal that goes to Bruges (having such Sluices under
its Command, that it can overflow all the Country about) where the Regiment
came the 4/14th of October. The rest of the Troops Cantoned about Bruges, came
to Garrison one after another as fast as Quarters could be made ready for them.
Col. Beveredge's and Stanley's Regiments remained behind at Dixmuyde for some
time to reinforce the Garrison, till others came to relieve them, and then
they were ordered to Ostend for their Winter Quarters.

As for the most remarkable Transactions in the great Army since we had left
it, they continued encamped at Deynte and Grammen, whilst his Majesty remained
in the Field; and some days after we had been detached from thence, the King
was informed that a Party of French was made of about 500 Men to come and
surprise one of our Out Quarters, and ordered thereupon a suitable Detachment
to lie in Ambuscade to receive them; but upon the Approach of the Enemy, some
of ours spoiled the Design by firing too soon; and so the French retired only
with the Loss of Two Men.

His Majesty left the Field on Friday the 16th of September, O. S. and went to
Breda, and afterward to Loo, where His Majesty remained between a Fortnight
and three Weeks, whereby the Command of the Army remained in the Elector of
Bavaria's hands; who sometimes after marched nearer to Ghendt, part encamping
about Drongen on the Lys, and part at Gavreon, the Scheld making a Line of
Communication between them, the distance being but small; the Elector took his
Quarters at Drongen, a very fine and noble Abbey of White Monks of the Order of
St. Norbert, and about a League from Ghendt; afterward his Electoral Highness
removed toward Alost, where 'twas designed to separate into Winter Quarters;
but the Count de Montal having joined the Marquess de Boufflers on the other
side of the Sambre, and both making a considerable Body, marched toward
Charleroy, with a Train of Artillery, Bombs, and Mortar-pieces, with a design
to attack it; this obliged the Elector to march with his Army toward Brussels,
and afterward to advance as far as Waterloo and Genap, to be ready to relieve
it, in case of an attack. Baron Fleming with the Brandenburg and Liege Troops,
having repassed the Meuse at Huy, marched up to Fleury to join his Electoral
Highness.

The Marquess de Boufflers finding Affairs in so good a posture, contented
himself to bombard the Lower Town of Charleroy, which lies on the other side of
the Sambre, whereabouts Boufflers lay encamped, he began this Work on Sunday
the 9th of October, O. S. and continued till the Tuesday following; where his
Bombarding cost infinitely more to his Master, than the Mischief he caused
could amount to, this being the most inconsiderable part of Charleroy, and the
Fortifications of it altogether neglected, that lying open to the Enemy. Upon
these motions of the French toward Charleroy, the King who was lately come
from Loo to the Hague, October. 9./19.
went Post to Brussels, where his Majesty arrived October. 9. and lay that night
at his own Palace, and returned the next day to the Hague, after having held a
Council of War with the Elector of Bavaria, and other great Officers of the
Army; my Lord of Athlone was thereupon detached from the Army, with
Ammunitions, Provisions, and other Necessaries for the Relief of Charleroy,
with an Escorte of 4000 Horse and Dragoons, which his Lordship got safely into
the Town.

Boufflers having left Charleroy, the Armies on both sides began to separate
toward their Winter Quarters. Great Garrisons have been put in Brussels,
Mecklen, Ghent, Vilvord, and Dendermond, and along the Canal; so that in Four
and twenty hours time, upon any motion of the French, we can have a
considerable Army about Brussels.

His Majesty being come back to the Hague, sailed some days after for England,
where he arrived at Tarmouth the 18th day of October, and thence went to
London; where His Majesty was received with universal Joy and Acclamation, for
his happy and safe return. And thus I have brought the relation of the most
remarkable Transactions of this Campaign in the King's Army to a conclusion,
whereby it appears, that if other things did second the unwearied Pains, the
indefatigable Toyls and Labors His Majesty takes, and the continued Dangers he
exposes himself to, the French Arms would not flourish so much as they have
done hitherto; and whatever Advantages the French have really had, or to which
they pretend in this Campaigne, yet the King's Subjects have not in the least
disgraced the Renown and Glory of their Ancestors in it; but have acquired to
themselves such Reputation, as has forced even a Commendation, and I may safely
say, Fear from their Enemies. We have a sort of People, who in magnifying the
French Greatness, and how useless our Efforts have been in Flanders to suppress
it, would insinuate, that because he is Great, that it is best to yield to what
we cannot resist; and since we have had no more success in Flanders, it is best
let it go, and stand for the rest upon our own Defense, which indeed is the
only way to break the Alliance, and have this very Power (which they so much
magnify) wholly upon our Arms, so that a Man has reason to suspect, that such
Insinuations do underhand tend to introduce a French Power amongst us. If the
French King is so Great, all as a rational Man can infer is, that therefore our
Efforts ought to be so much the greater; and that we are to make use of the
utmost of our Powers, not only to resist, but to endeavor to humble this
formidable Power, to which the way seems already open by our Signal Victory at
Sea; it is very plain, that if a stop can be put to the French King's
Proceedings, it must be by an English Power, and that it is only by the Vigor
and Greatness of our Efforts as he can be humbled; which I am sure is a thing
to be wished by all true Englishmen, and to which every one that is such will
contribute, according to his Condition and Capacity, to the utmost of his Power.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 3. Dauphine read Dauphin. p. 9. l. 12. Curiassers r. Curiassiers.
p. 10. l. 19. idem. p. 17. last l. Perteys r. Perweys. p. 18. l. 26. a River r.
the River. p. 28. l. 24. confiement r. confinement. p. 30. l. 15. Farrel r. O
Farrel. p. 36. l. 10. Bois Seignerer Isaac r. Bois Seigneur Isaac. p. 40. l.
29. was afterward r. as afterward. p. 50. l. 18. Gislenhem r. Gislenghem. p.
51. l. 11. Lanier r. de Liniere. p. 63. l. 12. Bewark r. Bewack. p. 64. l. 18.
Mondny r. Monday.


