THE HISTORY OF THE CAMPAIGN IN FLANDERS, For the Year, 1695. WITH An ACCOUNT
OF THE Siege of Namur.

By EDWARD D'AUVERGNE, M. A. Rector of St. Brelade in the Isle of Jersey, and
Chaplain to His Majesty's Regiment of Scots Guards.

LONDON, Printed for Mat. Wotton, at the Three Daggers; and John Newton, at the
Three Pigeons, in Fleetstreet, 1696. Where are to be sold the Histories for the
Years, 1692, 1693, 1694. Written by the same Author.

TO HIS GRACE, The DUKE of ORMOND, Lieutenant General OF His Majesty's Armies,
etc.
MY LORD,
WHAT my Worthy Friend did, when he published one of my precedent Histories, I
beg leave now to do my self, and to make use of the Opportunity which my
Presence in England at this time affords me, to present these Sheets to YOUR
GRACE. The End my Friend had in that Dedication, was to procure me the
Protection of YOUR GRACE, to whom it was then my Misfortune to be unknown: But
now I am so sensible of YOUR GRACE's unmerited Favors, that this small
Offering proceeds from Gratitude; though common Prudence were enough to have
induced me to shelter this Work under the Patronage of a Name known and valued
by all Europe; a Name worthily born by YOUR GRACE, the deserved Heir of a Race
of Heroes. That Great and Warlike Spirit, which YOUR GRACE inherits from a long
Descent of Renowned Ancestors, takes You from that soft Rest and Ease You might
enjoy at home, and carries You abroad into the Field of Fame and Glory, there
to hazard both Life and Fortune; the one for the Safety, the other for the
Honor and Reputation of England: And it is That attracts the Hearts of all
Nations, even of our Enemies, and inclines them to love, admire, and respect
You; witness what we saw in that Great Day of Landen, wherein Your Heroic
Courage vanquished our Victorious Enemies, even then when you fell into their
Hands, died in Your Noble Blood. Your Valor amazed them, but Your Civil
Generous Deportment charmed them, and has made the Celebrated Name of ORMOND
Reverenced and Esteemed among all the High Officers of the Armies of France; if
I may not say Feared, without disrespect to a Brave and Valiant Enemy. They are
great Judges of Martial Worth and Merit; and therefore, at the same time that
they applaud and admire it in YOUR GRACE, they cannot but be apprehen^ive of it
in an Enemy; especially when they consider it lodged in One born to Command,
and whom the Greatest Monarch and General now in the World has tutored through
all the Steps and Degrees of Experience, before he made him Lieutenant General
of his Armies; though it were a Commission antecedently due to so Illustrious a
Person. His Majesty would have YOUR GRACE to be the chief Sharer with him in
all the Toils and Dangers, to which he has so undauntedly exposed himself for
the Common Good of the Cause he heads: 'Twas You He would have daily with him
in the Trenches during the most Famous and Important Siege of Namur, to give
YOUR GRACE all the Advantages of the Best and the most Perfect Knowledge in the
several Arts of War, that He may one Day confide the Leading of his Armies to
the DUKE of ORMOND.

But, MY LORD, I forget that I venture upon an Attempt in which the ablest Pens
may miscarry. YOUR GRACE has been so often regaled with Epistles Dedicatory
from the most Ingenious Persons, who look upon You as the great Patron of Mars
and of the Muses, that even at the best I can but make an Echo to their
Endeavors, in setting forth YOUR GRACE's due Praise. This Consideration bids
me be silent, and only desire leave to subscribe my self,

May it please YOUR GRACE, YOUR GRACE's Most Faithful, Most Humble, and Most
Obedient Servant, E. D'Auvergne.

To the Reader.
SOme People will wonder why this Account comes out so late; I rather complain
that it comes out too soon. As late as it is published, the Reader may easily
perceive, by the negligence of the Style, and the many Faults of the Press,
that it has been both writ and printed in have. The great variety of Action in
the Last Campaign has swelled this History to a considerable bulk, which
therefore has required some time to compose, as well as to print. The
Booksellers to make the more have, have put it into several Hands to have it
printed, which is the reason of the difference found in the spelling of several
Words, besides other Faults, which I hope the Courteous Reader will pardon. I
have only corrected those Errors of the Press which altered the sense of the
Phrase, the re^t I must leave to be amended by the Judicious Reader.

Indeed an Account of this nature should not be published without being first
perused by some of the General Officers concerned: But such a just and
necessary Circumspection would keep the Work too long from the Public, which
loves to have things New; therefore it must even be content to have it attended
with several Mistakes, and (I may say) worse Faults: It Is what obliges me to
beg the Excuse of those Great and Worthy Gentlemen, whose noble Feats and
Actions make up the subject of this History, for the several Faults and
mistakes of this Book; which if more exact, would be more just to their
deserved Honor and Praise. In so glorious an Action as the Siege of Namur,
where every Regiment concerned has performed Wonders, it was very difficult for
me to do express Justice to all; and therefore I hope, that when I offend in
this respect, their generous Nature will incline them to Pardon.

A dry Journal may be made in the Camp, but I think that an Historical Account,
wherein a Man must specify the Connection and Coherences of the several Matters
of Fact, their relation to, and dependence from one another, requires the Calm
and Leisure of a Winter-Quarter to compose it.

I have lately received from Maestricht the Plan of the Siege of Namur, and of
the Lines of Circumvallation, (done by an ingenious Hand) with several other
Particulars relating to the Siege, which are come too late to be inserted in my
Book; but I have added at the end of it as much as I could, viz* the List of
the Hesse and Brandenbourgh Forces, and of those encamped in the Line of
Circumvallation. As for the Plan, my Undertakings meet with so little
Encouragement that the Booksellers could not go to the Charge of having it
engraved, and joined to this History. I have given it to Mr. Morden at the
Atlas in Cornhill, where the Curious may have it to explain and illustrate my
Account of this Great and Famous Siege. Such Discouragements may convince the
World, that I do not write for Profit. My End and Design is to satisfy the
Curiosity of English Men, so much concerned in the Interest and Charges of this
War, and as much as lies in my Power to give them a true Relation of Things. If
I had not more regard to the Satisfaction of my Country, than I have to my
Labor and Expenses, I should never concern my self with these Matters. Five
Campagnes to One that should affect a studious and quiet Life, is enough to put
him out of conceit with War, or giving an Account of it.

God continue the Success of His Majesty's Arms, that our Enemies may be soon
reduced to such Just and Reasonable Terms, as may produce a speedy and solid
Peace. Amen.
* The Style of this Account is the Julian, or Old Style, observed in England.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Engraving of the Plan of the Siege of Namur, has retarded the Publishing
of this Book for some time.

THE HISTORY OF THE Last Campaign IN FLANDERS, 1695.
THE Issue of the last Year's Campaign left the Scale of War beginning to
incline favorably on our side; for though the Enemies at first seemed to
command the Field, and that their Army domineer^d to the very Gates of
Maestricht, yet at last they had much ado to cover the Conquered Flanders from
an Invasion, and were forced to leave Huy open to a Siege, and suffer it
quietly to fall in our hands, when it was so convenient a Post for Liege, and
an Out-work not only necessary for its safety, but that likewise gave us the
liberty of the Meuse to the very Gates of Namur, to form an attempt on that
side when ever we should have the Superiority of the Field; therefore whatever
the Enemies may have boasted of their precipitate Marches the last year to
cover their Towns in Flanders, and to maintain their Frontier at Courtray, yet
what we did then, opened the way to the Great and Glorious Undertaking of this
happy and successful Campaign.

This would be a very strange and surprising turn to a Man that should know no
more of the Affairs of this War, tha^ what he has read in the Flourishes of the
French Panegyrists, or that has been used hitherto to the frequent Music of Te
Deums for several Successes pretended to be due to the Justice of an ambitious
aggresser's Cause. When we lo^t the Battle of Landen, nothing less according to
their accounts could be expected than the loss of the Spanish Netherlands; and
'twas the French Kings own expression, That there was nothing but what he might
expect from such a Victory, and nothing but what we ought to fear after such a
Defeat Letter to sing the Te Deum
* And yet it is from the loss of this very Battle that we must date the
declining of our victorious Enemies greatness. The following Campaign, they
found themselves incapable to pursue their so much boasted Success, and to act
offensively, by the considerable increase of our Strength: And in this the
Success of the War has appeared signally of our side, and we ought always to
thank God for ^o extraordinary a Blessing. This variety of Events in the
Affairs of War ought to teach us, at the expense of our Enemies, not to be
arrogant nor insulting in Success, but still to be thankful to God, to keep
within the bounds of Moderation, and not to suffer our selves, to be
transported to such Extravagancies which now upon this happy turn of the Scale
of War, render the flattering and insolent Writings of our Enemies ridiculous
to the meaner and the most ordinary Reader.

If the Counsels of our Enemies during the precedent Winter Quarters* were
still contriving some new designs to advance their Conquests, they became so
sensible (the last Winter) of the Increase of the Allies Strength and Power,
that far from projecting any new Attempts upon our Frontiers, they began very
early to provide for the defense and security of their own; they found what
shifts they were put to the last Campaign to cover their Conquests in Flanders
from an Invasion; and if they succeeded in the defense of it, yet the
undertaking made them jealous of our further designs against their Frontier of
this side; this made them resolve to leave no way open (if possible) to any
attempt against them in this Country, which, bordering upon the Sea, a
Conquest here would be so much the more dangerous that it may draw the
reduction of Dunkirk after it, or at least, it would expose it to the hazard of
a Siege, which of all their places in the Low Countries, is the most important
for them to maintain.

The way was open from the Water of Ipre, to the Lys, and as for their Old Line
from the Lys to the Scheld, they found it of a troublesome length, and
difficult to keep, and that it did not sufficiently cover their Country so
long as Courtray lay exposed to us* The Lys and the Scheld incline very much to
one another in this place, which makes the distance between these two Rivers
half less than it is between Menin and Pont d' Espiers; and therefore as for
this reason it was so much the easier to de^end, so likewise it was very
necessary for the Safety of Courtray, which though weak of Situation, yet
could not be attacked, as long as they kept a Line here. For this reason the
Enemies resolved to make a new Line between the Lys and the Scheld, which
should begin at St. John's Port at Courtray, and should terminate ^t self on
the Scheld between Bossu and Avelghem; and likewise to make another from Ipre
to Comines upon the Lys, thereby to shelter their pais conquis from any design*
Accordingly about the middle of March last, they summoned the Boors of all the
Country round about to rendezvous at Ipre and Courtray, and being all ready
toward the latter end of the Month, the Marshall de Bouflers, who re^ided at
Lisle as Governor of the French Fland^rs, drew out all the Frontier Garrisons
to cover the Pioneers, whilst they should work at the new Line, and encamped
with them at Belleghem near Courtray, where he had his head Quarters.

Upon this Motion of the Enemies, our Garrisons had orders to be ready to
march, and the Duke of Holstein Ploen, with the Duke of Wirtemberg, waited upon
the Elector at Brussels, where they held a Council of War, and resolved that a
Detachment of Five Hundred Men out of every Battallion in Garrison in Flanders,
Brussels, Malines, Louvain, and the Neighboring Dutch Garrisons, should be
drawn out to form a Camp between Deinse and Ghent, in order to oppose, if
possible, this new work of the Enemies. The Garrison of Malines, Louvain, and
others the most remote marched the first of April toward the General
Rendezvous, and the Elector left Brussels, attended by the Prince de Vaudemont,
the Dukes of Holstein Ploen and Wirtembergh, and came to Ghent the 4th, to put
himself at the head of the Army. In the mean time the Garrisons of Ghent and
Bruges, with the Regiments of Mackay and Graham from Ostend, and Lorne from
Damme marched, and by the 6th. they were all at the General Rendezvous between
Deinse and Ghent, commanded by the Elector of Bavaria, who took his Quarters at
Oydonck, and the Duke of Holstein Ploen, who took his at Nevel; our Right
reached toward the Abbey of Drongen, and our left was at Deinse; and our whole
Army consisted of about Seventy Battallions, being a Detachment of Five Hundred
Men a^ Battallion; so that our Strength was computed to be about 35000 Foot.
The Garrisons of the Meuse did not stir, nor those in Holland; but the Garrison
of Dixmuyde, and those quartered in or about Newport, had orders to be ready to
march, being reinforced with the Regiments of St. Amand and Soutlandt from
Sluys. The Cavalry drew out 30 Men of a Troop from the same Garrisons* so that
our Army at Deinse consisted of near Fifty Thousand Men, but the Season was yet
so early, that the Ground produced no Forage, which was so much the more
retarded by reason of the rigor of the precedent Winter, and the Troops were
subsisted with dry Forage from the Magazines of Ghent.

Whether 'twas to make a diversion to oblige the Enemies to draw off some of
their Forces from the defense of their new Lines, to facilitate the forcing of
them by our Army at Deinse, or whether we were jealous of Dixmuyde, that the
Enemies might have some design upon it, whilst the main Body of our Army was
Encamped near Deinse, I cannot determine; but whilst the Enemy were working
very busily at their New Lines, a Train of Artillery was sent from Ghent to
Bruges, with an Escort of Five Hundred Dragoons, April.
which was followed the next day with all sorts of Ammunitions, Convoyed by
Five Hundred Dragoons more; and the ^est of our English and Scots Dragoons
which had been quartered in the Winter between Ghent and Sasvan-Ghent, marched
the same way some days after, and went to Dixmuyde, where the Forces Quartered
in the Camerlings Ambacht (or Country about the Canal of Newport) had orders
to repair upon a Minutes warning, with the Regiments of St. Amand and
Soutlandt, that had marched from Sluys to Newport: But the Enemies who were
resolved not to be interrupted in their Work, but to bring it to perfection,
ordered all their Garrisons in Flanders to draw out, and the Brigade of
Foot-Guards, both French and Swissers, marched with all expedition from Paris
to join the Army near Courtray; so that at the same time that we formed our
Army near Deinse, they had their Main Body with the Marshall de Bouflers at
Belleghem, and sufficient Detachments to cover the Kenoque, and the New Line
they were making between Ipre and Comines upon the Lys. Of our ^ide we made a
Bridge upon the Lys below Deynse to pass that River in case the forcing of the
Enemies Work should be judged ^e^sible. But because 'twas now the beginning of
the Spring, and that it was very dangerous to hazard a Battle, which at the
best must ruin our Army though we should succeed in beating the Enemy from
their Work, and hinder it from any other Action of the Campaign; but if beaten
and repulsed, then the Enemies would have remained Masters of the Field* with
the advantage of a whole Campaign before them: For this reason 'twas not judged
safe for the Interest of the Allies to hazard a Battle to endeavor to force
the Enemies Work; but to remain encamped at Deinse, whilst the Enemies should
keep the Field, to cover our own Garrisons; which Reasons were sent to, and
approved of by the King, who was still in England, expecting the Conclusion of
the Sessions of the Parliament in order to pass the Sea, and put himself at the
Head of his Army.

Thus the Enemies were suffered to go on quietly with their Work, which they
advanced with all Expedition, having above Twenty Thousand Pioniers employed,
which they had summoned from the Chatellenies of Lisle, Ipre, and Courtray; and
from the Paiis d' Artois; and having succeeded in this Work, they thought they
had provided effectually for their defense, and reckoned that this advantage
wou^d draw the whole success of the following Campaign after it; and
considering that their design was to act Defensively, they made as much of this
Affair as if they had got a Victory, or had taken some considerable Town,
because they supposed that what they had done contributed in spite of our
attempts to their Wishes and Designs: For now they had a very strong barriere
from Dinant to the Sea, every where covered either with a River or a Line,
which being provided with good Troops, we must either force the passage of a
River, or their Lines to get into their Country. Namur closed up the Meuse and
the Sambre; from Thuin on the Sambre to the Haine they had another Line to
cover the Country between Mons and Maub^uge; which River running by Mons,
falls into the Scheld at Conde. The Scheld from Conde to Bossu between Audenard
and Tournay, is a very good defense, which Nature has provided for the Enemies
Country on the other side, and their New Line which they have made this year,
Incloses all their Country from the Scheld to the Lys at Courtray: From
Comines upon the Lys they have continued their Line to Ipre, and from Ipre they
have a Canal which goes by the Kenoque to Furnes, and so to Dunkirk, fortified
with good Redoubts and Forts from place to place. So that if we consider the
strength of the Enemies Barriers, and the weakness of our Frontiers, it must
very much add to the Honor and Glory of a Conquest of our side; and we need
not much wonder at the Enemies Conquests, whilst we have acted defensively, and
have been so considerably inferior to them in Number in some of the foregoing
Campagnes.

The Marquis de la Valette, Lieutenant General, who Commanded the Old Lines,
being dead of an Apoplexy the last Winter at Courtray, the French King gave the
Command of the New Lines to the Count de la Mothe, Marshall de Camp, which
they have made so much stronger than the l^st, that they have not the
Conveniences of Water to fill the ^osse; for which reason they have made the
Ditch so much the larger, and the Breast-work equal to standing Fortifications*
with Redoubts ^aliss^ded and Stockaded, as well as the Angles Saillants* or
^oints of the Line which flank it. As soon as the Enemies had brought this work
to some perfection, they began to dismiss their Troops back into Quarters,
except such a Number as should be necessary for the defense of their Lines,
with orders to be ready at first warning; and it being so early in the Year
that our Forces could not subsist but at the Charges of dry Forage, all the
Cavalry was sent back into Quarters, and the Infantry of the Neighboring
Garrisons. The Elector left the Field as soon as there appeared no probability
of attempting the Enemies Line, and went for Brussels the 16th together with
the Prince de Vaudemont: The Duke of Holstein Ploen returned to Malines and
Maestricht the 23th. and the 25th. the Garrisons of Ghent, Bruges, Ostend, and
Dendermond were sent back to their respective Quarters, till we should take the
Field; part of the Garrison of Brussels, with those of Malines, Louvain, and
Lier, with the Dutch Guards, and the other Troops which His Majesty designed
should act under His Command in Flanders, being something remote from their
Quarters, to return back again in so little time, were ordered to ^ncamp at
Marykirk near Ghent, where they were supplied with dry Forage, being near
Forty Battalions, Commanded by the Duke of Wirtembergh, who had his Quarters at
Ghent; and Major General Churchil, who Commanded the Garrison of Malines lay at
Marykirk, which were the only English left in the Field.

Soon after the returning of the Forces from the Camp at Deinse into their
Quarters, His Majesty gave the Command in chief of his Army to Charles Henry of
Lorrain, Prince of Vaudemont, which was signified by order to the Garrisons. He
has always been very zealous for the Kings Interest, and the Allies; and has
been a Partner in most of the Dangers to which the King has exposed himself
from the Year, 1673, when the King of Spain entered into an Offensive and
Defensive Alliance with the States of Holland jointly with the Emperor and
Princes of Germany, to this time: And as such long experience of the King's
Heroic Virtues must needs produce a very high Veneration for His Majesty, so
the King has so long tried the Spotless Honor, the Undaunted Courage, and the
Incomparable Judgment of this Excellent Prince, that he has a particular Value
and Esteem for him; All his Qualities are Charming. He is of a most affable and
generous temper; and has the Look and Presence of a Person of the highest Rank
and Eminency, so all his Actions are agreeable thereunto; and if the Gout and
Rheumetismes have very much weakened his Body, and almost disabled him of his
Limbs, that is sufficiently recompensed by a Vast Judgment, and a most Solid
and Clear Understanding. At the Battle of Landen he was in Italy, which is the
only Action in this Country, that he has not been present at with His Majesty
since the last Holland Wars; and when he left Brussels to undertake that
Journey, he declared that he was extremely grieved to part with the King, and
that 'twas the greatest trouble of his Voyage. He is Governeur des Arms to the
King of Spains Forces in Flanders, which answers to a Marshall; which
Commission is never given, but when a Prince of the Royal Blood of Spain is
Governor of Flanders. When the Elector of Bavaria had this Government given
him, the King of Spain allowed him all the Privileges which the Cardinal
Infant, and other Governors of the House of Austria have had, and as this of
having a Governeur des Arms was one, so Prince Vaudemont, who before had
commanded the Spanish Horse, had this Commission given him. But without any
farther Character of this Noble Prince, what he has done in this Campaign is
sufficient to give him a Rank amongst the Greatest Generals in History.

The Sessions of Parliament kept the King in England, almost to the middle of
May. His Majesty landed in Holland the 14th, and as the time to open the
Campaign (which was something retarded by the rigor of the precedent Winter)
drew near, the King spent but few days at the Hague in Conferences with the
States General, and went to Loo the 20th, to take his usual Divertisement. In
the mean while our Armies began to take the Field, and as His Majesty designed
Two Armies for the beginning of the Campaign, one to be commanded by the
Elector of Bavaria and the Duke of Holstein Ploen, and the other by His Majesty
in Person, and Prince Vaudemont, which was to Act in Flanders; So the first
began to Randezvouz near Brussels, with the Head Quarters at Sellick; the Right
at Asck, and the Left toward Brussels, compos'st of the Dutch Troops that had
their Quarters in the Frontiers of Holland, and upon the Meuse, with part of
the Garrisons of Brussels and Louvain, May.
Commanded then by the Duke of Holstein Ploen. As for those which were to act
in Flanders under the King and Prince Vaudemont, being most His Majesty's
Troops, they did not take the Field so soon, being quarter^d at hand in the
Towns of Flanders. The 23th. the Elector left Brussels, to put himself at the
Head of the Army at Sellich, and marched that very day to Ninove, taking his
Quarter at Pamele. The 26th. our Garrisons in Flanders marched to take the
Field. That of Bruges* with Mackays Regiment from Ostend, marched to Bellem
upon the Canal under the Command of Sir Henry Bellasis, Lieutenant General, and
Major General Ramsay. The Regiments of Brewer and Tidcomb from Bruges, Courthop
and Graham from Ostend, and Lorne from Damme, and those quartered near the
Canal of Newport, (viz.) Lesley, Tiffeny, Maitland, Ferguson, and Buchan, had
orders to march to Dixmuyde, there to form a Camp under the Command of
Major General Ellembergh. The Garrisons of Ghent and Dendermond marched the
26th, and joined our Forces that had Encamped at Mary-kirk ever since the Camp
at Deynse; and the 27th we all rendezvouz'd at Arseel, the Garrisons of Bruges,
Ghent and Dendermond, and the Forces that had Encamped at Marykirk with our
Right near Caneghem, and our Left to the Lys, Commanded by the Prince de
Vaudemont, and the Duke of Wirtembergh, being then all Infantry. This was the
same Camp with that of the other Year called the Camp of Wouterghem, changing
name from the difference of the Kings Quarter, which was now marked at Arseel.
The same day the King came from Breda to Ghent, being about Twenty Leagues;
where the Inhabitants had made great preparations to receive His Majesty, with
demonstrations of Joy suitable to what they owe to so great a King, and the
Protector of their Country; the principal Burghers waited upon the King in
Procession from the Antwerp Port, where His Majesty was received and harangued
by the Magistrates; the Canon all round the Ramparts of this big Town, which
had been drawn out on purpose, was thrice fired; the Militia was under Arms,
making a Lane through the Streets, and the Chief Burghers had all White Wax
Torches in their hands, in the same manner that they use to attend at their
Processions: In this Ceremony the King was conducted to Monsieur d'
Auverquerque's Lodgings, with Illuminations all along the Streets; and a
stately Fire-work was prepared upon the Clock-House, which made a very fine
show. Indeed the People of this Countries Joy was very great to see the King
come to head the Armies in Flanders; for when it pleased God to take away our
late Queen of ever blessed Memory, it is impossible almost to express their
grief; they were afraid that the King having lost this admirable Partner of his
Kingdoms would be obliged to remain in England to take that care upon himself,
which he used to commit, during the Campaign, to this Wise and Excellent Queen;
and therefore this added so much the more to Their Joy, that they were rid of
this fear, and that they saw His Majesty coming to put Himself at the Head of
the Army, and that His Enemies could not hinder the peace and quiet of His
Kingdoms, which His Majesty committed to the prudent and faithful care of the
Lords Justices. And though the King had already made that day a long Journey
from Breda to Ghent, yet He only tarried there to refresh Himself, and came
that very Night about Twelve of the Clock to the Camp at Arseel, and the next
day His Majesty^Dined with Prince Vaudemont. The 29th. the King reviewed the
first Line of Foot, the Regiments marched in Battallion before His Majesty, and
not single Companies, which would have taken up too much time. They appeared in
very good order, and very full, and extremely well Accoutr'd. The same day the
Cavalry came to the Camp, the English Encamped upon the Right toward Caneghem,
and the Dutch upon English Pay, with the Dutch Brigade of Montigny* Encamped
upon the Left toward the Lys; being all commanded by Monsieur d' Auverquerque,
Eldest Lieutenant^General. The 30th. the King reviewed the second Line of Foot,
which marched in Battallion as the first, and appeared in the same order. The
31th. in the Morning, the King reviewed our English Cavalry, all which Encamped
upon the Right Wing, which made a very gallant show, the Horses being in very
good order, and the Men very well Clothed and Armed. In the Afternoon His
Majesty reviewed the Left Wing of Horse made up of the Dutch; the Cavalry
marched in Squadrons before the King, as the Foot had done in Battallion, and
all the Cavalry in general was in an extraordinary good Condition: I shall
Insert here our Line of Battle at this Camp, according to the Review made
before the King.

Line of Battle at the Camp of Arsoil, May 30th. 1695. Commanded by the King,
and under His Majesty by Prince Vandemont.
RIGHT WING.
First Line.
Auverquerque, Lieutenant General. Rivers, Major General. Brigades. Regiments.
Squad. Matthews Eppinger's Dragoons 5 L' Etang. Horse Granadiers 1 Scarborough
1 Ormond 1 Rivers 1 Auverquerque 1 Vaudemont 1 Coy. Wood 2 Galloway 3 Coy 2
Leveson 2 Squadrons 20
Second Line.
The Duke of Ormond Lieutenant General. Eppinger, Major General. Brigades.
Regiments. Squad. Matthews Livingston Drag. 4 Mirmont 1 Lumley Lumley 3
Carabiniers, or Wyndham 2 Schomberg 2 Langston 2 Hompes Nassaw Vries^andt 3
Keppel, last Year 2 Lippo Holland Nassaw Sarbruck 2 Squadrons 21
Body of FOOT.
First Line.
Duke of Wirtembergh, General of Foot. Count Nassaw, Lieutenant General. Count
Noyelles, Lieutenant General. Churchil, and Mirmont, Major-Generals. Brigades.
Regim. Battal. Brigade of Guards. English Guards first Regiment 1 Eng. Guards
Coldstr. 1 Dutch Guards 1 Scots Guards 1 Earl Royal 1 Selwyn 1 Churchill 1
Trelawney 1 Stanley 1 Earl 1 Fitspatrick Fairfax (Lloyd) 1 Fusiliers 1
Collingwood 1 Fredr* Hamilton 1 Ingoldesby 1 La Meloniere 1 Packmoer Nassaw 1
Packmoer 1 Fuhnen 1 Zeelandt 1 Prince George 1 Prince Frideric 1 Danish Guards
1 Ransaw Noyelles 1 Ransaw 1 Milune 2 Prince Philip 1 Torsay 1 Bernstorf
Wymberg 1 Churprince 1 Luc 1 Bernstorf Zell 1 Arents 1 Brigad^ Bernstorf 1
Birkenfeldt 1 Battalions 36
Second Line.
Sir Henry Bellasis, Lieutenant General. La Meloniere and Ramsay,
Major-Generals. Brigades. Regim. Battal. Brigade of Guards English Guards first
Regim. 1 Dutch Guards 1 Scots Guards 1 Collier Royal 1 Seymour 1 Rada 1
Granville 1 Saunderson 1 Collier 1 Offerrel Lauder 1 Mackay 1 Offerrel 1 Marton
1 Strathnaver 1 George Hamilton 1 St. Paul Woffembuttel Gua. 1 Hering 1 Huisen
(Lewen haupt.) 1 Cinqvilles 1 St. Paul 1 Hanover Guards 1 Banniere L'Ecluse 1
Holstein Beck 1 Weldern. (Bulo) 1 Tcharner 2 Banniere 1 Anhalt Zerbst Weed 1
Heyden 1 Schrettenback 1 Dona (Rhingra.) 1 Gohr (Zobel) 1 Anhalt Z^rbst 1
Slagenberg 1 Battalions 34
LEFT WING.
First Line.
Portland, Lieutenant General. Major General Dopf. Brigades. Regim. Squad.
Montigny Montigny 2 Turken 2 Boncourt Boncourt 2 Seestadt 2 Wirtemberg 2 La
Forest 2 Hompes Portland 3 Win Win Dragoons 4 Essex 4 Squadrons 23
Second Line.
La Forest Lieutenant General. Brigades* Regim. Squad. Montigny Ohr 2 Zeulen 2
Schack Schack 2 Vittinghoff 2 Rochford or 2 Zuylenstein Win Dopf Dr. 4
Cunningham 4 Squadrons 18
Though the Regiments of Lauder, Offerrel, Strathnaver, and George Hamilton,
are inserted in this List, yet they were not in the Camp at Arseel, they
remained in their Quarters at Deinse, under the Command of Brigadier Offerrel;
neither were the Horse-Granadiers nor the Life-Guards of Ormond and
Auverquerque yet come up, however they were daily expected, and the Garrison of
Deinse was at hand; so that the Kings Army at Arseel consisted of 70
Battalions, which at 600 a Battalion makes 42000 Foot, and 82 Squadrons,
whereof 26 were Dragoons, whose complement is 100 a Squadron, which makes 2600
Dragoons, and 56 Squadrons of Horse at 150 per Squadron, which makes 8400
Horse; all which being added together amounts to 53000 Men, which was then the
whole of the Kings Army. But to give a just Estimate of the Forces we had then
in the Field in Flanders, I shall here insert the Line of Battle of the Army
commanded by the Elector of Bavaria, as it passed Review before his Electoral
Highness at Ninove; and the List of the Little Camp we had at Dixmuyde.

LIST of the Electors Army at Ninove, Commanded under Him by the Duke of
Holstein Ploen.
RIGHT WING.
First Line.
Spaniards, 8 Squadrons. Arco, Lieutenant General. Rivera, Major General of the
Bavarian Foot. Brigades. Regim. Battal. Bavarians Bavar. Gua Foot 2 Squad. Arco
Dragoons 2 Arco Cuirassiers 5
Second Line.
Spaniards, 7 Squadrons. Brigades. Regim. Battal. Bavarians Bavar. Gua. Fo. 1
Rivera 1 Squad. Monasterol Drag. 3 Weickel Cuirass. 5
First Line.
Nassau Weilbourg, Major-Gen. Brigades. Regim. Squad. Pyper Erbach 2 Horenberg
(Stein) 2 Montpouillan 2 Squadrons 21 Battalions 2
Second Line.
Brigades. Regim. Squad. Pyper Nassau Weilbourg 4 Squadrons 19 Battalions 2
Body of FOOT.
First Line.
Tettau, Lieutenant General. Salisch, Major General. Brigades. Regim. Battal.
Lindeboom Holstein Ploen 1 Lindeboom 1 Essen 1 Lottom 1 Harsolt 1 Gohr Hanover
1 Carles 1 Sparr 1 Heukelom Braha 1 Oxenstern 1 Friesheim 1 Ameliswert 1 Dumont
1 Heukelom 1 Tettau 1 Battalions 15
Second Line.
Major-Generals, Fagel and Suerin. Brigades. Regim. Battal. Salisch 1 Suerin 3
Prince Lodowick 1 Knoring 1 Hasfert 1 Holstein Norburg. Capol 2 Marquet 1
Obergen 1 La Mothe 1 Holstein Norburg 1 Fagel 1 Battalions 14
LEFT WING.
First Line.
Athlone, General of Horse. Ittersom, Lieutenant General. Hubert,
Major General. Brigades. Regim. Squad. Chauvire Athlone 2 Warfuse 2 Vocht 2
Chauvira 2 Ittersom 2 Rohr Wirtemberg 2 Saxe Heilberg 2 Flodorp 2 Iselstein
Hubert 2 Bois David 2 Vrichappel 2 Prince Philippe 2 Holstein Ploen 2 Squadrons
26
Second Line.
Lieutenant-Generals, Opdam and Count Tilly. Major General, -- Brigades. Regim.
Squad. Lippe-Zell. Tilly 2 Saxegotha 2 Arco 1 Bernikow 2 Lippezell 2 Rohr
Wolfembuttel 2 Goeden 2 Ryswick Ryswick 2 Hombourg 2 Montflin 2 Oost^rise 2
Heyden 2 Opdam 2 Squadrons 25
Reserve of DRAGOONS.
Boinenbourg Holstein Ploen 4 Boinenbourg 4 Willers 3 Matta 4 Schlipenbach 4
Schulemberg 3 Squadrons 22

Army at Dixmuyde, Cammanded by Major General Ellenberg.
First Line.
Mathews Dragoons, 2 Squad. Tennagel Horse 1 Squad. Infantry. Battal. Brewer 1
Tidcomb 1 Lesley 1 Courthop ( St. George) 1 Graham 1 Belcastel 1 Aver 1 Jutland
1 Prince Christian 1 The Queen of Denmark 1 Queens Dragoons 2 Squadrons 5
Battalions 10
Second Line.
Mathews Dragoons, 2 Squad. Tennagel Horse 1 Squad. Infantry. Battal. Maitland
1 Ferguson 1 Tiffeny 1 Lorne 1 Buchan 1 Soutlandt 1 St. Amand 1 Holle 1 Young
Holstein 1 Lloyd, or the 2 Queens Dragoons Squadrons 5 Battalions 9
By this List it appears, that the Army at Ninove, Commanded by the Elector of
Bavaria and the D. of Holstein Ploen, consisted of 33 Battalions, which makes
19800 Foot, 91 Squadrons of Horse, which makes 13650, and 2200 Dragoons, which
in all amounts to 35650 Men. Ellenberg had 19 Battalions, which according to
our computation of 600 Men per Battalion, makes 11400 Foot, besides 3^0 Horse
and 800 Dragoons, which makes 12500 Men: So that we had then in the Field, in
the Kings Army 53000 Men, in the Electors 35650, in Ellenbergs 12500; all which
being added together, makes our Armies to consist of 101150 effective Men. But
besides this, we had the Brandenburg Forces, who were to act upon the Meuse,
and were drawing to their general Rendezvous near Li^ge, from their
Winter Quarters which had been assigned them in Liege, Aix ^a Chapelle, and in
the Diocese of Cologne, consisting of 18 Battalions and 38 Squadrons, Commanded
by Lieutenant General Heyden, which made 10800 Foot, 14 Squadrons of Dragoons
and 24 of Horse, which makes 5000 Horse and Dragoons, in all 15800 Men.
Brigadier D'ompre was at Bilsen, not far from Maestricht, with 9 Squadrons of
Horse made up of the Regiments of D'ompre, Grisper, Reibold, Bunaw, and S^xe
Meining, which has but One Squadron. I have not seen a List of the Liege Forces
Commanded by Prince Cerclas of Tilly, but I believe it did not exceed 10
Squadrons, and 4 Battalions. Besides all this, I suppose we had some Dutch
Battalions which joined the Brandenburg Forces when they went to the Mehaig^e,
in order to Invest Namur: For I am sure there were Dutch Regiments in the Siege
which are not in these Lists, as particularly Dedem and Coh^rne. 'T was
generally computed that all our Forces from the Meuse to the Sea, in the Field
at the beginning of this Summer, consisted of 150 Battalions and 262 Squadrons,
which amounts in all to 124700 effective Men, which is a very advantageous
difference from what we had the Last Year, considering that to bring these
Forces in the Field, we have not raised one Man more the Last Winter for it;
and this must be the consequence of the advantage we had by the taking of Huy,
and not having Liege for a Frontier, how much soever the success of the Last
Campaign was lessened by our Enemies.

At the same time that our Army under the El^^or and the Duke of Holstein Ploen
began to Rendezvous at S^llick, the French who were not in a condition to act
otherwise than defensively, began to form three Bodies; the one to Rendezvous
between Qui^vrain and Blaton, their Front toward Mons, and Rear toward Conde,
being the main Army Commanded by the Marshall de Villeroy, who was declared by
the French King General of His Army in Flanders, in the place of Marshall Duke
of Luxemburg, who dyed of a Pleurisy at Versailles the latter end of December,
with the Reputation of a Great and Renowned General, having had very great
Success in this War at the Battle of Fleury, his Attack upon our Rear at Leuze,
the Shock at Steenkirk, and the Battle of Landen, besides the Sieges of Men's,
Namur and Charleroy. In the last Holland Wars, he had the misfortune to be
witness to the taking of Philipsburg by the Duke of Lorrain, after a Siege of
three Months, which occasioned several Lampoons to be made upon him; but
nevertheless, if he met with any disadvantages 'twas not for want of Courage,
and his Actions in the precedent Campagnes of this War have acquired him the
Name of one of the most Famous Generals* I do not say it to lessen his
Character, that he has Commanded in the flourishing of the French Power and
Greatness, when they had Armies to act offensively, and to command the Field,
and that he is dead just at the turning of the scale to the Allies. He is dead,
and no body knows what he could have done in the change of this Last Campaign
more than others. The second Army of the French Rendezvouz'd at Gosselies near
Charleroy, designed, I suppose, at first to defend the passages of the Sambre:
This Army consisted all of Horse and Dragoons, being about 70 Squadrons,
Commanded by the Marshall de Bouflers. The third gathered by Furnes,
consisting of 18 Battalions, Commanded by Monsieur de Montal, one of the first
Lieutenant-Generals of France, and who pretended to a Mareschals Staff in the
last Creation of 1693. He missed it; for which reason he did not serve neither
in that nor the following Campaign: But in this the French King gave him the
Government of Dunkirk, and the Commission to be General in Chief of a separate
Body, which he was to Command independently from the Mareschals of France,
according to the Directions he should receive from the Court. Besides this, the
Marquis de Har^^urt had a little Flying Army the other side of the Meuse,
consisting of about 30 Squadrons, in the Frontier of Luxemburg. I have not seen
the List of this, nor of Bouflers, nor Montals Armies; but that of the main
Army Commanded by the Marshall de Villeroy, has been Published, of which I
shall insert a Copy in this place: But first I shall premise, That the
Marshall de Villeroy having received his Instructions from the French Court,
arrived at Valenciennes the 16th, where he was met, to confer about Affairs, by
the Marshall de Bouflers from Li^^e. The 17th the Marshall de Villeroy came
to Courtray, and visited the New Lines as far as Ipre, and after that went to
the Camp between Blaton and Quievrain, to put himself at the head of the Army,
where he was soon followed by the Princes of the Blood, and among the rest by
the Count de Toulouse, who made his first Campaign this Year. The Marshall de
Villeroy reviewed the Army, of which, as I have now said, this List has been
published.

LIST of the French Army Commanded by the Marshall de Villeroy at the
beginning of the Campaign, 1695.
RIGHT WING.
First Line.
The Duke de Chartres, General of Horse. Rosen and Gassion,
Lieutenant-Generals. Duc de Roquelaure, Major-Gen. Brigades Regim. Squad.
Asfeld Dragoons Colonel General 3 Asfeld French 3 Fimarcon 3 Re^eville Horse
Granadiers 1 Noailles 2 Duras Life* 2 Lorges Guards 2 Villeroy 2 Gen d' Arms 1
Chevaux legers 1 Grand Monsquet. 2 Mongon Cuirassiers 3 Bourgogne 3 Roquepine 3
Rot^^mbourg Rottembourg 3 Berry 2 Cravats 3 Squadrons 39
Second Line.
Montrevel, Lieutenant General. Montmorencey, Luxembourgh, and Pracontal,
Major-Generals. Brigades. Regim. Squad. Blanchefort Royal Alleman 3 Anjou 2
Bourbon 2 Cosse 2 Tiessenhausen Furstemburg 2 Fiates 3 Imecourt 3 Dauriac 3
Sully 3 Pujols 3 Massot Melun 3 Bissy 3 Massot 3 Squadrons 35
Body of FOOT.
First Line.
The Prince of Conti, and the Duke of Berwick, Lieutenant-Generals. Messieurs
d' Artagnan, and Crequi, Major-Generals. Brigades. Regim. Battal. Lux Piedmont
3 Provence 2 Charot Bourbonnois 2 Vermandois 2 La March 1 Dantin Crussoll 1
Languedoc 2 Monroux 1 Cadrieux Humiers 2 Toulouse 2 Fourille Guards (French) 4
Guards (Swisse) 3 Th^^y Du Maine 2 Rousillon 2 Bourbon 1 Villeroy Chartres 2
Royal Italien 1 Lyonnois 1 Surville du Roy 4 Guiche Guiche 2 Navarre 3
Battalions 43
Second Line.
Rubantel and Feuquieres, Lieutenant-Generals. Solr^ and Albergoty,
Major-Generals. Brigades. Regim. Battal. Surlaub^ Poitou 2 Surlaube 2 Saint
Second 1 Greder Greder Alleman 2 Angoulesme 1 Montferrat 1 Tesse 1 Surbeck
Swisse Reynold 4 Surbeck 4 Courtin 2 Reynold Artois 1 Lionnois 1 Perigeux 1
Royal Savoy 1 D'ormesson Berry 1 Irish Guards 2 Orleans 2 Battalions 29
LEFT WING.
First Line.
The Dukes of Bourbon and Du Maine, Lieutenant-Generals. The Duke of Elbeuf,
and Monsieur de Vandeuil, Major-Generals. Brigades. Regim. Squad. Souternon Du
Roy 3 Chartres 2 Toulouse 2 Villeroy 2 Pralin Royal Roussillon 3 Villequier 2
Villars 3 Carabiniers 8 Cheladet Rohan 2 Du Maine 2 Orleans 2 Mestre de Ca Genesis
3 Dauvray Drag. Frontenay 3 Dauvray 3 La Reine 3 Squadrons 43
Second Line.
Lieutenant General, Busca. Major General, Count (...). Brigades. Regim. Squad.
Clermon^ 3 Manderscheid 3 Saint Lieu 3 Vaillac 3 Quadt 3 Champlin 3 Lagny
Conflans 3 Lagny 3 La Reine 3 Squadrons 27
With the Artillery Three Battallions, viz.
Royal Artillery 2 Bombardiers 1 Battallions 3 Total of Battallions 75 Of
Squadrons 147
According to this List the Marshall de Villeroy had at the General Rendezvous
of his Army 147 Squadrons, which at 120 per Squadron Horse and Dragoons one
with another makes 17640 Horse; and 75 Battalions, at 600 a Battalion, makes
45000 Foot; in all 62640 Men. Besides this Monsieur de la Mothe, who Commanded
in the New Lines, had a body of Men to defend them, but I have not heard the
strength of it; however when the Marshall de Villeroy marched in the Lines,
being reinforced by this Body, he was then computed to be near 90 Battalions
strong, besides the Army Commanded by Monsieur de Montal; and 'twas then
supposed that all these Armies added together made about 98850 effective Men.
They had left ^0 Battalions in Namur, which with the Body Commanded by the
Marquis de Harcourt in the Frontier of the Pais de Lux^mburg, they thought
sufficient to make head against the Brandenburg Forces toward the M^use: So
that if we include the strong Garrison of Namur, there could not be 20000 Men
difference between their Armies and ours.

Thus having made as just an estimation as possibly I could of the Forces on
both sides, which (considering that I cannot get all the Li^ts of the Enemies
Forces) I must confess cannot be so exact of their side as it is of ours; but I
compute their Strength according to the general Rules at the beginning of a
Campaign. I shall now return to our Camp at Arseel, and proceed to give an
account of the Actions of these mighty Armies. Though the King ordered the
general Rendezvous of his Forces in this place, and that the Elector himself
advanced toward the Scheld, yet it is very reasonable to think that at the
very beginning of the Campaign, the Kings real design was to besiege Namur, and
to act toward the Meuse. For the Elector of Bavaria had Orders to detach my
Lord of Athlone with 40 Squadrons of Horse toward Louvain; and Flanders, of
this side of the Lys, being a close Woody Country, which made Horse not so
necessary to us as it was to the Elector at Ninove, the Marquis de la Forest
was commanded the First of June with she Brigades of Schack, Boncourt and
Montigny, which made our Left Wing of Horse, to reinforce the Elector of
Bavaria's Army; June.
and the Brigades of Coy and Hompes were ordered from the Right to the Left
Wing, in their place. The same day Brigadier Earl was commanded with a
Detachment of 1700 Men to Rouselar and Rombeck; our Pioneers had made the way
for the Army to march by Inghelmonster and Mulenbeck, and this Detachment was
made to cover our March the next day, and to keep in the Parties of Ipre and
Menin. In the Evening we were joined by the Regiments of Lauder and Offerrel
from Deins^, and the Regiments of Strathnaver and George Hamilton remained
there in Garrison under the Command of Brigadier Offerrel, being reinforced by
a Detachment from our Army Commanded by a Colonel.

The ^d the Army marched in four Colomnes from Arseel to Rouselar, dividing
from the Center. The Right of Horse and Foot marched upon the Right in two
Colomnes. The first left Thielt upon the Right, and so marched on by the
Villages of Pet^em, Hardoye and Baveren. The second marched through Thielt, and
so by the Villages of Ayeghem and Colscamp, and the High Road from Bruges to
Rouselar. The Left of Foot and Horse marched likewise upon the Right in two
Colomnes; the first led by the Regiment of Noyelles, and the second by that of
L'Ecluse. The first Colomn of the Left marched by the cut ways upon the Left of
the High Road by Denterghem, Mulenbeck, and Rouselar, along the Mandel; and the
second kept the Highway. The Artillery and Baggage marched in the Rear of the
first Colomn of the Right by Thielt, Ardoye, and Baveren, and so the Army came
to the Camp at Rouselar, where the King took his Quarter; our Right at
Hooghleed, and our Left near Rombeck, as the last Year; only we were more
advanced toward Ipre; and Orders were given to march the next day. The third
the Army marched to Becelar near the Enemies Line between Ipre and the Lys. The
first Line upon the Right by Roosebeck, Passendal, and the Abbey of Sonnebeck,
and the second upon the Left by the High Road from R^uselar to Moorsleede: We
made a Detachment of Four Hundred Dragoons toward Menin, which was not far
from our Left Flank, to cover our March: They met with a Party of the Enemies
Dragoons, which they pursued to the very Palissades of Menin, and brought back
Twenty Three Prisoners. Captain Stanhop, a Voluntier in this Campaign, had a
Horse shot under him in this occasion. The Army marched in this order in the
Enemies Country without any loss, and encamped with our Right near the Abbey
of Sonnebeck; our Left made an elbow from the Center at the Village of Becelar
toward Moorsleede and Dadyseel. So that our Camp faced from the Right to
Becelar, toward the Line between Ipre and Comines; and from Becelar to the
Left toward the Lys and Menin. The Dragoons of the Left faced to Moorsleede,
covering the Kings Quarter, which was at the Baron de Becelars House, and St.
Paul's Brigade, which had the Rear-Guard in this March, encamped also at the
Kings Quarter, with some of the Life-Guards and Dragoons. Upon our coming to
this Camp, in the Evening the King went to view the Enemies Line, being about
three English Miles from our Camp, with a good Escorte of Horse Commanded by
Brigadier L'Etang, and all the Granadiers that were then come up (for the
Second Line was still marching into the Camp) Commanded by Major General La
Meloniere, and the English by Colonel Ingoldesby and Lieutenant Colonel Rook.
Villeroy was not then come up, and what Forces the Enemy had in the Line, which
were Commanded at first by Monsieur de la Mothe, were now under the Command of
Lieutenant General Rosen, who with a Detachment of Villeroys Army had Marched
before to reinforce the Line, which was very well Palissaded, and the Parapet
very thick and strong flanked with good Redoubts, and Cannon mounted for the
defense of them. The King returned late to the Camp, and our Artillery,
Baggage, and Rear-Guard, was not all come up by Midnight. Orders were given to
be ready to March the next Day.

The Marshall de Villeroy Marched from his Camp between Blaton and Quievrain
(the 27th of May) to Leuze, and the 29th he Marched nearer to the Scheld,
having his Head Quarter at Cords, to be nearer to observe our Army at Arseel,
according to its motions, if it passed the Lys, or Marched on toward Rouselar.
The 3^th he made the Detachment, of which we have now spoken, to reinforce the
Lines; and upon our motion to Rouselar, and so toward their Line between Ipre
and Comines, he passed the Scheld and the Lys with all diligence, and encamped
with the main Body of his Army (that very Night we came to Becelar) within the
Line, with his Right at Sulebeck near Ipre, his Left at Comines, and the Head
Quarter at Houthem near the Lys. The French had provided in the Winter for such
quick Marches by making Royal Ways (as they call them) where a Squadron can
march a breast, from Mons to the Sea, to facilitate the Marches of the Army,
cutting and pulling down all they met, without any regard to Houses or
Villages, if they happened in the Line of the Royal Way. At the same time that
the Marshall de Villeroy Marched with the Main Army toward Ipre, to make head
against our Forces, the Marshall de Bouflers, who was encamped at Gosselies
near the Sambre, Marched with the Body under his Command to St. Guilain, to
observe the Elector of Bavaria, who encamped near Ninove. The 4th in the
Morning the General beat for the Army to be ready to March, and the King went
again very early with a strong Detachment, to observe the Enemies Countenance
within their Line; Colonel Lauder Commanded the English. His Majesty found the
Main Body of the Enemies Army encamped within the Line, which had passed the
Lys in the Night at Comines, and came to incamp between Houthem and Sulebeck.
Upon the Kings approach to their Line with so considerable a Detachment, the
Enemy thought that it had been the Vanguard of our Army coming to attack their
Line; for which reason they all immediately stood to their Arms: But Villeroy
being come with his Army within the Line, the King returned to the Camp, and
our Army did not stir from Becelar.

But though there was no probability of success in forcing the Enemies in their
Lines, yet it was convenient for our further designs to oblige them to bring
all their Forces for the defense of them; for which reason the Elector of
Bavaria decamped from Ninove the 4th, and Marched that Day to St. Lievens
Houthem, toward the Scheld. The 5th His Electoral Highness passed the Scheld
below Audenarde, and encamped near this place. The 6th he Marched with his
Army, and encamped near the Enemies Line, between the Lys and the Scheld, with
his Right at Tighem toward Courtray, and his Left between Veermande and
Kirkhove, and his Quarter at Castres. Monsieur de Montrevel,
Lieutenant General, had been left here with a Body of Foot for the defense of
the Line from Courtray to the Scheld, but upon this March of the Electors, the
Marshall de Bouflers (who had advanced from Gosselies to St. Guilain, upon
Villeroys passage of the Scheld in order to observe the motions of the Electors
Army) Marched with his Body of Horse and Dragoons to Tournay, where he passed
the Scheld, and so went on to the Line, where he found a Reinforcement of Foot
sent him by the Marshall de Villeroy, and took his Quarter at Clare. So that
the Enemies had now all their Forces in the Field (except Harcourts Camp
volant) from the Scheld to the Neighborhood of Dunkirk, for the defense of
their Lines. The Marshall de Bouflers Commanded between the Lys and the
Scheld. Villeroy with the Main Army, observed ours between the Lys and Ipres.
Monsieur de la Mothe covered the Canal from Ipre to the Kenoque; and from
thence to Furnes and Dunkirk, Montal Commanded; and Monsieur de Capestan was
put into the Kenoque, for the security of that place. Besides this the Enemies
reinforced the Garrison of Ipres, where they doubled the Posts, and took a
particular care for the Sas of Bonsingue, which is a Sluys strongly fortified
upon the Canal about a League below Ipres, which if once mastered, all the
Water about Ipres, which adds very much to its strength, may be drawn away by
letting loose this Sluys.

This being the disposition of the Enemies within their Lines, I shall return
to speak of our own Affairs at our Camp at Becelar. The 5th Major General Dopf,
Quartermaster General of the Army, was sent with a strong Detachment to mark a
Camp at St. Janstein cappelle, which made us expect that the Army should have
Marched toward Dixmuyde, or the Canal of Ipres; but I believe it was to order
the March of our designed Detachments to Dixmuyde. The same day the Second
Troop of Guards Commanded by the Duke of Ormond, came to the Camp, having been
in Winter Quarters at Breda, and Cantoned upon the Country to refresh their
Horses, after having Escorted His Majesty from Breda to Ghent. The same day our
Bread-Waggons were attacked by a Party upon the way to Bruges, but the Party
was repulsed, and Five and Twenty of the Enemies made Prisoners. The Country
all along, till you come near Bruges, was so close and woody, and so convenient
for lurking Parties, that our Convoys never missed but they were attacked by
some Party or other, which though they could gain nothing, but still had the
worse, yet that incommoded our Camp very much, by the great Detachments we were
still obliged to make, being then Eight Leagues from Bruges, and Eleven from
Ghent; so that at first, Provisions were not plentiful among us, but that was
soon taken care of by having regular Convoys from the Camp to Bruges: Besides
the Boors of the Country had Orders to bring in Provisions upon pain of being
plundered, which they did very willingly, not looking upon us as Enemies, but
Friends; being very desirous to be freed from the French Yoke, under which they
have been ever since the Treaty of Nimeguen, that Ipres with its Chatelleni^
was quitted to the French. Our Camp was not above a League and a half from
Ipres, between Ipres and Menin; so that our Patrouilles of Horse went sometimes
to the Palissades of the Town. We heard, that though the Enemies had provided
for the defense of this place as well as their Line, yet they were apprehensive
of a Bombardment, and began to unpave their Streets, which we could as easily
have done before Villeroys face, as he afterward Bombarded Brussels in the
presence of Prince Vaudemont, of which Exploit they bragged so much in France.
But though the French Kings Manifesto charges us with making it our principal
glory of late to Bombard his Maritime places, without any other advantage but
that of doing mischief; yet if that had been the Temper of the Allies as much
as it is of our Enemies, I believe that Ipres might have felt the malignity of
our Temper as well as Brussels did that of the French.

The 7th the Duke of Wirtemberg, with Colonel Gohr of our Train of Artillery,
went Very early in the Morning with a good Escorte to Dixmuyde; and the same
day Bannieres Brigade was detached to the Right to incamp near the Abbey of
Sonnebeck, to guard the Avenues from Ipres to our Camp, and keep in the Enemies
Parties. The 8th Major General Churchill and Brigadier Bernstorf were commanded
with Eight Battallions to March, and reinforce the Duke of Wirtembergs Army
near Dixmuyde. The Regiments were the First Battallion of Dutch Guards,
Churchill, Granville, Ingoldesby, Danish Guards, Prince Philippe, Gohr-Holland
and Bernstorf; upon which motion of Wirtembergs to Dixmuyde, the Marshall de
Villeroy sent a Reinforcement to the Kenoque, expecting an attempt upon that
place; and Montal himself came with his Body to Loo between Furnes and Kenoque,
to be at hand for the defense of it. The 9th by break of day, a Detachment of
Three Hundred of the Enemies Granadiers, and Six Squadrons of Horse, came with
a design to surprise our advanced Guard at the Windmill of Geluvelt between
Becelar and Comines. We had here an Out-guard of Four Squadrons of Horse, and a
Detachment of One Hundred Foot; but in the Night (the top of the Hill being
open and exposed to the Enemy) they retired to some Houses and Defiles in the
bottom to prevent the Enemies designs. This Detachment of the Enemies finding
their design frustrated, retired to their Lines, and Two of them deserted over
to us, taking this opportunity to make their escape; for though desertion is
very common among the French, yet being encamped within their Lines, the
passages were so kept that they could not desert but by such shifts; and these
were the first that came in since our being at Becelar, so near the Enemies.
The same day Brigadier Fitspatrick, Colonel of His Majesty's Fusiliers, came to
the Camp from England, where he had remained ever since the Battle of Landen,
where he was dangerously wounded; and in the Evening our Volunteers went to
join the Duke of Wirtembergs Army designed to make an attempt upon the Kenoque.

The Duke of Wirtemberg who had left our Army at Becelar the 7th very early in
the Morning, arrived at Dixmuyde by Nine of the Clock; immediately after his
arrival he Mustered the Forces encamped near this place, consisting, as we have
said before, of Nineteen Battallions and Two Squadro^s of Horse, and Eight of
Dragoons; and immediately after the Review, he ordered them to march toward
the Fort of Kenoque, and gave the plunder of the Boors between Dixmuyde and
this place to the Soldiers, in revenge of some which they had barbarously
murdered In the Evening the Duke came with his Army near Kenoque, which is but
a good League and a half from Dixmuyde, and encamped before the place, having
his Quarter at New Cappelle, his Right upon the Canal that goes from Kenoque to
Loo and Furnes, and his Left upon the Canal from Kenoque to Dixmuyde. This is a
very strong hold, situated at the meeting of the Canal of Loo (which goes to
Furnes and Dunkirk) and the Canal of Dixmuyde and Ipres, which makes as 'twere
the figure of a ^. Just upon the point of the joining of these Canals, there is
a very strong Bastion in the very middle, with the water cut about it, making a
very large and deep Fosse. The Canals of Dixmuyde and Loo toward Dixmuyde, and
of the other side toward Bruges, has very good counter-guards which defend the
approach of the Digue near this Bastion; and of the French side between Furnes
and Ipres, this Bastion is covered with a sort of Horn-work with a boggy Morass
before it; so that there is no coming into the Fort but by a way made upon the
top of the Digue. The other side of the Canal toward Bruges is covered with a
Morass and standing water, which makes it inaccessible* The most accessible
side, where the Duke of Wirtemberg was, between the Canal of Loo and Dixmuyde,
has besides the Counter-Guards of which we have now spoken, which cover the
Bastion, several Retrenchments all along the Digue of the Canal, till you come
to a Drawbridge toward Loo. But however this is nothing to resist an Army,
unless there is a Body of Men of the Enemies side of the Canals to hinder the
taking of the Posts about it, which would then be soon beaten to pieces. This
is a great passage into the Enemies Country, it being open from this to St.
Omer; besides it commands the Communication between Ipres and Dunkirk, and
would secure Furnes in our hands, which consequently would make Dunkirk a
Frontier, and expose it to a Siege. Every body knows the consequence of it, if
we should take it, and therefore the Enemies will still use their utmost
endeavors not to hazard it, by keeping this Post and Furnes in their hands.
This place, upon the approach of the Duke of Wirtemberg with his Army, was
commanded by Mon^ieur de Capestan, a Major of Foot. And that which confirmed
the Enemies of our real design against this place was* that we had taken care
before to have a Plan of it, some Ingeniers having been sent on purpose to
Dixmuyde the last March, who went with a good Detachment from that Garrison,
Commanded by a Lieutenant, Colonel and Major, to observe it. The Garrison of
Kenoque sallied out upon them, and attacked that Post where Major Rapin of
Belcastels Regiment had been placed, and he had the misfortune to be killed in
the action; but this Detachment being reinforced from the Neighboring Posts,
the Enemies were obliged to retire, after having lost a Captain, and some other
Officers wounded, besides Soldiers. And this little place was then so
unprovided for such engagements, that they were forced to send a Drum to
Dixmuyde for a Surgeon to dress their wounded Men, because this Garrison
consisted only of Detachments from Ipres relieved from time to time, and so
they had no Surgeons.

Upon the Duke of Wirtembergs arrival here the 7th, we began to make Trenches
to cover our selves, being encamped almost within Musket Shot of the Enemies
Works, and we mounted our Guards toward the Enemy with Two Thousand Five
Hundred Men upon the several Posts, Commanded by a Brigadier and other Officers
proportionably. This Army was divided in Four Brigades, Two of English
Commanded by Colonel Tiffeny and Sir James Lesley, who acted as Brigadiers,
being eldest Colonels; the third by Brigadier Haxhausen, composed of Danes, and
the Regiments of Aver and Belcastel; and the fourth of Dutch, Commanded by
Brigadier Bernstorf, who came here with Major General Churchill. The 9th in the
Morning the Enemies fired very briskly upon our Men, but without any damage. In
the Afternoon Major General Churchill came to the Camp with his Eight
Battallions, having passed through Dixmuyde that Morning. In the Evening the
Duke of Wirtemberg ordered an attack to beat the Enemies from a Retrenchment,
and some Houses upon our Right near the Canal of Loo, the whole was Commanded
by Colonel Tiffeny as Brigadier, and the Granadiers by Colonel Maitland.
Colonel Tiffeny was upon the Right, and the Enemies fired very hard upon him
from a Fort of the other side of the Canal, which he returned very bravely: He
himself was wounded through the Hand with a Musket Shot, and Major General
Churchill who was willing to have a share in the Action, escaped very narrowly,
being shot through the crown of his Hat with a Musket-ball. Colonel Maitland
who was to dislodge the Enemy with his Granadiers, did it with all the Success
and Conduct that could be wished, and the Men went on with a great deal of
Bravery and Courage, and drove the Enemy from their Post, which they
endeavored in vain to recover two or three times successively, coming on with
Sword in hand. We had several Granadiers killed and wounded. Colonel Tiffenys
and Fergusons Regiments lost most in this Action. Of Colonel Fergusons
Regiment, Captain Trumbal was killed, Major Bruce of Maitlands wounded, and an
Ensign killed* I have not seen the List of Colonel Tiffenys, but it was
generally computed that our whole loss in this Action amounted to about Four
Hundred Men killed and wounded, but they grew almost to Thousands by that time
they came in the Paris Gazette, which certainly could not fall without some
slaughter among the Enemies. We had three small pieces of Cannon which played
during this Attack, which is the only Cannon we fired against the place: The
small Shot was indeed very brisk on both sides, the whole Night, and we could
hear it very plain from our Camp at Becelar: And though it does not appear that
we had any real design against this place, but only to amuse the Enemy, yet it
was necessary for us to make this Attack because the Posts from whence we drove
the Enemy were very inconvenient to us upon our Right. The Duke of Wirtemberg
had some Artillery from Dixmuyde, with Morter-pieces and Bombs, but 'twas never
taken out of the Boats to mount upon the Batteries, except the three
Fieldpieces now mentioned. This Artillery had been sent by Water from Sas van
Ghendt, besides a great quantity of Ammunitions, with the rest of our English
battering pieces, which remained under the Walls of Ghendt, without being sent
any farther. Monsieur de Montal, upon this motion of the Duke of Wirtembergs,
had advanced between the Canal of Loo and that of Ipres, to defend this place,
and to hinder our passage of the Canals to invest it; so that nothing could be
undertaken without the bringing of both Armies to wrangle about this Post, and
ours to attack upon very disadvantageous terms* So that after this attack of
the 9th there happened nothing extraordinary before the Kenoque, but only in
the Night they generally fired pretty briskly to hinder our Men from making any
approaches, and their Artillery played ten times to our once; hovvever the Duke
of Wirtemberg still continued there to keep the Enemies in suspense.

As for what passed of the Elector of Bavaria's side, which we have left
encamped before the Enemies Line between Courtray and the Scheld, with his Head
Quarter at Castres, between Tighem and Kirkhove, he made upon his arrival here
great preparations of Fascines, as if he had designed to attack the Line: And
the 8th he went with Three Thousand Horse and Dragoons to observe the Enemies
Works. They had an out-post at a Mill without their Line near St. Denis, which
hindered our approach, which Major General Fagel was ordered to attack with the
Bywacht of the Army (that is a Captain, Lieutenant, and Ensign, and Sixty Men
of every Regiment, which are still ready to march out upon any occasion, with
Field-Officers proportionably) and with the Granadiers. The Enemies had here a
good Detachment, commanded with a Lieutenant Colonel, and the Post was strong,
and they disputed it some time, but at last were forced to abandon it. Count
Volkerstein of the Elector of Bavaria's Guards was killed upon this occasion.
As for the loss of both sides, I have not seen an account of it. The Elector of
Bavaria after this Action continued in his Camp at Castres, and we at Becelar,
still leaving the Enemies in doubt, whether we should attack them in their
Lines, whilst matters were preparing for an important undertaking.

Whilst we continued in our Camp at Becelar, Forage was not very plentiful,
nothing being to be had here but Grass. The Country hereabouts is altogether
Woody, with little Arable Land, and yet most of that remained untilled (some
said) by order, to hinder the subsisting of our Armies near this place. The
10th the Enemy, who had hitherto Forrag'd within their own Lines, ventured to
forage without, which occasioned some deserting among their Men, who wanted
that opportunity within their Lines. The 11th the Fourth Troop of Guards
Commanded by Monsieur d' Auverquerque, with the Horse Granadiers, came to the
Camp, the first having been in Winter Quarters at the Hague, and the last at
Boisleduc. The 13th our Cavalry forrag'd toward Ipres; and this being a close
Country, and just by an Enemies Garrison, the Troopers went on foot to cut down
their Forage, which was guarded by a Detachment from the Infantry, and then
the Horses were brought from the Camp to fetch the Forage ready made up
in^Trusses; by which precaution we forrag'd thus almost to the Gates of Ipres
without losing One Horse; and indeed though this Country is very convenient for
such designs, and that our Camp was flanked of both sides, with Ipres upon the
Right, and Menin and Courtray upon the Left, and the Enemies Line in our Front,
yet we lost but very few Horses, there being still good Guards upon the Woods
to cover our grazing, which was still done by order. The 14th the King was
informed that the Enemies had a design upon our Bread-Waggons coming from
Bruges, and that they were to fall upon them at Rouselar; for which reason my
Lord Essex was detached with Five Hundred Dragoons to join our Convoy at
Rouselar, and my Lord Portland went with Five Hundred Dragoons more Commanded
under his Lordship by Brigadier Win, sustained by some Horse, to endeavor to
meet with the Enemies upon their way, being advised that they were to pass that
Evening by Moorsleede; accordingly my Lord Portland overtook them in this
place, and the Dragoons had orders to dismount and attack them, which they did
with a great deal of Courage. The Enemies were Commanded by a
Lieutenant Colonel, about Four Hundred strong; they had made some Barricades of
Wagons, which they defended no longer than to gain time to make their escape;
but notwithstanding, a Captain with about Thirty Men remained Prisoners, and
they had several killed and wounded* The fire was very hot for above half an
hour, and the Count de Soissons, who was here as Voluntier, very much
encouraged our Men, and was very well pleased with their way of falling on.
Count de Soissons is Brother to the Prince Eugene of Savoy, Velt-Mareschal
General of the Emperors Forces in Piemont, and a near Kinsman to the Duke of
Savoy. The French King would oblige him to serve in Piemont with his Regiment
against the Duke of Savoy, which he refused, and quitted, and retired, with the
French Kings leave, out of the Country: But the French King hearing he was gone
into England, he was so netled at it, that he ordered the Countess de Soissons,
his Wife, immediately to leave the Kingdom. He served in our Army this whole
Campaign as Voluntier, being waited upon by the Kings own Servants; and he was
still with the King upon all occasions. He is a Person of a very fine
Education, very civil and obliging, and very brave, which has gained him the
esteem and affections of all Persons of Quality in our Army. But to return to
the business of Moorsleede; Lieutenant Webb was killed in this occasion,
Brother to Lieutenant Colonel Webb of the Guards. Brigadier Win was wounded
in the Knee, which though it was not esteemed very dangerous at first, yet he
dyed afterward of this Wound at Ghent, being generally regretted. (The King
has since given his Regiment of Dragoons to Colonel Rosse, Lieutenant Colonel
of the Regiment who has been one of the Kings Aid de Camps the three last
Campagnes. Captains Collins and Holdgate were likewise wounded, both Officers
of Dragoons. The next day our Convoy of Bread-Waggons came safe to the Camp;
and with them my Lord Rivers Major General of Horse, Monsieur de Zuylenstein
Lieutenant General, created by His Majesty Earl of Rochsord, and my Lord Cutts
Brigadier, being lately come over from England. Besides the miscarriage of the
Enemies upon the coming of our Bread-Waggons to the Camp, they had received the
same misfortune before upon their going to Bruges, above Fifty of them having
been carried Prisoners into this place by our Detachment. The 15th at Night a
Party of the French fell upon an Outpost of Bannieres Brigade at Sonnebeck,
where they made several Prisoners, most of them Swissers of T^har^ers Regiment
The 17th the Duke of Wirtemberg had Orders to withdraw his Forces from before
Kenoque, and to march back to Dixmuyde. Nothing extraordinary happened in the
attack of this place from the 9th, of which we have given an account, to the
time of raising the pretended Siege; save that the 10th, Montal passed the
Canal of Loo with a good Detachment of his best Troops, with a design to have
surprised out Out guards; but the Duke of Wirtemberg had notice of it, and the
Guards were so ordered, that upon some fire of both sides which allarme^ the
Camp, the French retreated, fearing an Ambuscade which was ready for them The
17th in the Afternoon, the Artillery and Baggage had orders to march from our
Camp at Becelar to Rouselar, Escorted by Bannieres Brigade from Sonnebeck, and
St. Paul's from the Kings Quarter. They marched all Night, meeting now and then
with French Parties, which would have broken in upon the Line of Baggage, but
the Brigades were so disposed upon the Front, Flanks, and Rear, that they were
still repulsed. Orders were given for the Army to march the next Day.

The 18th the Army marched; the first Line upon the Right by Sonnebeck,
Passendal, and Roosebeck, to Rouselar, the same way that we had come to this
Camp; the second Line marched upon the Left, gaining by Moorsleede the high way
from Menin to Rouselar. Packmoe^'s Brigade had the Rear-guard with seven pieces
of Cannon to make good our retreat out of the Enemies Country. The King
remained with the Rear-guard to see all safely march off Villeroy had a great
mind to have fallen upon our Rear in this March; having upon notice of it
ordered a Detachment of many Squadrons of his best Horse and Dragoons, with
which he marched very early out of the Line to observe our motion, directing
his way from Ipres toward the Windmill of Gel^velt, to have come into our Camp
by Becelar. But such was the order of our March, that he was obliged to see us
march quietly off. That day we came to Rousela, with our Camp as before between
Hooghleed and Rombeck; Bannieres Brigade encamped upon the Right before the
Village of Hooghleed, where Prince Vaudemont had his Quarter. The Army halted
the next day, but matters being ready for the great and glorious undertaking of
this Campaign, the King left the Camp at Rouselar very early the 19th in the
Morning, to go toward the Meuse, with the Troops of Life-Guards of Ormond and
Auverquerque, the Horse Granadiers, my Lord Portlands Regiment of Horse, and
Dopfs Dragoons Commanded by Brigadier L'Etang: The main of which Body kept with
the Kings Domestics and Baggage, but His Majesty had a sufficient Escorte to
hasten on before.

We had made great preparations at Maestricht of Artillery, Mortars, Bombs, and
all manner of Ammunitions; and all the Boats of the Meuse at Liege, Maestricht,
and Huy, were detained for the States Service. And though all this threatened
Namur, yet the French had brought all their Forces within their Lines, without
keeping any Body to guard the passages of the Sambre: Whether it was that they
thought Villeroys, Bouflers, and Montals Forces were but sufficient to defend
their Lines against the King and the Elector of Bavaria's; or that they
depended upon the strength of Namur, and the goodness of the Garrison in it,
and the difficulty of a Siege; They left the Sambre unfurnished of Troops. But
His Majesty expected only the junction of the Brandenburg and Liege Forces to
invest Namur. Six Battallions of Brandenburghs had had their Winter Quarters at
Liege, and some at Aix la chapelle, but the Cavalry and the rest of the Foot
had Wintered in the Diocese of Cologne, and at Cleves, and Wesel in the Lower
Rhine; so that they did not Rendezvous by Liege till near the middle of June,
that they marched with the Liege Forces Commanded by Prince Cerclas of Tilly,
and encamped at Falais, upon the Mehaigne, between Liege and Namur, waiting for
His Majesty's farther Orders. And my Lord of Athlone, with his Forty Squadrons
of Horse and Dragoons who had been detached from the Elector of Bavaria's Camp
at Ninove for the same design, had marched to Tilmont to be ready to join them.
In the mean while Prince Vaudemont, who Commanded the Army at Rouselar since
the King left it to take care of the Siege of Namur, marched the 20th to draw
nearer to Ghent. The Army marched upon the Left (siding the River Mandel which
we had upon our Right Flank) in two Columns, by the ways we had made when we
were at the Camp at Arseel, by Mulenbeck, and Inghelmonster, and so we came to
the Camp at Wouterghem, our Right at Dentherghem, and Left at Grammon toward
the Lys: We had the Mandel before us, and the height of Arseel behind our
Right. Some French Parties fell upon our Maroders near the Lys, and made some
Prisoners. Prince Vaudemont staid near Denterghem to see the Army march into
the Camp, and every Battallion saluted passing by him, as Commander in Chief of
the Army. At our Marching into this Camp, we could see the French in their Camp
upon a rising ground the other side of the Lys, by Harlebeck, being computed near
three Leagues from our Camp. The Marshall de Villeroy had passed the Lys at
Comines immediately upon our March from Becclar to Rouselar, and the 19th had
marched without the Line at Courtray, and encamped near this place, to be ready
to pass the Scheld, if he was ordered to march toward Namur.

We have left the Brandenburg and Liege Forces encamped at Falais upon the
Mehaigne, and my Lord Athlone at Tilmont, where he was reinforced with Dompres
Brigade of Horse from Bils^n. But now they had Orders from the King to invest
Namur. Accordingly my Lord Athlone marched the 17th with the Body of Horse
under his command, and encamped between Malevr^ and Perwys: The 18th between la
Falise and Temploux, where he was joined by the Brandenburg Troops: The 19th he
left a good Body of Horse at the Post of La Falise, and marched with the Main
Body toward Charleroy. This motion put the Enemies in suspense, whether we
should attack Namur or Charleroy: Whereupon the Marquis de Harcourt, who had
passed the Meuse at Dinant, and was now posted between Charleroy and
Philippeville, reinforced the Garrison of Charleroy with a Body of Dragoons.
But my Lord of Athlone having passed the Sambre at Chasselet below Charleroy,
marched again down the Sambre toward Namur, and pressed all the Boats upon the
River to make a Bridge of Communication, which were brought down to the Abbey
of Floref upon the Sambre two Leagues above Namur. Thus my Lord of Athlone took
the Posts from the Sambre to the Meuse of the Town side, about La Falise; and
the other side of the Sambre, from the Abbey of Floref to the Meuse. But all the
other side of the Meuse in the Pais de Condros remained open. This was the
21th. I do not know whether my Lord of Athlones Troops were not judged
sufficient to invest the whole Town, which taking a vast Circumference, and
divided by so many Rivers, might have exposed any one quarter to be forced to
put a Reinforcement into the Town; or whether my Lord of Athlone had Orders to
take no other Posts, and to stay for the Elector to do the rest: However the
other side of the Meuse lying open, it gave opportunity to the Marshall de
Bouflers to throw himself into the place. This was with Eight Regiments of the
best Dragoons in the Army. He had left his Camp at Clare within the Line the
18th, (the same day that the Elector repassed the Scheld to march toward
Namur) and took along with him the Kings Dragoons, the Dauphins, those of
Caylus, Grammont, St. Hamines, de Ganges, and du Barreau; having Orders from
the French King, That if my Lord of Athlone had invested Namur with the
Brandenburg Troops, and the Horse under his Command, to force his way in at any
rate. But the other side of the Meuse remaining open, he was not put to it. The
same day Bouflers repassed the Scheld at Tournay, and marched up along this
River as far as Mortaigne. The 19th he came to Conde. The 20th he passed the
Sambre at Thuin. The 21th he came to Dinant, where he passed the Meuse; and the
22th he got into Namur. He sent back all the Dragoons Horses, except those of
the Kings, and Asfeldt Estranger, which he kept in the Town; having made very
great diligence to get in before my Lord of Athlone should be joined by the
Elector of Bavaria. His getting into the place did chagrine us at first,
because that (as we expected) would render the taking of the Town very
difficult, by an obstinate resistance; but as it has since proved, it has added
extremely to the Glory of the Siege, and has made it one of the boldest and
finest undertakings of this Age. I dare say, that if the French King had
believed that we could have taken Namur with the strong Garrison that was in
it, he would never have commanded a Marshall of France to put himself into it
to defend it, to add thereby so much the more Honor and Glory to the
Enterprise; being it may be the first that has been defended by a Marshall of
France, with order from the King. The Marshall de Crequi defended Treves, but
every body knows how he was forced into it by the loss of a Battle; and this
was a place of Refuge where he made his escape, and where he resolved to regain
his Honor by a desperate defense.

My Lord of Athlone with the Dutch, and Baron Heyden with the Brandenburg
Forces, having received Orders to take the Posts near Namur, the Elector of
Bavaria and the Duke of Holstein Ploen marched with all speed from their Camp
near the Enemies Line to form the Siege of this strong and important place.
Accordingly the 18th the Electors Army decamped from Castres between Veermarde
and Tighem, and repassed the Scheld below Audenarde, and marched that day as
far as St. Lievens Houtheim. The 19th this Army passed the Dender at Ninove,
where it encamped that night, and the Elector went to Brussels to visit the
Electoress. The 20th the Army marched to Halle. The 21th it passed the Senne,
and marched to Genap and Promell, where the Elector returned to the Camp from
Brussels. The 22th the Elector passed with his Army the little River Dyle at
Genap, and marched as far as Masy, within Two Leagues of Namur; which was a
very great March, to pass so many Rivers, from the Enemies Line between the Lys
and the Scheld clear to the Sambre, in five days. The same day the King came to
the Camp near Namur, and took his Quarter at the Chasteau de la Falize, within
Four English Miles of this place, having left his Army at Rouselar the 19th;
and that day His Majesty passed through Ghent, and lay at Diselbergh in the way
to Dendermonde. The 20th through Dermonde, and so to Grimberg near Brussels,
where the King has a House of his own. The 21th by Vilvorde and Louvain, to the
Abbey of Parc^; and the 22th to La Falise. Brigadier L' Etang marched after
with easier Journeys, escorting the Kings Domestics and Baggage. The 23th the
Elector passed the Sambre with his Foot, and some Spanish Horse, with the Dutch
Brigades of Holstein Norburg and Dedem, and took his Quarter at the Abbey of
Malogne upon the Sambre; and the Brandenburg Forces, Commanded by
Lieutenant General Heyden, passed the Meuse, and took their Post on the other
side of this River, upon the height of St. Barbe, before the Fauxbourg de
Jambe. The Duke of Holstein Ploen remained of this side of the Sambre and Meuse
with the King, and the rest of the Dutch Forces. And now the Posts being taken
all about Namur, before the Town and the Castle, and the other side of the
Meuse, it is from this day (23) that we must reckon the investing of it.

This place has very much changed condition since it fell into the French Kings
hands, who spares no Charges to put his Frontier Garrisons in the best
condition of defense. When the French took it, the Town was but weak, being
absolutely commanded by a steep Hill, which hangs just over it from the Port
de Fer to that of St. Nicholas near the Meuse; so that they had the liberty to
bring down their Batteries at first upon the descent of this Hill, and to open
their Trenches at the foot of it near the Meuse; and so in four or five days
time they were lodged upon the Counterscarp of St Nicholas his Gate; and the
Town capitulated the 26th of May, the Trench having been opened the 19th. But
now to add a considerable strength to this weak part of the Town, the French
had made a detached Bastion upon the ascent of the Hill just before St.
Nicholas's Gate, all of Stone-work, with a Casematte upon it, (that is a Corpse
de Guard Bomb proof) the Counterscarp of the Fosse of Freestone, and the
covered way the same, which pointed just upon the top of the Hill, so that no
Cannon could bear upon this Work from the Plain upon this Hill, but we battered
it in revers from the other side of the Meuse at the Brandenburg Batteries,
which required some time before we could bring these Batteries to the
Waterside. Upon the Right of this toward the Port de Fer, they had made two
other detached Bastions of the same work just upon the brow of the Hill; and at
the foot of the Hill before the Port de Fer, and between the Hill and the
Brook of Verderin, they had a fourth, which hindered the Avenues between the
Hills to this Gate. The Brook of Verderin runs along a narrow Valley between
these Hills by a Sluyce fortified just at the Port de Fer. It is by this
Sluyce that the Fosse of the Town is furnished with Water from this Gate to
that of St. Nicholas, where it is stopped up from running into the Meuse by a
Stone Digue above Ten Foot broad: For this River is so shallow and
inconsiderable, that it could not otherwise fill the Fosse. The Plain upon
these Hills is fortified with a double covered way palissaded, to defend these
detached Bastions toward the Village of Bouge; and when we attacked the place,
they were working at a third nearer to the brow of the Hill just before these
works; so that this Town which before was weak, was really strong by the
addition of them, and held out longer than the Castle.

The French attacked the Castle and Cohorne upon the top of the Hill between
the Sambre and the Meuse; and this they took care to fortify afterward, so as
to leave it almost unattackable the same way they had took it before. The
Cohorne, or Williams Fort, fell into their hands by driving their Trenches
round the work along the bottom, between it and the Terra Nova, or upper
Castle, which work being embraced, and all manner of Communication cut off, was
forced to surrender. The French to prevent such a method of proceeding another
time, built a strong Stone Redoubt just upon the top of the Hill between the
Cohorne and Terra Nova, with a Casematte upon it Bomb proof; and this work
commands all this bottom to the Sambre. Before this work they have made a very
good covered way palissaded, from the Angle of the Gorge of the Cohorne to the
brink of the Hill upon the Meuse. They have besides this made a very good
Half Moon upon the courtin of the Horn-work of the Terra Nova. They have
fortified the Devils House, (which flanks the side of the Cohorne toward the
Meuse) with a strong Stone Redoubt, which they have called the Casotte. This
House, when the Spaniards had it, had but a simple Retrenchment about it, and
yet it held out four or five days. From the upper point of the Cohorne, which
is toward the Meuse, they have made a very good covered way, which goes about
before the Casotte to the edge of the Hill upon the Meuse: And beyond all this,
to cover the whole from the Sambre to the Meuse, they had undertaken a
prodigious Line cut into the very Rock, all along the top of the Hill, near an
English half Mile in length, terminating upon the edge of the Hill toward the
Sambre, and the same Hill toward the Meuse, with two Redoubts at each end. The
Line was finished, and the Redoubt toward the Meuse was very forward; but that
toward the Sambre was but just begun, which they made up with Fascines upon
our arrival before this place. This Line had a very fine Gate in the middle,
such as they use to make for the coming in to their Towns, but 'twas not
finished. It would have been very difficult to have forced this Line from
without, but the passage of the Sambre at the Balance not being fortified by
the Enemy, it made way for us to attack this Line within; which made it but a
cheap bargain (as we shall tell hereafter): However to add as much strength to
it of this side as the time of the Siege would allow them, they made a Battery
of two pieces of Cannon upon the reverse of the end of the Line toward the
Sambre to fire upon the pass of the Balance, and some Coupeures or Traverses
to fortify the inside of their Line, and a Perpendicular Line of Communication
to the covered way of the Cassote. And indeed the Castle was so strongly
fortified upon the top of the Hill with all these Outworks, that it would have
been a very tedious piece of work for us to have attacked it this way: But the
weak side of the Castle and Cohorne was toward the Town and the Sambre, and
the Enemies had not provided for an Attack of this side, which made all these
prodigious works fall into our hands in less time than the French had taken
this place before; though then much inferior to what it is now in Strength and
Fortification.

If the Enemies had reason to depend upon the great strength of this Garrison,
they had as much reason to expect a vigorous resistance from the Forces that
were in it, which were very numerous, no less than twenty Battallions, of which
some were the best reputed Regiments of France; but others, about four or five,
being what they call Regiments de Salade, that is, Garrison Regiments, which
are not fit to put into the Field. Their old Corpse have generally one or two of
these Battallions, where they train and exercise their Recruits and worse men
for one Summer, and then they draw them out the Campaign following. These
Regiments are always weak, and therefore cannot come up to the computation of
other Battallions; but I believe that all these Battallions put together may
very well be computed 450 Men strong, one with another, which makes 9000 Foot;
and 8 Regiments of Dragoons which marched out 3 Standards each Regiment, which
makes 24 Squadrons, which if complete would amount to 2400 Dragoons; but I dare
say that (considering their hasty and quick March from the Scheld to this
place, by the Sambre and Dinant) they could not exceed 2000 Men. There was
besides 6 Independent Companies in the Town, and Artificers, Miners, and
Gunners; all which joined together made about 12000 effective Men at the
beginning of the Siege. But for the more particular satisfaction of the Reader,
I shall here insert the List of the Garrison, commanded in Chief by the
Marshall de Bousters, known for his Zeal and Fidelity to the French King, and
his active and vigilant Courage; and by the Count de Guiscard Governor of the
place, a Gentleman of great Accomplishments. This last has been extremely civil
and obliging to our English Officers that have been at any time Prisoners at
Namur. Monsieur de Laumont was Lieutenant Governor, and Brigadier; Monsieur de
Megrigny Major General, and (next to Vauban) the ablest Ingenier of France, was
here with a Brigade of chosen Ingeniers to look after the defense and
reparation of the Fortifications, and to try their Art in the dispute of every
work^ Besides these General Officers, the Garrison had four Brigadiers, Qu^lus
of Dragoons, Maulevrier, St. Laurens, and l' Aba^ie, of Foot. Their Artillery
consisted of 120 pieces of Cannon and Mortars, 12000 Granades, 130000 weight of
Powder, Ball and Bombs proportionably, 10000 spare Arms, and Provisions for six
Mone^hs; besides, as they gave out, 10^000 Crowns in Cash for the payment of
the Garrison. The List whereof was as follows: Of the Dauphins Regiment, 5
Battallions, commanded by the Count de Montbron Son to the Governor of
Cambray, two whereof were Garrison Battallions; Beauvoisis, one Battallion,
Commanded by the Count de Vi^uxbourg; Royal Artillery, one Battallion,
Commanded by Brigadier St. Laurens; Maulevrier, two Battallions, Commanded by
Brigadier Count de Maulevrier; Bugey, one Battallion; Haynault, one Battallion;
Solre, one Battallion; Court-Swisse, one Battallion; Foix, Commanded by Count
Morstein, one Battallion; La Mar, one Battallion; Nice one Battallion;
Piemont, three Battallions; Navarre, one Battallion. I have given an account of
the Dragoons before, which I need not repeat here These were indeed by much the
best Troops of the Garrison, and were generally very brisk Soldier-like
Fellows, and very well accouter'd; As for their Independent Companies, they
were in no extraordinary condition, neither have I seen an account of them.

After we had invested Namur, in order to form this important Siege, my Lord of
Athlone was detached with most of the Cavalry to the Plains of Fleury, and so
to the Pieton, to consume the Forage thereabouts, and between Charleroy and
Mons. We kept no more Horse in the Siege than was necessary for Convoys,
Patrouilles, and to carry Fascines for the Works and Trenches. And this place
being so strong, and the Posts about it of such a great circumference, and over
two considerable Rivers, that it could not be besieged but by a numerous and
strong Army, His Majesty ordered a good Reinforcement from Prince Vaudemonts
Army, which we have left encamped at Wouterghem Accordingly on the 21th
Major General Ramsay was commanded with Brigadier Fitspatrick, to march toward
Namur with 14 Battallions, being the First Battallion of the First Regiment of
English Guards, the First Battallion of the Scots Guards, the First Battallion
of the Royal Regiment, Selwyn, Seymour, Rada, Fusiliers, Collingwood, Lauder,
Saunderson, Zeeland, Hanover Guards, Arents, and Weed. The same day ( 21st) the
D. of Wirtemberg having left the Enterprise of the Kenoque the 17th, came to
the Camp at Wouterghem with the 8 Battallions Major-Gen. Churchill had
commanded thither, and 11 more from Dixmuyde, of which some came that day with
the Duke, and others came some days after; which made in all 19 Battallions:
The 1^ Battallions from Dixmuyde were, Tidcomb, Courthop, Belcastel, Jutland,
the Queen of Denmark, Maitland, Ferguson, Tiffeny, Buchan, Soutland^ and St.
Amand, besides Tennagels Regiment of Horse, and the Kings Dragoons; so that of
the 27 Battallions we had before the Ke^oque, commanded by the D. of
Wirtemberg, 8 remained in Garrison at Dixmuyde, with the Queens Dragoons, under
the Command of Major General Ellemberg. Our loss before the Kenoque amounted to
587 Soldiers killed and wounded, besides Officers. In Tiffenys Brigade,
composed of the Regiments of Churchill, Granville, Ingoldesby, Maitland,
Ferguson, Tiffeny, Lorne, and Buchan, 3 Officers killed, 32 wounded, and 337
Soldiers killed and wounded. In Lesleys Brigade, made up of the Regiments of
Brewer, Tidcomb, Courthop, Lesleys, and Graham, 20 Soldiers killed and wounded.
In Bernstorss Brigade, in which were the Regiments of Bernstorf, Holle, Young
Holstein, Prince Philip, St. Anand, Soutland, Reinhard, and Gohr, 2 Officers
killed, 3 wounded, and 208 Soldiers killed and wounded. In Haxhuysens Brigade,
made up of the Regiments of Belcastel, Aver, Prince Christian, Queen of
Denmark, 22 Soldiers killed and wounded. The Dutch and Danish Guards did Duty
upon the D. of Wirtemberg, and did not roll with the rest.

Major General Ramsay having been detached the 21th with Brigadier Fitspatrick,
and 14 Battallions, to hasten toward Namur, marched that day near Ghent, and
encamped at Marykirk. The 22th he marched through Ghent, and encamped at Erp
near Alost. The 23th he marched to Vilvorde, where Count Nassaw,
Lieutenant General, came to put himself at the head of this Detachment. The
24th to Velthem, near Louvain. The 25th through Louvain; and so we encamped in
the Retrenchments we made last Year at Tourine Bavechein, from whence
Lieutenant Colonel Macartney was sent to the King to receive further Orders;
and the 26th we march^d to Perwys. Lieutenant Colonel Macartney returned with
Orders to halt the next day. We were then reinforced by the Regiments of
Tidcomb, Stanley and Maitland, besides the First Battallion of Dutch Guards,
which had come strait from Dixmuyde, and march^d this day to the Camp before
Namur. The same day Brigadier St. Paul came up to Perwys, with the Hanover
Regiments of ^t Paul, Cinqvill^s, and Hulsen. They had left Prince Vaudemo^ts
Camp the 22th. The 28th Count Nassau and Major General Ramsay marched to
Temploux with the Body under their command, within a League and a half of
Namur, not far from the Sambre. The day before the King had removed his
Quarters from La Falise nearer the Town, to the Farm of the Maison rouge, upon
the Hill near the Village of Flavennes on the Sam^^^: And the same day we began
to work at our Line of Circumvallation, tracing the Ruins of that which the
French had made when they besieged this place, July.
which we found ready cut out to our hands, except at Maulx, where we made it
run a little more out than the French had done before. Upon Count Nassaus,
arrival to Temploux, the two Dutch Regiments of A^entz and Weed, which had
marched with the English Detachment, marched and took their Post with the Dutch
in the Line of Circumvallation; and the same day a Major, a Captain, and 2
Lieutenants, of the Dragoons within Namur, were made Prisoners, endeavoring to
get in, and were sent to Huy* Hitherto the French were not much disturbed by us
in the Town of Namur; for we had not yet broke ground before the place; and the
Water of the Meuse was so low that we could not get our Cannon up so soon as we
expected; for when they were come up to Huy, the River was found so shallow,
that we were forced to unload our Cannon, and put them in lesser Vessels to
bring them; which as it required time, so consequently it retarded very much
the vigorous prosecution of the Siege: Nevertheless the King, with the Elector,
went every day to visit the Posts near the Town, and among the rest, July 1st,
as the King was riding near the Town to observe the Enemies works, a Lieutenant
and Cornet of Dragoons deserted from the Enemy, and came to the King,
pretending themselves to be of Liege, and that they would not serve against
their own Forces, and the Allies of their Prince. The same day my Lord Cuts
came to the Camp at Temploux with six Battallions; the Second of the First
Regiment of Guards, his own or the Coldstream Battallion of Guards, with the
Regiments of Trelawney, Ingoldesby, Nassau, and Heyden. The last, being Dutch,
went into the Line of Circumvallation. My Lord Cuts had been detached from
Prince Vaudemonts Army the 24th of June, with ten Battallions, but at Vilvo^de
he received Orders to send back Mackays Regiment, and three more Dutch, to
A^ost: From Alost Colonel Mackays and Count d'O^nas Regiments went back to
Prince Vaudemont, but the other two went to reinforce the Garrison of Aeth. For
upon our undertaking of this Siege, the Marshall of Villeroy (whom we have
left encamped near Courtray, without the Line) had passed the Scheld near
Pottes and Escanaffe, lying with his Army on both sides the River to be in
readiness to follow the Orders of the French Court in this important
conjuncture; and Ath being now exposed to the Enemies Army, these two Regiments
were commanded from Alost to reinforce that Garrison; and besides, the Prince
of Anhalt Brigadier, was sent with two Battallions more from Prince Vaudemonts
Army to command there, where he got with some difficulty.

We were so long before Namur without breaking ground against the Town, that
people began to talk very variously about this Siege; as if we had not designed
it, but rather (having lodged a strong Garrison in this place) to undertake an
easier work, and besiege Charleroy; for from the 23th of June that the Town was
invested, to this time, we had done nothing but worked at our Line of
Circumvallation, and made our Bridges of Communication; one upon the Sambre,
between Flavennes and the Abbey of Malogne; the second upon the Meuse, above
Namur, toward Dinant; and the third upon the Meuse, below Namur, toward Huy.
But the true reason of our slowness proceeded from our want of Cannon, part of
which came up the last day of June; and then we opened the Trenches the day
following, being the 1st day of July. The Dutch broke ground at night near the
Village of Bouge, upon the Plain, before the Retrenchments and covered ways the
Enemies had made upon this Hill from whence the Town is commanded.
Major General Fagel had the Trenches, with six Dutch Battallions. We did not
advance our work very far this night, because the Trench was flanked from the
Castle, which could easily fire over the Town here; for which reason we were
obliged to make Traverses in the Trench to cover our selves from the Cannon of
the Terra Nova; so that the Work could not be so far advanced as it would have
been, if we had been obliged only to make a simple Trench. The Enemies fired
very briskly to hinder our Workmen, particularly from an old Tower which they
had just before their covered way, called la Tour de Cockle. The Brandenburgs
of the other side of the Meuse worked to make a Battery upon the height of St.
Barbe, to beat in reverse upon the Enemies within their covered way upon the
Hill of Bouge. The 2d Major General Salisch had the Trenches, and Major General
Fagel had the misfortune to be shot in the Neck as he was dismounting, but
without danger. We worked at a little battery of three pieces of Cannon near
the Village de Bouge, to play upon the Tower of Cockle; and this night we
advanced considerably our Trenches; and in both these nights we had not above
16 Men killed and wounded* The 3d the King declared Brigadiers Lindeboom and
Heukelem, Major Generals; and the Colonels Frisheim and Heyden, Brigadiers in
their places* The same day one of the Electors Chaplains was returned to the
Kings Quarter by the Enemies: They had made him Prisoner the day before near
their Line, between the Sambre and the Meuse, where his Curiosity had carried
him. This day our Cannon began to play; a Battery of three pieces of Cannon
from the Village de Bouge against the old Tower, and from the edge of the
height of St. Barbe, being a Brandenburgh Battery of six or seven pieces of
Cannon, which fired over the Meuse in reverse within the Enemy^s Retrenchments
upon the Hill of Bouge. At night the Enemy lessened their Fire, and we advanced
our Work considerably.

The 4th, early in the morning, Brigadier St. Paul was detach^d back from Count
Nassau's Camp at Temploux to reinforce Prince Vaudemont, with the Hanover
Guards, the Batallions of St. Paul, Cinqvilles, Hulsen, and Zeelandt; and
indeed we were in some trouble and pain at this time about Prince Vaudemont.
For the Marechal de Villeroy, who had advanced as far as the Scheld at Pottes
and Escanaffe, expecting Orders to have marched to the relief of Namur, or to
undertake some Si^ege for a Diversion, received Orders to repass the Lys to
attack Prince Vaudemont in his Camp at Wouterg^em; which, if it had succeeded,
would have been an effectual way to raise the Siege of Namur. It Is a very easy
thing to find Miscarriages and Faults in ill Success; and when an Enemy has
come to the worse by taking wrong measures, it is no hard matter to tell how he
might have done better. The Attempt upon Prince Vaudemont was doubtful; for
either Villeroy may come to the worse, or the Prince may retreat: But if whilst
Villeroy was advanced as far as the Scheld, the French King had undertaken the
Siege of Ath or Ardenard, one of these two places must of necessity have fallen
into his Hands, whilst we were besieging Namur; or we must have raised the
Siege to have hindered it. However, whether it was, that the Enemies (who had no
other designs but to act defensively had not prepared themselves for a Siege,
or whatever other reason there was for it, Vill^roy eas^d us of the Jealousy
we were in for Ath and A^denarde, and received orders to repass the Lys: For
this end he made his Army as strong us possibly he could, and ordered Monsieur
de Ximenes Lieutenant General, and Pracontal, Major General, who were near M^ns
with a good Detachment of Horse, to come and join him: Being reinforced with
these Troops, he ordered Bridges to be made upon the Lys the 2d. at night at
Vive St. Eloy, where he passed that River the 3d. and encam'd at St. Barbon.
Montal at the same time had Orders to march with the Body under his command
from the Neighborhood of Kenoque toward Thielt. Prince Vaudemont being
informed of this motion of the Enemy's, made a movement of his Camp at
Wonterghem, to bring his Right more to the Rear to take up the rising Ground of
Arseel, which he thought more defensible. This was the third in the Evening;
the Prince ordered then Retrenchments to be made upon the Left toward VVacken
and the Lys; and the 4th. the Army retrenched and fortified upon the Right all
the rising Ground of Arseel; and the Regiments of Strathnaver and George
Hamilton, with Brigadier O Farrel, came from Deinse to the Camp to reinforce
our Army, the Garrison being supplied by Detachments. Prince Vaudemont had then
about fifty Battallions, and fifty one Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons; and
with these Forces he was then resolved to expect the Marechal de Villeroy, and
to venture the issue of a Battle in his Retrenchments, which he had made very
strong; though Villeroy had near the double of his number, and that Prince
Vaudemont had not above 36000 men. Whilst we were working at our Retrenchments
at Arseel, the French Army, commanded by the Marechal de Villeroy, was marching
in the morning toward our Camp, with their Left upon our Right near Caneghem,
and their Right toward our Left at Be^^^ghem and VVacken. We had a Dutch Major
posted with two hundred Foot at Inghelmonster upon the River Mandel; the
Castle, or Gentleman's House was pall^saded and moted, from whence he
interrupted the Enemy's march for some time, who had a Colomne to march by this
place: His Post being strong and palissaded, he would not surrender till they
brought Cannon against him; and then he surrendered himself and Detachment
Prisoners of War. Some of the French Officers would have had him made an
Example, for pretending to hinder the march of a Royal Army with a handful of
men, but on the contrary, the Marechal of Villeroy approved of his Courage and
Bravery, and was pleased to applaud it.

The Marshall de Villeroy came early enough in presence of our Army that day
to have attacked it, and to have decided the Fate of our Army by a Battle: But
whether it was that he found our Camp strongly fortified, and that he would not
then hazard it, or that he had orders to stay till Montal bad taken the Posts
in the Rear of our Right, between Arseel and VVirk, to attack us there, and
that he thought it more sure and expedient to stay till then. He remained in
presence of our Army that Evening, expecting to have attacked the Prince very
early the next morning, and, in a manner, to have caught him in a Net, by
invironing him upon the Right. Prince Vaudemont was informed of this motion of
Monsieur de Montal's. Our Army was then posted in the Retrenchment, expecting
the Enemy; and though Montal had already passed Thielt, and was drawing near to
Caneghem, Prince Vaudemont changed Resolution, and thought it very hazardous to
venture a Battle which promised the total ruin of his Army; and then, though
the time was urgent and pressing, he immediately, with a most admirable
Judgment, resolved upon* and contriv^d a Retreat. The Prince had very wisely
provided for such an Accident in the morning, by ordering all the Baggage to
load immediately, and to march by Deinse to G^ent, that it might not embarrass
the motions of the Army. The Prince ordered first the Cannon to be drawn off
the Batteries, and to march toward Deinse; which was done so secretly, that
the Enemies did not perceive it. He had wisely ordered the Artillery to be
moving from Battery to Battery all the Afternoon, so that when it went clear
off, the Enemies thought it had been but the ordinary motion. After, the two
Lines of Foot marched upon the Left, along the Retrenchment. To cover this
march of the Foot, the Prince ordered a Body of Horse to come and post in the
Retrenchment, as 'twas quitted by the Foot. The Foot marched with their Pikes
and Colors trailing to conceal their march; neither did the Enemies perceive
this motion till the Cavalry mounted again, and abandoned the Retrenchment, and
then the Infantry was already got in the bottom between Arseel and VVouterghem,
marching toward Deinse. At the same time that the Foot were filing off from
the Retrenchment, the Prince ordered Monsieur d Auverquerque, with the Right
Wing of Horse, interlin^d with Colliers's Brigade of Foot, to make a Line
facing toward Caneghem, extending himself from the Windmill of Arseel toward
Winck. This motion was to make Montal believe that this Line was designed to
oppose his Attempt upon the Rear of our Right; but his secret Orders were to
march off by Winck to Nevel, and so to Ghent. At the same time that the Foot
march^d by Wouterghem and Deinse, my Lord Rochford, who was posted with the
Left Wing of Horse and two Battallions toward the Lys, made the Rear Guard
toward the Left, with a Line of Foot upon one side, and three Squadrons of
Eppinger upon the other. All this was so contrived by the Prince, from the
Right to the Left, that the Army disappeared all at once, just as if it had
vanished out of the Enemy's Sight. The Prince, and the Duke of Wirtemberg, and
other Generals, kept to the Retrenchments till all was marched off; forming,
with themselves, Domestics and Attendants, a little Body of Horse, still to
impose upon the Enemy, and followed the Army as soon as 'twas all got off. The
Enemies finding themselves cheated, did what they could to overtake and fall
upon our Rear: Montal particularly endeavored to fall upon that Body commanded
by Monsieur d' Auverquerque, which marched off by Winck to Nevel. He overtook
the Rear with some Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons: But our Defiles were good,
and Brigadier Collier had ordered all the Granadiers of his Brigade to the Rear
of all, to face the Enemy from time to time as they advanced in their Defiles;
which was so well contrived, that the Granadiers with their Fire kept the
Enemies at a distance, and made the Retreat good, and Montal could not do us
the least harm. When they had failed here, they endeavored to fall upon the
Rear of our body of Foot, which was brought up by Count de Noyelles
Lieutenant General. They ordered a Line of Foot to advance, with some Horse and
Dragoons; but the Foot was got already so far that they could not hurt them.
However two Squadrons of their Dragoons put green Boughs in their Hats, which
is our sign of Battle, and spoke some French and some English, as if they had
been some of our own Reer-Guard: It was then the dusk of the Evening; and with
this Stratagem they were suffered to come up close to our Rear of Foot, and
marched with them a little way, till they came to a convenient place, that they
fired upon our Rear, and then fell in with their Swords. This put the first
Battallion in great disorder; but the other immediately facing about, obliged
the Enemies to retire. They killed us several Men, and made some Prisoners: The
Lunenburgh Regiment of Luck suffered most in this occasion. And this is the
only loss we received from the Enemy in this great and renowned Retreat; which
is as fine a piece of the Art of War as can be read of in History, and which
can hardly be paralleled in it; which has showed more the Art, Conduct, and
Prudence of a General, than if the Prince had gained a considerable Victory:
And this is the Sense his Majesty was pleased to express of it in a Letter he
writ to Prince Vaudemont upon this occasion. By this Prince Vaudemont bafled
all the Enemy's Designs, which aimed at no less than the loss of Flanders, by
the ruin of his Army; and for this Reason had laid aside all thoughts of
besieging Ath or Audenarde, to get Newport, (...) so to have a passage free
within our Canals, which cover the Spanish Flanders. This would not only have
been the Consequence of the Prince's defeat, but likewise the raising of the
Siege of Namur must have followed it.

The Prince having made his Retreat in this order, and the Army being passed
Deinse, and got as far as Nevel in the way to Ghent, 'twas ordered to halt, and
rest there for that night: But Prince Vaudemont (as he himself afterward said
it) remembered a Maxim of that Great General, Charles IV. Duke of Lorrain, his
Father; That when an Army is upon the Retreat, it must be sure to retreat out
of the Enemy's reach; for which Reason he sent Orders to Sir Henry Bellasis to
march immediately with the Foot to Ghent; and the Army came to Mary-K^rk that
night, under the Walls of Ghent, without Bruges-Port; and it was all got here
by six a Clock the next morning. Whilst the Army was upon the halt at Nevel,
Major General Churchill, being just by the House where he had his Quarter the
last Spring, when we formed a Camp between Deinse and Ghent (as the Enemies
were working at their new Lines) went in, to rest himself, and ordered a
Sergeant and twelve Men of the next Regiment for a Guard upon it: But as the
Army marched on, the Regiment did not send to call off the Sergeant and his
twelve Men, and the whole Regiment and Army marched without their knowledge;
they still expected to have found the Army by them the next morning; Major
General Churchill, being fatigued, went to sleep; Lieutenant Colonel Godolphin
of Sir Bevil Granville's Regiment was with him, and Major Negus of the
Major-General's Regiment, and Captain Lloyd his Aid de Camp. The next morning
very early, as they were getting up, they found that the Army was marched on,
and the Centries gave notice that a French Party was just upon the^* They
called in the Sergeant and six men (the rest being dispersed Centries) into the
House: It proved that it was no Party, but Maroders of the Army, who came to
plunder the Country. The six Soldiers being got into the House, and the Doors
shut up, fired upon the French, which made them retreat. In the mean time the
Major General made all haste to endeavor to make his escape; and being got out
of the House, the French Maroders had rallied with their Camarades to force the
House; so he fell in the Hands of two of them, who plundered him, took his
Gold, his Watch, his Coat, and Cravat; but being jealous of one another, they
were for dividing immediately the Spoil; and so they spoke to the Major General
to set down by a Hedge, and that if he offered to stir, they were so many about
the House that they would certainly shoot him. They got on the other side of
the Hedge to share that which they would not trust with one another: Whilst
they were busy at this work, the Major General seeing no body to observe him,
slipped to the other side of another Hedge hard by; and so having two Hedges
between him and them, he got out of their sight. He passed by one of their
Centries, who took him for one of the French Army, and asked him which way the
Army marched, to which the Major General answered accordingly, and so made his
escape, and got to our Army at Mary-Kirk, having marched most on Foot in his
Boots. As for Lieutenant Colonel Godolphin, Major Negus, and Captain Lloyd,
which were still in the House, they had not so good Fortune; but the House was
soon environed: The Maroders came with a Drum to make them believe they had an
Officer with them; and so these Gentlemen, expecting good Treatment from an
Officer, yielded themselves Prisoners of War: But as soon as the Door was open,
the mobb of Soldiers got in, and fell on plundering. There was a great deal of
Baggage in the House, as Saddles and Furniture for Horses, and in the Barn
suveral good Horses. Those that got in first minded only the Plunder; others
followed, who finding no other Booty, stripped Colonel Godolphin naked, and had
him away Prisoner in this condition: Major Negus and Captain Lloyd were not
treated quite so ill, having some of their Clothes left them. But they were all
carried Prisoners to the Marechal de Villeroy, who made some Excuses for their
ill Treatment, and was himself very civil to them: He gave them immediately
their Liberty, and desired they should stay no longer but to refresh
themselves. He invited them to Dinner the next day, and so sent them back
without Ransom.

The Marshall de Villeroy having slipped this opportunity of falling upon
Prince Vaudemont, by his wise and happy Retreat, march^d with the French Army
to Rousselar; and Prince Vaudemont, who had marched all night as far as Mary
Kirk under the Walls of Ghent, halted here till nine of the Clock in the
morning, that he judged all the Straglers were got up to the Army, and so
marched through Ghent, and encamped without Brussels Port. And as Prince
Vandemont foresaw that the Enemies having miss^d this opportunity would march
toward Newport, so twelve Battallions had orders not to pitch their Tents, but
to be ready to march under the command of Sir Henry Bellasis Lieutenant
General; but the Army marching through Ghent, and the Baggage, this Detachment
could not repass the Town to march toward Bruges till the next day early in
the morning. Brigadier Offerrel was left in Deinse, and a Swedish Regiment,
besides a Detachment. Prince Vaudemont had writ a Letter the 4th. to the King,
to give him an account of his Circumstances, and of the motions of the Enemy to
attack him; which made us very anxious before Namur for the success of that
Affair. The next day in the morning he sent an Express to the King, to give his
Majesty an account of his successful Retreat, which the King received at night;
which good News caused an universal Joy before the Town, and dissipated all the
Apprehensions we had for the safety of Prince Vaudemont's Army. This brings me
back again from Flanders to speak of the progress of the Siege of Namur.

The 4th. the English Army employed in this Siege were like to lose all their
money coming from Louvain under an Escorte of about 100 Horse, and 50 of Dopf's
Dragoons. Mr. Hill, the Pay-master-general of his Majesty's Forces was with
them: They met, by Perwys, at a Defile, with a good Party of the Enemy's Horse
and Dragoons from Charleroy, which at first made ours give way, thinking them
stronger than really they were. The Pay-masters of the Regiment had put their
money into a Wagon, which the Enemy overthrew, and were taking out the Horses:
In the mean time, the Officer commanding our Party, who before had done his
best to make his people stand, rallyed them again; who finding that the Enemy
were not so strong as at first they apprehended them, came on upon them, and so
the Enemy were obliged to retire in their turn. But the Wagon being
over-turned, several Regiments lost their money in the confusion, some taken by
the Enemy, and some by our own Troopers: However, the Enemy being near our
Camp, and afraid of another Party, went off as fast they could to Charleroy,
their Garrison, having no great occasion to brag of their Booty, which they
quitted as easily as they got it. Mr. Hill was in a Coach, but he made his
escape upon a Led-Horse. The same day Lieutenant Colonel Billing of S^lwyn's
Regiment was commanded with 300 men to take Post upon the rising Ground of this
side the Sambre, over against the House of the other side, called the Balance,
where the Enemy had a good Guard to defend the Passage of the River. This was
in order to make some Batteries upon the side of this Hill, to disl^dge the
Enemy from the Balance and the Abbey of Salsen. This Post was pretty warm at
first, being expos^d to the ^ire of the Battery of two, upon the end of the
Enemy^s Line, of which we have before given an account. But our men soon put
themselves under Cover* and this Post was daily relieved with a
Lieutenant Colonel and 300 men, till we had gain^d the Passage of the Sambre.
At night M^jor-^eneral H^uklom commanded the Trenches. The 5^h. or about this
time, Baron Fleming Velt Mareschal-General of the Elector of Brandenburgh's
Forces, came to the Camp before Nam^^^, and took his Quarter on the other side
of the Meuse, with the Brandenburgh Troops under his Command, which hitherto
had been commanded by the Lieutenant General Baron Heyden. The same day it was
resolved, that the English Forces encamped at T^emp^oux, should open the Trench
upon the Right of the Enemies Retrenchment, directing their Approaches toward
the old Tower of Cockle; That three English Regiments should mount the Trenches
here, and three Dutch upon the Left toward the Meuse. where they had opened
the Trench, near the Village of Bouge. Accordingly in the Evening, my Lord
Cutts Brigadier was commanded with the Regiments, Royal, Selwyn, and Trelawny,
for this Work; and Major General Salisch had the Trenches. The Enginier missed
in the night the Ground where we were to begin to work, which was in a bottom
upon the Right of the Enemy's Rettenchment or covered way: And so these three
Regiments returned without breaking Ground. The 6th. Major General Lindeboom
mounted the Trenches, and Brigadier Fitzpaterick, with the Regiments of Seymour
and Columbine (being that lately commanded by the Marquess de Rada, Son to the
Marquess de Montpouillan, who dyed of a Fever at Bruges the beginning of the
Campaign, and the Regiment was given to Lieutenant Colonel Columbine, Captain
of the Guards, who had been Lieutenant Colonel to it in the time of Colonel
Babington) the third was the Regiment of Fusiliers. This night these Regiments
opened the Trench before the Enemy's covered way upon the Hill of Bouge, taking
the opportunity of the hollow ground to begin their work very near the Enemy.
Captain Thilips of Selwyn's Regiment was wounded with the Workmen: Thus the
Trenches were mounted upon the Right by the King's Forces, three Battallions
commanded by a Brigadier; and by the States Forces, three Battallions upon the
Left, commanded by a Dutch Brigadier, making two Attacks upon Right and Left,
under the Command of a Major General. 200 men were commanded every night upon
each Attack, with two Captains, and other Officers proportionably to work and
advance the Trenches, whilst the Regiments of the Trenches covered their Work
(which they did under the shelter of Wooll-sacks) with their Fire; which
generally continued more or less the whole Night. The 7th. Major General
Heukelom had the Trenches, with my Lord Cutts's Brigadier upon the Right, and
the Battallions of Tidcomb, Stanley, and Collingwood. (I could not get a List
of the rolling of the Dutch Brigadiers and Regiments upon the Left, so that I
must pass it over.) Captain Gaubet of Colonel Ingoldesby's Regiment and
Enginier, and another Enginier of la Meloniere's Regiment were killed in the
Work this night.

The 8th. several of the Regiments encamped at Temploux had Orders to march in
the Lines of Circumvallation, being the first Battallion of the Royal Regiment,
the Fusiliers, Ingoldesby, Saunderson, Maitland, and Lauder. We continued still
to fire with our small Battery upon the Hill against the old Tower, and among
the Palissades of the covered way. The Brandenburghers did the same from their
Battery upon the edge of the Hill of St. Barbe; but being too far from the
Meuse, and to fire over this River upon the Enemy in their Works upon the Hill
of Bouge, it could not do very great execution: But to make more serviceable
Batteries of this side, and to bring them nearer to the Meuse, the
Brandenburghs had opened the Trench (the 1st.) against the Enemy's Work, which
they had to cover the Fauxbourgh de Jambe, to drive them out of this place. The
Castle commanded all the bottom between the height of St. Barbe and the Meuse;
for which reason the Brandenburgh Troops were forced at first to open their
Trench very high up the Meuse toward the Bridge of Communication, and so to
work downwards toward the (...); and by this time they had considerably
advanced their Work. But this day the Enemy made a Sally about two in the
Afternoon upon the Brandenburghers Trenches, which was commanded by a Colonel,
The Enemy were reckoned about 1200 strong, being most Dragoons, and two
Squadrons of them mounted: The Brandenburghers were at first forc^d to give
way; the Colonel that commanded was killed, being a French Refugie, a
Lieutenant Colonel, and 100 Soldiers killed and wounded. The Enemies levelled
150 paces of their Trenches; but the Brandenburghers rallied, and being
reinforced with some Horse, they regained their Post, and drove the Enemy back
to the Fauxbourgh de Jambe, who had the Count de Grammont Colonel of Dragoons
wounded upon this occasion, and about thirty men killed and wounded. This is
the only Sally the French made during the Siege of the Town.

In the Evening Major General Ramsay was commanded to make an Assault upon the
cover^d way which the Enemies had upon the Hill of Bouge, with the five
Battallions of Guards which were here, to be employed in the Siege; the other
two remained with Prince Vaudemont: These ^attallions were two of the first
Regiment of English Guards, the Coldstream Battallion of Guards, of which my
Lord Cuts is Colonel, the first Battallion of Dutch Guards, and the first of
Scots Guards, besides a Detachment of fifteen Grenadiers throughout the other
Regiments of his Majesty's Forces here. The Attack was disposed on this manner:
This Body was to form two Attacks, the one upon the Right of the Tower of
Cockle, the other upon the Left, each Attack to begin with 120 Fusiliers
commanded for that purpose out of the Regiments, and 120 Grenadiers; the
Fusiliers to march first, each carrying a large Fascine before him, and his
Fusil ready, being drawn up in three Ranks; the Granadiers immediately to
follow, each to carry three Grenades; they were to advance in this manner
toward the Line which they were to attack, and then, when they were come
within forty paces of the Enemy's Work, the Grenadiers were to divide to the
Right and Left of the Fusiliers, and to fire their Arms by Pelottons, and then
to advance clear to the Enemy's Palissades to fire in their Grenades, after
that, the Fusiliers were to throw down their Fascines, and then to make all the
Fire they could; the Grenadiers were to be followed by 100 Workmen to each
Attack, and two or three Ingeniers, the Workmen to carry Wooll-sacks and
Gabions, and post them most conveniently to drive the Enemy from their Works;
100 Grenadiers besides were to carry Fascines, as the Fusiliers, and march
equally with them, and 50 men behind them, with an Enginier to plant them as
the rest; and these were to march in the Center, between the two Attacks,
against the old Tower; as many Grenadiers were to be disposed in the same
manner upon the Right of all; the Battallions were immediately to follow, and
sustain the Fusiliers and Granadiers, and drive the Enemy from their Works. The
first Palissades being gained, we were to lodge our selves there, and to make
use of the Enemy's raised Work for a Parapet: The Regiments in the Trenches
were to be ready to march out, and sustain them upon occasion; the Signal, to
be one of the Artillery Colors raised upon the highest of the Dutch Trenches,
and then all were to fall on; which was accordingly done about seven in the
Evening. Major General Ramsay ordered none of the Battallions should fire till
they could put their Pieces in the Enemies Palissades, and to march with their
Arms shouldered,; which he saw executed himself. The Guards march very boldly
with their Arms shouldered, and sustained the Enemies Fire till they came up to
the Palissades, and then they gave a full fire, which put the French in some
confusion:. Nevertheless they still disputed the Retrenchment; and after a
little time they were forced to quit it, and the Guards remained Masters of the
Palissade. The Enemies Palissades being gained, the Major General ordered our
Men to break them, and to get into the covered way: Our Soldiers being flushed,
were very eager to go forward without bidding: Having gained this covered way,
nothing could hold them; but they went on very furously, and attacked the
Palissades of the second covered way, which they gained after a short dispute,
and the Enemies were in such a Consternation, that they soon abandoned them;
all that their Officers could do could not keep them up, but our Men got in
with them, and pursued them Sword in Hand, among all their Forts which they had
upon the Brow of this Hill, and so down to the very Counterscarp of the Tower
before the Port de Fer; the most forward went th^s far: But the rest made a
great Slaughter among the French that had got into the Stone-pits, which are
very common upon the side of this Hill, where they endeavored in the confusion
to conceal themselves from the Fury of our Soldiers: But the Forts made a
considerable fire and killed us many men, who were very thick all about them.
Where the Dutch Guards attacked upon the Right, the Enemies disputed their Post
very hard, and held them to it: They were sustained by my Lord George
Hamilton's first Battallion, who had his share in the Honor of the Action,
though 'twas not this Regiment's turn to mount the Trenches; but being at hand
in the Line of Circumvallation, my Lord received Orders to be ready with his
Regiment; Brigadier Fitz-Patrick marched at the Head of it with his known
Bravery: The Dutch Guards (notwithstanding the resistance they met with)
carried the Palissades they attacked, and the Royal Regiment maintained it, and
pushed on with the rest; and indeed they all did wonders in this Attack: And
when they were once got in the first Palissades, there was no distinction of
Battallions, but all mixed with one another, and the Soldiers were very willing
to obey their next Officer, without distinction; so that I shall omit the due
praise which every Regiment deserved upon this occasion, as well the Regiments
of the Trenches as the Guards, some of which were concerned in the Attack, as
the Fusiliers, Tidcomb, etc. The fire continued till past nine of the Clock,
and both the Regiments that mounted and dismounted the Trenches remained to
make good the Attack. My Lord Cutts had the Trenches the night before, with the
Regiments of Tidcomb, Stanley, and Collingwood, and did not dismount till the
whole Attack was over, where he hazarded himself very freely, as he does upon
all occasions of Service. Brigadier Fitz-patrick being to mount the Trenches
with the Regiments of Lauder, Ingoldesby, Saunderson, and Maitland, and
Brigadier Frisheim, with the Dutch, relieved the Posts which had been gained:
The Guards come off about midnight, and marched back to the Camp at Temploux,
where they came very early in the morning, after having gained a very great
Reputation in the Attack: For whereas they were only to to gain the outer
covered way, by the disposition of the Attack; yet they beat the Enemies from
all the Retrenchments they had upon this Hill, and pursued them among their
Forts, down the Hill to the very Port de Fer, where most of them were killed
at the very Palissade; but several of our Men that had advanced so far, were
made Prisoners; among the rest, Lieutenant-Colonels Pierce and Morrison,
Captains of the second Regiment of English Guards, Ensign Atkins of the same
Regiment, and Ensign Ross of the Scots Guards, and several Soldiers.
Major General Ramsay, who had the conduct of this Attack, had his Horse wounded
under him with a Musket Shot, and his Servant's Horse was killed just by him
with a Cannon-ball, which came very thick from the Castle, which fired over the
Town here. He had the thanks of the King for this great Success, who was
present in the whole Action, and the Compliments of the chief Generals; and
Prince Vaudemont writ him a Letter of Congratulation upon this occasion.

If the English did such considerable Actions in this Attack, the Dutch were
not idle upon the Left, but at the same Signal with ours they marched out of
their Trenches, and attacked the Left of the Enemies Retrenchments toward the
Meuse. Major General Salisch commanded the Trenches, this night and the Attack
of this side, with the Regiments of the Trenches, and those that were to mount,
in all 7 or 8 Battallions. The Enemies Fire was more opiniatre of this side
than it had been upon the Right of our Attack; which caused a considerable
slaughter among the Dutch Regiments; but in spite of their resistance they
gained the Work, and beat the Enemies from their Renchments. The Regiments of
Salisch, and another Dutch, Oxensten, and Braha of the Swedes, suffered very
much in this Action; for which reason the two first were sent to Garrison in
Maestricht, and the two last to Huy; and four other Pattallions were sent from
Maestricht to take up their place in the Line of Circumvallation, being the
Regiments of Du Thiel, Anhalt d'Essau, and (if I am not mistaken) two Swiss
Battallions of Lochman. The Lieutenant Colonel commanding the Regiment of
Salisch was killed, and the Major wounded, with several other Officers killed
and wounded, of which I have not seen a particular account. As for our own
loss, I shall here insert as exact an account of it as possibly I can. In the
Brigade of Guards, who were most concerned in this Action, we had 177 Soldiers
killed, and 366 wounded, 41 missing, supposed Prisoners. In the first Regiment
of the English Guards, they had Officers killed, Lieutenant Colonel Robinson,
who commanded the second Battallion, Captains, Montague and Hide, and Ensign
Cavendish; Lieutenant Colonel Davis and Captain Vpcot, dead of their Wounds:
Wounded, Lieutenant Colonel How, Captains, Evans, Etheridge, Newton, Jane, and
Amstin; Ensigns, Clerk, St. Denuis, and Desaulnais. In the second Regiment of
English Guards, killed Captain Weston, and Ensign Holmes: Ensign Whiterong dead
of his Wounds: Wounded, Colonel Matthews Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment:
Lieutenant-Colonels, Edgworth, Jones, and Pierce, and Captain Markham, Ensigns
Hill, and Miller, and Adjutant Wyvil; Prisoners, Lieutenant-Colonels, Pierce
and Morrison, and Ensign Atkins. In the Dutch Guards, killed, Captain
Hooghwitz, and Adjutant Verhoop: wounded, Lieutenant-Colonels Gaudecker,
Hutzler, and Pagnies; Captains Tilly and Boisroux, and Ensign Windeseim. In the
Scots Guards, killed, Captain St. Clair; Ensign Borthwick dead of his Wounds;
Ensign Ross Prisoner, and dead since of his Wounds: Wounded, Lieutenant Colonel
John Hamilton, Captain Southerland, and Ensign Iyster. I shall add to those,
Lieutenant Colonel Hume Commandant of my Lord Lornes Regiment, Son to the ^arl
of Argyle, then in Garrison in Dixmuyde, who came a Voluntier to see the Siege;
he waited upon Major General Ramsay in this Occasion, and received a Wound in
the Shoulder, of which he died since at Li^ge. Of my lord George Hamilton's, or
the Royal Regiment, killed, Captain anderson, Lieutenant Penfather, and Ensign
Cokbourn; Captain Dixon dead of his Wounds. My Lord George Hamilton received a
Contusion upon the Elbow, and Captain Hamilton, and Ensigns Carre and Vernal
were wounded. In Selwyn's Regiment, Lieutenant Gyles and Hamilton were wounded,
one with the Grenad^ers, and the other with the Workmen. In Trelawney^s,
Captain Sely was wounded with the Workmen. In Tidcomb's Regiment, which had the
Trenches, Lieutenant, Rivasson killed; dead of their Wounds, Captain Carew, and
Ensign ^errot: Wounded, Captains Pope Jackson and Forbes, and Ensign Cormack.
In Collingwood's Regiment, Lieutenant Lee wounded. In Colonel Ingoldesby's, one
of those that mounted the ^renches this night, killed, Captain Hamilton and
Lieutenant Jassa^t. In Saunderson's, Lieutenant Swain klled: wounded, Captain
Knight and Lieutenant Bernard. In Maitland's, killed, Captain Melvil with the
Workmen, and Lieutenant Arrot with the Grenadiers; Captain Gordon of the
Grenadiers wounded. I have not seen the List of Lauder's. As for our loss among
the Soldiers it was generally computed, that we had in all in the English and
Dutch Attacks about 500 men killed, and about 1200 wounded; and that our whole
Loss, Officers, and Soldiers put out of Battle, amounted to near 1800 men at
most, and this was the only assault where we had any considerable loss before
the Town.

The Enemies had their choicest Troops for the defense of these Retrenchments
upon the Hill, and as soon as they perceived that we designed an attack upon
this place, they ordered a great body of Foot and their best Dragoons to march
out of the Town, and to reinforce their Post upon the Hill, we could see them
march very easily from the King's Quarter. So that (reinforcement and all) they
had 8 or 9 Regiments of foot besides Dragoons within the retrenchments. It Is
certain that we made a very great slaughter among them, when once our Soldiers
got in and pursued them; they lay very thick in the pits, and up and down their
retrenchments; but because the Besieged always conceal their losses as much as
they can, we could not get a perfect account of it; but it is very reasonable to
think that their loss was not much inferior to ours. They had a Brigadier
kill^d in this occasion, the Count de Maulivrier, and two Colonels, the Count
de Merstein Colonel of the Regiment of Foix, the Marquess de Vieu^bourg Colonel
of the Regiment of Beauvoisis, and the Count d' Albert Colonel of the Dauphins
Dragoons dangero^sly wounded, besides several other Officers. We intercepted
afterward a Letter from Monsieur de Meg^igny to Monsieur Barbesieux Secretary
of State and War, which gave him an account of this Attack; that they had
defended it very vigorously, but that finding by our pouring in still of fresh
Troops upon them, that we were resolved to carry these works (cost what it
would) had at last quitted them, to reserve their Troops for a more necessary
defense, and that they had made a great slaughter amongst us, having lost 4 or
500 of their own. This was the account sent to Court; which we intercepted. I
must not forget to speak of a Battery which the Bavarians made of two pieces of
Cannon near the Sambre against the end of the Enemies Line, and another of the
same number a little more to the left, which began to fire upon the Enemies
lodged in the Fascine work at the end of the Line) just at the time of our
attack upon the Hill of Bouge.

The Evening of this Assault we began to mount four Regiments of the English,
and four Dutch, Major General Salisch and Brigadier Fits-Patrick, as we have
said before, had the Trenches, the Kings Regiments were, Lauder, Ingoldesby,
Sanderson and Maitland: The same Evening more Artillery and Ammunitions came
from Huy to the Camp under the Escorte of the Hesse Dragoons, Hitherto the
Artillery came up but leisurely, and had as yet done but little execution, and
this night we secured our lodgments in the Posts we had gained. The 9th We had
several Wagons laden with Spades, and Shovels, and other Instruments to work
in the ground, from Lovain. At night Major General Lindeboom had the Trenches,
and my Lord Cutts was to mount, but Colonel Selwyn was declared Bigadier by his
Majesty, who accordingly mounted the Trenches this Evening, with the Regiments
of Nassau, Selwyn, Trelawne, and Seymour. We worked to advance our Trenches
toward the descent of the Hill before St. Nicholas his gate, to embrace the
detached Bastion the Enemies had here. The Dutch upon the left, worked toward
the Meuse to bring their Trench by the Jesuits House, under the Clifts which
hung over this River, upon which they worked at a Battery to flank the side of
the detached Bastion. The Brandenburgs who had opened the Trench along the
Meuse above the Castle the first Instant, had begun another the 5th, along the
same River below the Town, which they had now considerably advanced, in order
to make two parallel lines all along the River, to cover the Batteries we
designed against St. Nicholas his gate, from the other side of the Meuse, and
to bridle in the Enemies who were still masters of the Fauxbourg de Jambe. The
10th Major General Heukelom had the Trenches, with my Lord Cutts, and the
Regiments Royal, Columbine, Fusiliers, and Tidcomb; and this day the Regiments
of Collingwood and Tidcomb had left Temploux to go into the line of
Circumvallation. The same day the Brandenbourghs having almost finished their
parallel lines along the Meuse, the Enemies abandoned the Fauxbourg de Jambe,
and set it on fire, and retired to the Bastion upon the Meuse-bridge. More
Cannon and Morters came up from Huy. The 11th. the rest of the King's Troops
encamped at Temploux went into the line of Circumvallation; the Brigade of
Guards encamped at the foot of the Hill below the King's quarter, near the
Sambre, and the rest toward the Village de Bouge, at Maulx and Bernacomen.
Count Nassau had his quarter at Bernacomen, and Major General Ramsay at Maulx.
We had now in all 78 Battalions before the Town in the whole line of
Circumvallation. The Prince of Tilly with the Liege Forces was encamped of the
Condros side of the Meuse to secure the Navigation of the river. At night
Major General Ramsay commanded the Trenches, with Brigadier Fits-Patrick, who
were relieved by the Regiments of Stanley, Collingwood, Lauder, and Ingoldsby,
As the Royal Regiment marched out of the Trenches Major Macilvaine was killed
with a Cannon ball from the Castle, which besides wounded Ensign Loggins of
Collingwoods Regiment, and three Soldiers. His Majesty declared my Lord George
Hamilton Brigadier in the Trenches. The same Evening we had a Battery of three
pieces of Cannon upon the rising ground of this side of the Sambre, which began
to play upon the Enemies posted in the Balance. The King was every day in the
Trenches from morning till night, and to lose no time had his dining Tent
pitched near Lieutenant General Tettau's quarter at Bouge, to be just by the
Trenches. Several persons were both killed and wounded near the King in his
daily visits of our approaches, but it pleased God to spare his Sacred Person
in all those dangers to which he so freely exposed himself. His Majesty was
generally accompanied by the Duke of Ormond, my Lord Portland, and the Count de
Soissons; and though 'twas contrary to orders, yet the Officers who followed
the King in the Trenches were too apt to crowd about him, which made the King's
going in the Trenches so much the more remarkable to the Enemies, and
consequently dangerous.

The 12th we had finished a Pattery on the Brandenbourgh side of the Meuse,
just opposite to the Demi Bastion of St. Nicolas his Gate, and a round Tower,
having only the River between them, and this day it began to play. At night
Major General Salisch had the Trenches with Brigadier Selwyn, and the Regiments
of Sanderson, Maitland, Nassau, and Selwyn. The 13th. in the morning we had
finished another Battery upon the River side in a Line with the former, from
both which the Cannon fired very furiously against the half Moon before St.
Nicolas his Gate* the Demi Bastion of the Meuse, and a thick stone Digue or
Damme which at this place keeps up the water in the Fosse of the Town. There
was in all about 30 pieces of Cannon upon these Batteries, besides a Battery
upon the Hill of Bouge against the Enemies Forts upon the edge of this Hill;
another upon the descent of the Hill to flank the detached Bastion they had
here, besides a Battery of Morters to incommode the Enemy in their Works at St.
Nicolas his Gate where we were making our Approaches* All these Batteries began
this day to make a noise, which before had done no great execution. The Town
Wall was weak along the Meuse opposite to the left of our Batteries, for which
reason the Enemies made within, parallel to the left of the Meuse Battery, a
blind of a great height and thickness made up with Earth and Fascines: the
rest of the Batteries in this Line had its effect against the old Tower and
Works of whith we have now spoken. At night Major General Lindeboom mounted the
Trenches with my Lord George Hamilton Brigadier, and the Regiments of
Trelawney, Seymour, Royal, and Columbine. The 14th* early in the morning it
began to rain very hard, which lasted till Noon, the water filled all our
Tenches, and very much incommoded our Workmen; this likewise cooled the Fire of
our Batteries, which could not for this reason play as vigorously as the day
before, but in the afternoon it held up, and they made amends for the morning.
Before this time the waters of the Meuse were so low that the Cannon came up
with some difficulty from Huy* but thereafter we had no reason to complain of
the want of water, for the whole Summer following it rained almost perpetually,
and more rain has fallen this Season, than has been known for many years
before. In the Evening Major general Henkelem being fallen sick, Major General
Ramsay had the Trenches, which were relieved by the Brigade of Guards commanded
by my Lord Cutts, whom his Majesty declared this Campaign Brigadier of the
Guards, which is an Honor no Brigadier had enjoyed before. My Lord Cutts his
own Battallion of Guards remained to do Duty at the King's Quarter, and the
other four mounted the Trenches. This night we pushed our Trenches down the
Hill, and embraced the detached Bastion before* St. Nicolas his Gate, for which
reason the Officer commanding this Bastion demanded the next day (15) to
capitulate; he demanded liberty to go into the Town with his men, which was
refused him. Our Batteries played the whole day with the same vigor they had
done the days before. In the afternoon our Bombs set on fire the Church of St.
Nicolas which joins to the Gate of this Name, where the Enemies had a Magazine,
which did them a considerable damage. In the Evening Major-geneneral Salisch
and Brigadier Fits-Patrick mounted the Trenches, with the Regiments of
Fusiliers, Tidcomb, Stanley, and Collingwood. As the Trenches were relieving my
Lord Salkirk was dangerously wounded in the Head just by the King, with a stone
caused by the grasing of a Cannon ball upon the top of the Trench. We applied
the Miner to the detached Bastion, and advanced our Trenches clear to the
bottom before St. Nicolas his Gate. Which Work Brigadier Fits-Patrick very much
encouraged by his presence, his usual vigilance carrying him to see every thing
done. In the morning early the Captain* that commanded in the detached Bastion,
fearing the effect of our Mine, sent his Lieutenant to offer to Surrender it,
who at first insisted upon the Capitulation demanded the day before; but being
threatened to be blown up, he desired liberty to go back and speak to the
Captain, and that he would return immediately with a further answer.
Accordingly the Lieutenant returned, and offered the detached Bastion at
discretion, and the Captain marched out with two Lieutenants, an Ingenier, and
53 men all of the Dauphins Regiment, and were sent Prisoners to Huy. They had a
very good Casematte in the Bastion, which covered them from our Bombs. At night
Najor-general Lindeboom, and Brigadier Selwyn, had the Trenches, with Lauder,
Ingoldesby, Sanderson, and Maitlands Regi^^nts. Captain Forbes of Tidcombs was
killed dismounting. We pushed our Trenches far enough to attack the
Counterscarp the next day, and having gained the detached Bastion the day
before, we worked at a Battery at this foot of the Hill, to fire in front
against the Half Moon of St. Nicolas.

Having given an account of the progress of this Siege thus far, I must return
to speak of our Affairs in Flanders. We have left Prince Vaudemont encamped at
Ghent without Brussels Port the 15th, after he had made his glorious retreat
from the Marshall de Villeroy's numerous Army, and Sir Henry Bellassis was
ready with a detachment of 12 Battallions, and the Dragoons of Rousse and
Cunningham to march toward Newport: All Prince Vaudemont's Army and Bagage
being got through Ghent, Sir Henry Bellassis Lieutenant General repassed the
next day (6) through the Town, and marched till he came within 3 short Leagues
of Bruges, upon the Enemeis side of the Canal, where he encamped that night.
The next day this Detachment not being thought sufficient for the security of
Newport, the Duke of Wirtemberg was sent this way with 12 Battallions more, and
all the Dragoons of the Army. Major-generals Churchill and Mirmont and
Brigadiers Earl and Haxhausen, were of the Detachment; and my Lord Rivers
Major General commanded the Dragoons. Prince Vaudemont being obliged to make
such Detachments for the safety of Flanders passed the Scheld the day before
(6) and encamped at Oostaker just without Antwerp Port, with his right toward
the Canal of Sasvan Ghendt, his left by the Scheld, and Ghendt before him. He
had then but 26 Battallions left with him, and about 30 Squadrons. The Duke of
Wirtemberg having been detached the 7th. from Oostaker marched that day as far
as Brug^s with the Dragoons, whilst the Foot followed, and encamped pretty near
this place upon the Canal. That same day Sir Henry Bellassis, who had marched
with his 12 Battallions the day before within three Leagues of Bruges, came
very early to this place, and ^^^lted to refresh the Soldiers, but the Dragoons
marched on straight to Placendal, having past the Canal of Oftend at Bruges.
The Town provided bilanders for Tiffeny's Regiment and all the Grenadiers to go
incessantly by water; they went of by three of the Clock that afternoon;
Colonel Tiffeny's Regiment remained to take post at Placendal, where the Canal
of Newport meets with that from Ostend to Bruges; but Colonel Southlandt, who
commanded the Grenadiers, went on by water to possess himself of the Pass upon
the Canal of Newport at Laffine. That Evening Sir Henry Bellassis marched with
the rest of the Foot all night the other side of the Canal of Ostend, which he
passed the next morning to get to Placendal, where he halted again to refresh
the Regiments, and went on upon the Sea side of the Canal of Newport, and
gained that day to Newendam Fort just by Newport, where he encamped with all
the Foot and Dragoons under his Command, except Tiffeny's Regiment which
continued to defend the Post of Placendal. And Sir Henry Bellassis being come
to Newendam sent the Regiments of Strathnaver and George Hamilton to reinforce
the Garrison of Newport. The Duke of Wirtemberg, who hastened after Sir Henry
Bellassis, marched through Bruges the 8th. and came to the Placendal, where he
passed the Canal; and that same day the Foot came up, having made two long
Marches from Ghent hither. The 9th. the Duke of Wirtemburgh passed the Canal at
Placendal, and advanced with the Foot and Dragoons as far as Newport, and
encamp^d at Lombardie, between the Canal of Newport and the Sea, and disposed
his Troops all along this Canal to defend the Passage of it.

The Marechal de Villeroy (as we have said it above) after he had miscarried in
his Design upon Prince Vaudemont at Arseel, had march^d with his Army to
Rousselar, from whence he received Orders from the French Court to march nearer
Dixmuyde, whilst Montal was marched before, and encamp^d at Scorback, between
Dixmuyde and Newport. But the Duke of Wirtemberg and Sir Henry Bellasis were
detached so a Propos by Prince Vaudemont; and they made such diligence toward
this place, that they prevented their Design: And the Marechal Villeroy
continued in his Camp between Rousselar and Dixmuyde, to expect fresh Orders
from the Court. The 11th. The Duke of Wirtemberg being too far from Prince
Vaudemont to be ready to join him, if Villeroy should march toward Brabant,
thought it best to leave a good Garrison in Newport, and to come back nearer to
Ostend; for which Reason he marched, and encamped this day under the Walls of
Ostend, and opened all the Sluices to drown all the Country about Newport. The
12th* The Duke of Wirtemberg marched on through Ostend, and passed the Harbor
upon a Bridge of Boats made for that purpose, and encamped in the Pais de Nort,
over against Placendal: A Battallion passed the Canal, for the Guard both of
the Canal, of Ostend and Newport; and Belcastel was left in Ostend. The Duke of
Wirtemberg continued encamped here some time, to observe the Motions of the
Marechal de Villeroy, and to be at hand to rejoyn Prince Vaudemont at Ghent.
But the Enemies being balked at Newport as much as they had been at Arseel,
resolved to besiege Dixmuyde, not so much for the importance of the place, as
for the Garrison that was in it, which being impossible for us to relieve, they
were sure to have them Prisoners; which would prove a great prejudice to us and
to our Affairs to have so many Regiments out of Service. And though it was
plain, that this place could not be kept; yet, considering that we had no
Frontier for Ghent and Bruges, which are great places, and capable of no
defense, 'twas very much our Interest to maintain not only Dixmuyde, but
Deinse, as long as possibly we could, to keep the Enemies in play, if they
continued in Flanders; but if they march^d toward Namur, then they remained
safe in our hands. Monsieur de Montal had Orders to invest Dixmuyde, whilst
Villeroy continued encamped near this place to make good the Siege; for though
they did not expect so cheap a Bargain as they had of this place, yet they were
resolved to make the Garrison Prisoners of War; and Montal had Orders from the
French King to give no other Conditions; for which reason the Marechal de
Villeroy kept with his Army pretty near Dixmuyde to oblige the Besieged to come
to these Conditions, having given Montal a considerable Reinforcement to carry
on the Siege. The place was invested by Monsieur de Montal the 15th. with what
number of Men I could not precisely hear, some say with about 13000 Men. Major
General Ellemberg commanded in this place, having in Garrison the Regiments of
Foot of Brewer, Lesley, Graham, Lorne, Prince Christian (being Ellemberg's own
Regiment) Aver, Holle, and another Dutch, the six first were in the King's own
immediate pay; and the other two were in the States Service. There was besides
a very good Regiment of Dragoons in the place, being the Queen's Dragoons,
commanded by Colonel. (...); but he himself went away sick from the Camp near
Dixmuyde to Bruges, and his Lieutenant Colonel was sick at Ghent all the
Summer, having had a dangerous fall the last Spring; so that Major Brereton
commanded the Regiment, who behaved himself with Honor in this occasion^ My
Lord Lorne's Regiment was commanded by Major Doncaston in the absence of
Lieutenant-Colonels Hume that had been wounded in the Assault before Namur the
8th of July: All the other Regiments in the King^s Pay had their Colonels
present. The Garrison had twenty eight Pieces of Cannon, and Stores for a
considerable resistance; the Regiments in it were good, some of them having
near 700 effective Men, and with the Dragoons, were computed 5000 strong.

Monsieur de Montal having invested Dixmuyde the 15th. and opened the Trenches
that very night at two different places, to make his Approaches before the
Rousselar Port, which is the weakest side of the Town, being commanded here by
a rising Ground; and at the other side of the Canal that goes from the Kenoque
to Newport, to which Dixmuyde is joined by a short Causfey from the Furnes
Port: There is a Bridge over this Canal defended without by a Ravelin moted
and palissad^d, and within with a square earthen Work palissaded. Their second
Approach was of this side to attack this Ravelin that covered the Bridge. We
had begun a new Work by Rousselar Port to put the Town in a better defense
against the rising Ground of this side, but it was not finished. The 16th. the
French began to fire before Rousselar Port with a Battery of eight Pieces of
Cannon and three Mortars; but they did us very little damage. The Enemies
worked very quietly without any disturbance from us; and though they made their
Approaches under our Cannon, yet the Gunners had no orders to fire.

The 16th. at night the Enemies advanced their Trenche within Musket Shot of
the Palissades: and the next day (17) in the morning Major-General^ Ellemberg
called a Council of War of the Commanding-Officers of the several Regiments,
and laid before* them the State of the Garrison; That the Enemies had brought
their Trenches very near the Glacis, particularly before the new Work, which
being as yet imperfect, would bring the loss of the Town after it, which could
not then resist above four hours: That the Enemies had made considerable
Approaches before Furnes Port, to attack the Ravelin that covers the Bridge;
and that they already began to fire against it: That the Water, from which he
expected a considerable advantage for the defense of the Town on this side, did
not rise sufficiently, notwithstanding that the Sluices of Newport were opened:
That he had consulted the Inginiers of the Garrison upon this matter, and that
they could not promise that the Town could hold out four hours if it was
vigorously assaulted; so that they were in danger of being taken by Assault, if
they resisted: For which Consideration he proposed to them, if it was not
expedient to capitulate, to deliver up the place upon honorable Terms, and
save the Garrison. The majority of the Commanding Officers of the several
Regiments consented to capitulate; but whether they consented to capitulate
upon the Honorable Terms they had afterward, I cannot tell. Major Doncaston,
who was the youngest in the Council of War, refused positively; alleging, That
there was to Breach made in the place; That they had as yet suffered no loss;
and the Enemies were not yet Masters of the Counterscarp; and that it would not
be consistent with their Honor to deliver up the Town so soon. But the
Majority of the Council of War being of opinion to capitulate, the
Major-General's Aid de Camp was sent with a Drum to the cocovered way toward
the Enemies Trenches before Rousselar Port and the Chamade was beat, and
Hostages exchanged. The whole day was spent in Contestations. In the evening
the Cessation of Arms was continued till the next day, with Moutal's consent.
All this night the Enemies (contrary to the Articles of the Cessation) worked
on with their Trenches* which they advanced close to the Glacis, where the next
morning they had a good Battery ready to tear the Rampart in pieces, if we had
not capitulated: Our Soldiers were not suffered to fire to hinder the Enemies
Work, though it was a notorious Breach and infraction of the Cessation. The
next morning, Montal still refusing any Terms but those of Prisoners of War
according to the Orders he pre^^tended to have from the French King, it was at
last agreed upon, and the Capitulation signed that morning (18) which consisted
of the Articles following.

First, That the Governor, Field-Officers, and all the other Officers and
Soldiers of the Regiments in Garrison in the said place of Dixmuyde, without
exception of any Nation, shall be Prisoners of War and shall be treated
according to the Cartel made in the beginning of this present War.

II. That the Besieged shall deliver up the Rousselar Port an hour after the
signing of the Capitulation.

III. That the Regiments which composed the said Garrison shall draw up upon
the Marketplace, and the other side of the Town in the Counterscarp without
Bruges Port; and the several Regiments drawn up in Battallian shall lay down
their Arms and march clear off the Ground, and the Officers shall only have
their Swords.

IV. That during the disarming of the Garrison, neither the Officers nor
Soldiers of the said Garrison shall be plundered or insulted by any Soldiers
belonging to his Most Christian Christian Majesty, upon any pretext whatever.

V. That before all this be done, the Equipages and Baggage of all the
Officers, as well of the Hospital and Artillery as others, shall have liberty
to be transported out of Bruges Port upon Wagons, or by the Canal for such as
shall go by Water, to be safely convoyed by his Christian Majesty's Troops, as
near to Newport as the Conductor of the Baggage shall think fit, giving
security for the return of the said Escorte.

VI. That an Officer shall be appointed by the Governor to conduct the said
Baggage toward Newport; which Officer shall return with the Escorte to join
the Garrison in such a Town as his Most Christian Majesty shall appoint for the
Prison of the Regiment to which he shall belong.

VII. That all the Domestics shall go along with, and lead the Baggage, though
they have Soldiers Accoutrements on, which shall not exceed two Soldiers a
Company, besides the Officers Livery-Servants, who are not comprised in this
Proviso; and this shall be performed upon Honor.

VIII. That the Officers shall have along with them as many Horses as they
please.

IX. That the Sick and Wounded shall have Boats to carry them to Newport, but
at the same time shall be comprised in the List of the Prisoners of War; and
that the Doctors and Surgeons shall remain with them to dress and take care of
them; which shall be done at the Most Christian King's Charges, as long as he
shall retain them.

X. That no Regiments of the Garrison shall be dispersed, but Officers shall be
allowed and kept protionably with every number of Soldiers.

XI. That the Garrison shall not be sent out of the Country conquered in
Flanders since the Year 1672.

XII. That the Garrison shall not march above five Leagues a day; and when they
march it shall be at his Most Christian Majesty's Expenses.

XIII. That Bread shall be given to the Soldiers during their Imprisonment.

XIV. That the Prisoners for Contributions, the Waggoners and Conductors shall
be set at liberty, and the Deputies which command them, as soon as the Wagons,
of which the Garrison has occasion for the transporting, of the Baggage, shall
be returned.

XV. That the Officers shall have the Towns where they are sent for, their
Prison upon their Word of Honor.

XVI. That as for the Dragoons in the Garrison, they shall be comprised in the
present Treaty, as well as the Regiments of Foot; and shall deliver up their
Arms, Standards and Horses, except the Officers.

Signed the 28th. of July, (N. S.) Montal.

These are the Articles upon which the Garrison of Dixmuyde was surrendered to
the French, which (setting aside the liberty of the Baggage, which should never
be put in competition with the King's Service, but should rather be undervalued
for it) are such as any Regiment could have in the open Field, and which some
Regiments actually had in the very Plains of Fleury, after the loss of that
Battle; where being formed into square Battallions, and resolved otherwise to
defend themselves, they had the Terms of Prisoners of War given them, though
surrounded with the Enemies Horse. This Treatment surpised very much all the
Officers and Soldiers of the Garrison, who had hitherto been promised
Honorable Terms, to march out of the Garrison with their Arms: they conceived
such indignation at the news of it, that several Soldiers broke their Arms to
pieces, even before the Enemy, and wished, that since they were made Prisoners
of War, they had sold their Liberty to the French as dear as possibly they
could, by a vigorous resistance. As soon as the Capitulation was signed, the
French took possession of the Rousselar Port, and were really Masters of the
place, before a great part of the Garrison knew any thing of the signing a
Capitulation; and the French Soldiers crowded in the place before it had been
evacuated by our Garrison. According to the Capitulation, the Regiments drew
out in Battallion, and marched clear off their Arms, which they left with their
Colors, except my Lord Lorne's Regiment, which tore off the Colors from the
Staff, rather than suffer them to be a Trophy to the Enemy. A great many
Soldiers had broke their Arms to pieces, and the rest the French took
possession of, and sent the Colors taken to be put up in Nostre Dame's Church
in Paris. The Garrison was at first sent to Ipre, but was afterward disposed,
without any regard to the Capitulation, in several Towns in the Pays Conquis:
Some to Arras, others to Bethune, Bouchain, Cambray, and Doway: And whereas it
was expressly agreed in the Articles, That no Soldiers should be sent Prisoners
into any Town without the Pays Conquis since the Year 1672* yet they were sent
to Arras and Doway; both which places were conquered before that, and some as
far as Bethune in the Borders of Picardy: But this is not the only Article in
which the French violated the public Faith of Capitulations. There is hardly
one which they observed; they would not in several places suffer the Officers
to come near the Soldiers that they may be debauched with more ease from our
Service by the late King^s Officers. A little before the taking of Namur, they
put the Officers in close imprisonment: And whereas by the Cartel, all
Prisoners are reclaimable within a Fortnight after they are taken, and that
'twas expressly capitulated, the Garrison should be made Prisoners of War,
according to the Cartel made in the beginning of this War; and that Prince
Vaudemont accordingly reclaimed these Prisoners, the fortnight being expired,
and offered their Ransom; yet ^he Marechal de Villeroy, by the Fr^nch King^s
Orders, refused to return them till the Campaign should be over: All which were
notorious violations of the Capitulation, without the least Regard or Honor to
the public Faith. All the while our Soldiers were thus detained Prisoners
contrary to the Capitulation, they persecuted and oppressed them to make them
take on with the late King's Officers; by which means a great many Soldiers
have been forced away from our Service; and, I dare say, as many, as could have
been lost in a brave defense of Dixmuyde; and therefore, notwithstanding that
the pretext to capitulate was for the pretended safety and preservation of the
Regiments in a place not tenable against the Enemies Power: yet it has been
this very Capitulation which has ruined and spoiled several fine and good
Regiments, and has rendered some almost incapable of doing the King any Service
for some time. I wish for my part that I could have been silent in this Matter,
and that I could (like the Painter) have drawn a Curtain over this Spot and
Blemish of our Campaign; and if this was the fault of some particular Men, yet
the Body of the Garrison had the same Heart and Soul with their Commanders that
did such Wonders before Namur; and therefore I hope the brave will not think
themselves concerned in what I have said of this easy Siege, nor take any
Exceptions against it; for I should be very sorry to offend any man, or to say
any that might detract from his Reputation.

The French having made themselves Masters of Dixmuyde, the Marechal de
Velleroy marched with his Army the 19th. from the Neighborhood of Rousselar to
Arse^^, whence the Marquess de Feuqueres was immediately detach^d with a Body
of Foot to attack Deinse. Offerrel^s Regiment had been sent to reinforce this
Garrison from the Camp at Oostackre, the Brigadier commanded in it. The Day
before the place was invested, the Regiment of Scheltinga was sent here from
Audenarde to relieve the Swedish Regiment, that was in Garrison, which went
back to Audenarde in the place of Scheltinga. At the same time that Feuquieres
was detached with a Body of Foot to attack Deinse, the Marechal de Villeroy
ordered a Body of Horse to pass the Lys at Gathlen to invest the place on the
other side of this River before Peteghem, which joins to Deinse by a Bridge
over the River. This place is not strong by situation, and the Fortications
about it were but a good Retrenchment palissaded, which was double toward
Arseel one within another, this being the weak side of the Town, the rest being
a Morass caused by the Neighborhood of the L^s: Without this double
Retrenchment, distant a good Musket Shot from the place, there was a Star-work
upon the way of Arseel, and Thielt: We had great Magazines of Hay in this
place, and eight pieces of Cannon. The Marquess de Feuquieres summoned the
Governor to surrender the place, who offered to do it upon honorable Terms;
but the Marquess de Feuquieres would hear of none but those of Prisoners of
War: To which Brigadier Offerrel consented; and the Capitulation was signed the
20th, and the place delivered to the French without firing a Cannon-shot of
ei^ther side, upon these Conditions.

First, That the Officers shall not be plundered; and nothing shall be taken
from the Soldiers but their Arms.

II. That the Officers shall have liberty to send all their Baggage, and Horses
with their Servants aad Baggage-Men with a good Escorte to Ghent.

III That the Officers shall have liberty to take their Saddle-Horses along
with them for their march, and after to dispose of them as they shall think fit.

IV. That the Officers shall have the liberty to wear their Swords, and that no
man shall take them from them.

V. That all the Garrison, both Officers and Soldiers, shall have one of the
conquered Towns in the Low Countries for their Prison, till such time as the
Conditions of their Liberty shall be agreed upon.

VI. That all the Inhabitants of the Town, as well Ecclesiastics as others,
with their Horses and Cattle, and the Cloister of Nuns, shall be exempted from
Plunder, or any other Molestation. Which was Signed at the Camp before Deinse
the 30th. of July, New Style, by the Marquess de Feuquieres.

The Garrison was sent to Doway and Cambray, which the Enemies could have sent,
if they would, as far as Luxemburgh without any breach of the Capitulation, and
was treated in the same manner as the Garrison of Dixmuyde. As soon as the
French had taken away all our Magazines, which they sent by Water to Courtray,
they demolished the place, and took away the Palissades. As for Dixmuyde, the
Enemies proposed to demolish the place, upon condition that they would not keep
a Garrison here, nor we neither, else that they would keep it (as it was) for a
Winter Quarter. The Magistrates of Dixmuyde made* the Proposition to the
Elector; and it is said, that by mutual consent this place is to remain
demolished; and so it continues this Winter without any Garrison. The French
all this while were Masters of the Country to the other side of the Canal of
Bruges, which they plundered and destroyed. But for the security of the Country
on our side of the Canal, Prince Vaudemont commanded Sir. David Collier with 8
Regiments of Foot, and 250 Horse (12) to guard the passages of the Canal. Upon
the Marechal de Villeroy^s motion toward Deinse, the Duke of Wirtemberg left
his Camp at Placendal the 19th. and marched to Bruges, and encamped at
Oedelghem, near Cruys Port, to cover the place, or to join Prince Vaudemont
upon occasion. Sir Henry Bellassis was left at Placendal, by the Duke of
Wirtemberg, as he march^d from thence to Bruges: By this disposition the Canal
was guarded from Ghent to Bruges, and so to Ostend. Sir David Collier guarded
the passages of the Canal near Ghent: The Duke of Wirtemberg was near Bruges,
and Sir Henry Bellassis at Plaiendal. Besides all this, Prince Vaudemont posted
the Regiments of Mackay and Torsay at Mulenstein, a Passage upon the Canal of
Sas van Ghendt, which covered the Prince's Army at Oostackre; which was now
reduced to sixteen or seventeen Battallions, by all these Detachments, which
were so prudently ordered, that the French never offered to pass the Canals to
get into the Pais de Waes.

Villeroy having made himself, Master of Deinse came nearer to Ghent with his
Army, and incamp^d with his main Body between Nevel, where he had his Right,
and Gottem upon the Lys, where he had his Left. A considerable Detachment of
his Horse passed the Lys, as if they had a design then upon Aud^narde. The Town
of Ghent having the Marechal de Villero, with a powerful Army, for their near
Neighbor, provided as much as possible they could for their defense: They
stopped up the Waters to drown the Country between the Lys and the Sch^ld, from
Bruges Port to that of Courtray, and made some new Retrenchments upon the Hill
without Courtray Port, which is the weakest, and most commanded part of the
Town: They mounted all their Artillery upon the Ramparts; and Prince Vaudemont
ordered a Detachment of our Gunners for their Service. 'Twas reported they had
made a great Provision of Bombs at Courtray, which made this place fear a
Bombardment.

This was the disposition of our Affairs in Flanders about this time, which I
shall leave to go on with the Siege of Namur; where the ill news of Dixmuyde
and Deinse did put us a little out of Countenance: But first I must remember to
give an account of my Lord of Athlone's Proceedings, who had been detached with
most of the Cavalry at the beginning of the Siege to the River Pieton, to
consume the Forage between the Sambre and Mons. He at first encamped at Pont de
Celles, upon this River, where he continued several days, and then advanced
near to Binche, and encamped at Herlaymont-Capelle, near to Marimont; from
whence, the 11th. he detached the Count de Lip Brigadier, with sixteen
Squadrons of Horse, to march toward the Enemies Line at Givry between Mons and
the Sambre, to raise Contributions. At his return he halted near Binch, an old
Town between Mons and the Sambre, with decayed Walls about it. The French make
a Winter Quarter of this place; and in the Summer they keep in it a small
Garrison, just enough to cover the Town from Parties. Whilst the Cavalry was
upon the halt near this place, several Spanish and Walloon Volunteers, that
wanted Booty, endeavored to force their way into the Town, and there was a
small Skirmish between them and the French which defended it. Count Lip
hearing the Fire, sent Orders to the Volunteers to retreat, and not to meddle
with ^t: But this handful of French, not content to be rid of these Volunteers,
pursued them, and fired upon them; for which reason Count Lip sent a
Detachment to repulse them, which got into the Town with the Enemy, and made
themselves Masters of it: It was a place which could not be kept, and so we
abandoned it.

I have left the Siege of Namur continued to the 17th. when all things were
ready to make an Assault upon the Counterscarp. Major General Lindeboom was
then in the Trenches, with Brigadier Selwyn, and the Regiments of Lauder,
Ingoldesby, Saunderson and Maitland. The Attack was ordered for the Evening at
the relieving of the Trenches to have a good number of Regiments ready to
sustain the Assault: Fifteen Grenadiers a Company were detached throughout the
Regiments concerned in the Siege of the Town (except the Guards) which made
about 500 Men, commanded by Colonel Collingwood. Major General Ramsay mounted
the Trenches this night, with my Lord George Hamilton Brigadier, and the
Regiments of Nassau, Selwin, and Seymour and the Royal Regiment, which was
commanded extraordinarily for the occasion. The Attack began about five of the
Clock in the Afternoon by the Grenadiers, who went on very courageously to the
Glacis, and fired their Grenades over the Palissades in the covered way. The
Enemies had traverses palissaded all along this covered way, from the Port de
Fer to the Meuse, which added very much to the defense of the Counterscarp.
Notwitstanding the Grenadiers gained the Glacis. But the Enemies, under the
cover of their Traverses, very much annoyed our Men, and pisputed the
Lodgment^s upon the Glacis very hard; for which reason the Regiments of
Ingoldesby and Sanderson, marched out of their Trenches to the assistance; but
when they came to lodge the Wooll-sacks and Gabions upon the Palissades of the
Glacis, the Enemies, who still defended themselves by the favor of their
Traverses, set them on fire, and sprang two or three Fougaces or little Mines,
which did some damage. Several Grenadiers leaped over the Palissades in the
cover^d way, where they fought with a great deal of Bravery and Courage in the
thick of the Enemies. The Lodgment was made at last, and the Enemies were
forced to abandon the Counterscarp. Our Cannon and Bombs play^d at the same
time very dexterously and furiously from both sides of the Meuse, and gall^d the
Enemy very much in their Works, at a time when they must fire with a great deal
of Art to annoy the Enemies, and not to hurt our own Men. The English made
their Lodgment upon the Palislades of the covered way from before the Face of
the Bastion de St. Roch next to St. Nicholas Gate, to the left toward the
Meuse; and the Dutch Grenadiers, who attacked upon the left, carried it from
the Halfmoon of St. Nicholas to the point of the Demy-Bastion of the Meuse,
being sustained by Detachments from their Regigiments in their Trenches, who
behaved themselves with the same Pravery as ours had done upon the Right. Baron
de Hasfert Colonel of a Swedish Regiment was killed in this Action, and a
Lieutenant Colonel wounded, besides several other Officers. The Enemies, who
were still Masters of two detached Bastions upon the Hill of Bouge, galled us
very much during the Attack with several Drakes or Fauconners they had, which
they fired continually down upon our Trenches in the bottom, and upon our Rear
in the Attack. 'Twas by one of these Drakes that Mr. Godfrey, Deputy Governor
of the Royal Bank of England (who was come some days before from Antwerp to
wait upon the King about the Affairs of the Payment of the Army) had the
misfortune to be he killed in the Trenches, standing near the King, and
Lieutenant Colonel Eck of the Dutch Troop of Guards had his Arm shot off by the
same Ball. His Majesty (as he does upon all like occasions) remained upon the
place during the whole Action, without stirring till our Posts upon the Glacis
were made sure, and 'twas then very late in the night. Our loss was not very
great, considering the resistance of the Enemies, who fired not only from the
covered way, but from the Bastion de St. Roch after we had gain^d it, where the
Officers were very busy to encourage their Men to make a good defense, and
exposed themselves very much to keep their Soldiers to a vigorous Resistance.
Our loss may amount to 7 or 800 men, killed and wounded. Colonel Ingoldesby and
Saunderson's Regiments suffer^d most among ours in gaining the Counterscarp. In
Trelawney's Regiment; Captain Carter of the Grenadiers, Son to Rear-Admiral
Carter killed at Barfleur Fight, was killed in the covered way, and Major
Carryl, who went on with the Grenadiers with Colonel Collingwood was wounded.
In Colonel Seymour's, Lieutenant Bethell of the Grenadiers wounded. In
Columbine's; Captain Young of the Grenadiers killed, Lieutenant Dorrington and
Ensign Drobus wounded. In the Fusiliers, Lieutenant Dancey killed of the
Grenadiers; Captain Negus wounded with the the Workmen. In Tidcomb's Regiment,
Lieutenant Williams of the Crenadiers killed; Captain Devaux wounded with the
Workmen. In Stanley's, Ensign Gardener killed, and Ensign Devreux wounded. In
Collingwood^s, Adjutant Gordon mortally wounded; Captain Booth, and Lieutenants
Kemp and Adams wounded. In Lauder's that had the Trenches, Sir John Keith
Captain killed; Lieutenant Colonel Stewart wounded. In Ingoldesby's, killed,
Lieutenant Brooker, and Ensign Paget: Wounded, Captains Purefoy, Jones, and
Stedman, Lieutenants Ogilby. Moor, Disney, and Lloyd, Ensigns Patterson and
Johnson. In Sanderson's, wounded, Captain Fowke, Lieutenant Hazard, Ensigns
Pallaster, and Par^ridge. In Colonel Maitland's, Lieutenant Orcharston and
Price killed; Captain Lundy, and Ensign Gairnes wounded. Monsieur Du Puy
Inginier-General of Holland was wounded, of which he died at Maestricht; and 5
Inginiers were killed, and 11 wounded.

The gaining of the Counterscarp was not the only advantage of this day; we had
now four Batteries which played very briskly upon the Enemies, posted at the
Abbey of Salsen and the Balance upon the Sambre, a House so called, where the
Besieged had made a Retrenchment to defend the Passage of the River, between
their Line and the Cohorne. The Forces quaitered between the Sambre and the
Meuse, being Dutch and Bavarians forced this Passage of the Sambre, at the same
time we were driving the Enemies from the Counterscarp of St. Nicholas his
Gate. 1^00 Bavarian Grenadiers, and 500 Musketeers were commanded for this,
Enterprise with a Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, and Officers
proportionable to the Detachment; there was a Detachment of an equal number of
Dutch, and the same number of Officers: A Major with 150 Fusiliers followed to
sustain them. These passed the Sambre at the Bridge of Communication above
Flavennes, to be ready to pass the Bridge at the Balance as soon as it should
be made, which Work they were to cover: 50 Grenadiers and 300 Musketeers went
of the other side of the River, commanded by a Lieutenant Colonel, and 600 men,
commanded by a Colonel, to sustain them. These were to march by the Maison
Blanch along the way made to draw the Boats upon the River, and so under the
Hills to the Balance. They had besides six Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons to
march after them, and cover them from the Enemies Sallies out of the Castle.
Six Bilanders, or great Boats, were made ready to go down the River at the same
time as the Foot marched on both sides of it: These Boats were contrived for
the making of a Bridge at the Balance, and had a Breast-work made upon their
sides Musket shot proof, to cover about 200 Bavarian Soldiers they had on
Board. During these Preparations our Batteries upon the Sambre played as fast
they could to dislodge the Enemies out of the Balance, which House they beat
down about their Ears, and spoiled the Retrenchments they had made to cover
themselves. As soon as our men came near the point of the Hill, upon which the
Line begins that goes from the Sambre to the Meuse, they fired very hard with
Small-shot out of the ^ascine Work at the end of this Line down the Hill, and
the Bavarian small Batteries before this Hill, fired against them. The Enemies
had made a little Battery of two Guns about half way down the H^ll, to bear
nearer upon the River; but our Batteries from the Sambre soon dislodged the
Enemies from hence. They made another of two upon the descent of the Hill
between the Cohorne and the Balance for the same purpose. Our Soldiers being
got at the Foot of the Hill on both sides of the River, under the metal of the
Enemies Cannon, they received little or no damage. Being now come near the
Balance, our Foot on the Balance side of the River, attack^d the Enemies in
the Retrenchment of this House, and in the mean while, the Soldiers in the
Boats, and those of the Town side of the River, made the Bridge, and passed it.
The French ordered three Battallions, and four Squadrons of Dragoons to come
down between the Cohorne and Casotte, to fall upon our Men. But the Besieged
being attack^d at the same time at the Counterscarp of St. Nicholas his Gate,
they could not spare men enough to hinder us from being Masters of the
Balance, which was immediately gained as soon as the Bridge was made over the
River; and the Detachments the Enemies had made from the top of the Hill
between the Cohorn and Casotte (where they were encamped) were only Witnesses
to the taking of the Passage, without attempting any thing for the defense of
it. As soon as we had made our selves Masters of this Post, we sent a
Detachment to the Abbey of Salsen, which the Enemies immediately abandoned, and
we took possession of it with a Captain and 100 men. Our loss was very
inconsiderable in the gaining of this important Pass; we had not above forty
men killed and wounded. A Captain of the Regiment of Swerin was killed with a
Cannon-ball. We relieved afterward this Post every Evening with a considerable
number both of Horse and Foot, who made a Retrenchment at the end of the
Bridge, where they were under shot of the Cannon of the Cohorn, which could not
hurt them.

The 18th. Having gained the Counterscarp we began to work at a Battery at the
Foot of the Hill to fire against the Half Moon of St. Nicholas, and the Bastion
de St. Roch, which Battery was very near the Glacis. The same day the
Brandenbourghs having finished their parallel Lines along the Meuse, they made
a Line of Communication between them, which so enclosed the Fauxburg de Jambe,
and the ^astion of the Meuse Bridge, that there was no fear of any more Sallies
of that side: This gave us such a command of the River all along the Castle and
Town, that the Marechal de Bousters ordered all the Boats they had under the
Town-Wall to be set on fire, least they should be serviceable to us to pass and
attack the Breach our Batteries had made along the Meuse. The Enemies for the
farther defense of the Town (having lost the Counterscarp) made a Retrenchment
within the old Tower in the Figure of a Horn-work, from the West End of St.
Nicholas his Church to the Meuse. Our Batteries played very furiously. The
Brandenburghs from the other side of the Meuse, played as hard as they could
against the Stone Digue that holds up the Water in the Fosse, to beat it down
and drain the Ditch, in order to assault the Breach of the Demy-Bastion, and of
the Halfmoon: ^ut the Digue was so strong and thick, that it resisted very much
the fury of our Cannon. (The Reader is to observe, that what I call
Brandenbu^gh Batteries, are the Dutch Batteries of the Brandenburgh side; for
the Brandenburgh Forces had no Battering Pieces here.) At night (^8.) Major
General Salisch and my Lord Cutts mounted the Trenches with the Brigade of
Guards. The Battallion of Scots Guards did Duty at the King's Quarter. In the
dusk of the Evening we fired all our Artillery and Mortars from the Batteries,
and the small shot from the Trenches, and round the whole Line of
Circumvallation three times, for the taking of Casal in Italy by the Duke of
Savoy and the Allies; all the Regiments being drawn out about the Line of
Circumvallation for that purpose, made a very fine running sire in such a vast
compass of Ground. The 19th. in the Morning we had finished a Battery of seven
pieces of Cannon on the Bavarian side, upon the highest part of the Hill
between the Sambre an the Meuse, which played very hard to make a Breach upon
the Left of the Gate of the Enemies Line. In the Evening the Elector of Bavaria
made a very great Detachment of the Dutch and Bavarian Troops to the Balance,
in order to have attacked the Enemies within their ^ine between the Sambre and
the Meuse; but because a considerable resistance was expected, the King judged
it too late, and deferr^d it till the next mornining: However the said
Detachment lay all night upon their Arms at the Balance to be ready to fall on
in the morning: The Enemies, who foresaw they could not keep their Line whilst
we could attack them within, drew away their Cannon from it this night.
Major General Lindedeboom mounted the Trenches with Brigad er Fitz-Patrick, and
the Regiments of Columbine, Fusiliers, Tidcomb and Stanley. The Dutch upon the
Left had pushed their Trenches to the Meuse along the Palissades of the covered
way; and this night they made some Traverses along the narrow Beach under the
bank of the River, before the point of the Demi Bastion of the Meuse, to come
at the Foot of the Digue to mine it; this Digue joins the point of the
Demy-Bastion to the covered way, to damm up the Water in the Fosse.

The 20th. early in the morning (being then rainy weather) the Detachment we
had ready at the Balance to attack the Enemies in the inside of their Line,
marched out for this Enrerprise. The Detachment consisted in all of about 8000
men, whereof about 40^0 marched from the Balance up the Hill, to get in
between the Line and the Casotte, and the other 4000 marched from the Line of
Circumvallation between the Sambre and the Meu^e to attack the Line in Front,
the Dutch and Bavarians upon the left of the Gate, and the Brandenburgh's upon
the right. The Elector of Bavaria was present in the whole Attack. A
considerable Detachment of about 1000 Horse and Dragoons was posted between the
Balance and the Abbey of Salsen, to hinder the Enemies from sallying this way
upon our Men, and the ascent of the Hill of Cohorn cover^d them pretty well
from the Enemies Cannon-shot. Major General Suerin commanded the Dutch at the
Attack in front of the Line upon the left of the Gate, where the Bavarian
Battery of 7 pieces of Cannon had began to spoil the parapet. The Dutch and
Bavarians marched up from the Balance in several Lines, being cover^d on the
left Flank with a good Body of Horse and Dragoons toward the Cohorn, of which
we have now spoken. When they came up, the Enemies did not long dispute their
two Traverses they had made within the Line, but retired to the perpendicular
Line of Communication between the Line and the Casotte: This gave Major General
Swerin opportunity to get over the Line at his Attack, and so to join and fall
upon the Enemies in this Retrenchment of Communication. The Brandenburghs at
the same time kept the Enemies employ^d upon the right of the Line toward the
Meuse, so that they could not so well defend this Communication, which they
were forced at last to yield, and the whole Line, being near an English half
Mile in length, and a prodigious Work cut into the very Rock, which cost the
Enemies a vast deal of Money and Labor: We gained this hardly without any loss
not having as yet above 20 men killed and wounded. The Enemies had a Battery of
2 pieces of Cannon upon the descent of the Hill of Cohorn toward Salsen, 300
men were detached out of the Bavarian Troops to force the Enemies from this
Battery, which they disputed a little, but when they abandoned it to retire in
the Cohorn, we found that they had before sent off the two pieces of Cannon. A
Dutch Battallion, with some Bavarian Dragoons sustained the 30) men detached,
who having forced the Enemy from the Battery, pursued them to the covered way
of the Cohorn, where they went, as if they had been to make themselves Masters
of the Work, but a great many paid for their rashness, and perished near the
upper point of the covered way of the Cohorn. After we had gained the Enemies
Line, we worked to make a Lodgment within the Line-parallel to the covered way
of the Casotte, which took up all the top of the Hill between the two Rivers.
The Enemies disputed the Lodgment very hard, making a continual sire from the
covered wa^ before the Casotte, and with the Cannon they had in this place; but
we at last finished it, which continued in this condition till we besieged the
Castle; the Guardbeing relieved daily at this Post by a Brigadier and four or
five Regiments. 'Twas in making of this Lodgment, and before the Cohorn that we
lost most Men, which amounted to about 300 men killed and wounded. A Captain of
the Elector's Guards was killed; one of the Elector's Ingeniers, and one of his
Gentlemen wounded. I have not heard of any other Officers of note. Thus we took
this mighty Work design^d to render the Castle impregnable, and which would
indeed have rendered the attacking of the Castle very difficult if it had been
continued down the Hill to the Balance upon the Sambre; for this Passage being
once gained, the Line can be attac'd within, which renders it weak and not
defensible. And since we have made our selves Masters of Namur, we have worked
to produce this Line down the Hill to the Balance to fortify this Pass of the
Sambre.

The same day (20.) we sprung a Mine under the Digue to blow it up, to let the
Water (by the ruining of this Work) out of the Fosse; but being just upon the
River, so that we could not get under the Foundation, and the Stone-work being
very hard; it could not have any axtraordinary effect: However, by this time a
great deal of the Digue was beat down, and the Water was considerably sunk in
the Fosse. The King had this Day the unfortunate news of Dixmuyde; at which the
whole Army was very much concerned. In the Evening Major General Ramsan had the
Trenches, and Brigadier Selwyn, with the Regiments of Collingw^od, Lauder,
Ingeldesby, and Sanderson* 21st. The English Battering-pieces, which had come
from Ghent to Malines by Water, came pretty near our Camp, under a strong
Escorte, having been brought by Land from this place, and drawn with our own
Horses, a Horse of a Company being commanded out of all the Regiments upon
English Pay In this Siege. The Captains were very willing to do this Service;
and some Colonels sent several Horses more than was order^d. Major General
Salisch relieved the Trenches, and my Lord George Hamilton, with the Regiments
of Maitland, Nassau Selwyn, and Trelawney. 22d. Our Artillery from Malines came
into the Line to be employed in the Siege. One of our Bombs fell into a
Magazine of Grenades the Enemies had upon the old Wall, between the old Tower
and St. Nicholas's Gate; the Bomb blew up the Grenades, and put them on fire,
which made such a noise that the Enemies within thought it had been an Assault,
and drew out to the Gate as fast as they could to defend the place. At Night
Major General Lindeboom had the Trenches, and my Lord Cutts with the Brigade of
Guards, the Dutch Guards excepted, who did Duty at the King's Quarter. The 23d.
early in the Morning a Battery of 18 pieces of Cannon of our English Artillery
began to play very vigorously upon the Face of the Bastion of St. Roch toward
St. Nicholas's his Gate, and soon beat down all the Stone-work of it; but the
Enemies were still Masters of the covered way upon the right of the point of
this Bastion toward the Port de Fer; so that it was necessary in order to
make afterward an Attack upon the Breach to extend our Lodgment upon the
covered way to the right of this Bastion, and consequently to make another
Assault to drive the Enemies out of the Traverses they had in this covered way,
of which they were still Masters. This Assault was resolved upon for this
Evening for the English, and another for the Dutch upon the breach of the
Demy-bastion of the Meuse.

In the Evening Major General Ramsay had the Trenches, and Brigadier
Fitz-Patrick, with the Regiments of Seymour, Royal, Columbine, and the
Fusiliers. The Attack began about the relieving of the Trenches, as usually, to
have the more Regiments to sustain: 200 English Grenadiers were ordered to
extend our Lodgment upon the Right, and 200 Dutch to make an Assault upon the
Breach of the Demy-bastion, Captain Miltitz of Essen's Regiment, and
Adjutant^General to the Prince of Nassa-Sarbruck* commanned the Dutch: The
English were commmanded by four Captains, of which Captain Booth of Collingwood
was the first. The Attack began but little before Sunset, and the Dispute
lasted very late in the night. Our Cannon and Mortars made a terrible noise,
and the Small-shot went on very briskly for a great while. The Enemies disputed
their Lodgement very long and very well, where some of their Officers
signalized themselves very much, paticularly one, who stood a great while upon
the very Palissades, exposed to all the Fire of our Cannon, encouraging his
Men, and waving his Hat over his Head: The Earth torn up by the grazing of our
Cannon-balls covered him twice or thrice, and when our Officers, who admired
his Bravery, expected him to be knocked on the Head, he still got up again:
However, in spite of the Enemies resistance we extended our Lodgment
considerably upon the Right. My Lord Cutts, who commanded the Brigade of Guards
In the Trenches this day, had Captain Wentworth Lieutenant of the Second
Regiment of Guards (who waited upon his Lordship to carry his Orders to the
Brigade) killed with a Musket-ball just by him. Lieutenant Colonel Skeleton, the
Major of the Brigade, commanded my Lord Cutts's Battallion of Guards, so that
he could not perform the Duty. The Dutch Granadiers marched on very bravely
over the Digue, though it was but narrow, and consequently a very
disadvantagious Defile to attack a Breach; nevertheless they carried it, and
lodged themselves upon the Demi-Bastion, of which they continued Masters for
above an hour; but the Demi-Bastion being narrow, and the Granadiers crowded
upon it, the Enemy so pelted them with Granado's from the old Wall within, that
they were forced to abandon it, and to Lodge themselves without, at the foot of
the Bastion, and though 'twas dark night yet the Artillery still fired very
hard to disturb the Enemies, to facilitate our Assault, which was the reason
that sometimes our own Cannon did us harm; however, our Loss was not answerable
to the terribleness of the noise in the Attack. We had in the Brigade of Guards
but nine Men killed, and thirteen wounded, and I suppose our Loss was
proportionable in the other Regiments. In the first Regiment of English Guards,
Captain Cripeny and Ensign Shute were wounded: in the Royal Regiment,
Lieutenant Archibald Hamilton, wounded; in Selwyn's, Lieutenants Castles, and
Corbonnel killed: In Trelawney's, Ensign Nuby killed, Captain Mitchel and
Lieutenant Cole, wounded: In Stanley's Captain Holiday of the Granadiers
wounded; In Maitland's, Lieutenant Carrent, killed. The King did not leave the
Attack till all was over, and did not return to his Quarters till after
Midnight. The 24th. our English Battery played very hard upon the Bastion de
St. R^ch, in order to make the Breach Attackable, now that our I odgment upon
the Conterscarp was sufficiently extended for an Assault; all the other
Batteries played with the same vigor, and the Brandenburgh's particularly, to
make the Breach of the Demi-Bastion more easy, and to Ruin the Half Moon of
St. Nicholas. The Bridge of Communication between this Half Moon and the
Curtain was quite broke to pieces, so that the Enemies could no more Relieve
it. But when we expected yet another Assault upon the Breache^ for the next
day, the Count de Guiscard came himself upon the Breach of the Demi-Passion,
where he Ordered a white Flag to be put up, to Capitulate; upon which all the
Batteries were immediately ordered to be silent. Lieutenant-Collonel Macartney,
Captain of the Scots Guards, who waited upon Major General Ramsay in the
Trenches, was sent to the Breach to know what Count Guiscard desired, who asked
to speak with Major General Ramsay; Whereupon the Major General went himself,
and after usual Civilities on both sides, the Count de Guiscard told him, That
though the Necessity and Condition of their Affairs was not such as to oblige
them to Capitulate, yet for the Preservation of the Town, they were willing to
give it up upon Honorable Terms, and desired that Hostages might be exchanged,
to enter upon the terms of the Capitulation. Major General Ramsay told him,
That he would acquaint the Duke of Holstein-Ploen with it, whose Quarter was
just by; and that he should have his Answer in an hour. The word of Honor
being given on both sides for a Cessation of Arms, during the time,
Major General Ramsay went himself to the Duke of Holstein-Ploen, and from
thence to the King, who Dined this day at his own Quarter, being come very late
from the Attack the over night, and so could not be in the Trenches the next
Morning. His Majesty sent the Major General back to the Trenches, with power to
exchange Hostages; and an Express was sent to the Elector of Bavaria, to give
him notice of it, and to Commission a Person to Treat with Count Guiscard for
the Surrendering of the Town. Major General Ramsay being returned to the
Trenches, acquainted the Count de Guiscard that he could give Hostages to enter
into Treaty. Whereupon the Count de Negent, Colonel of the King's Regiment of
Dragoons, and the Chevalier de Ville F^rt Major of Brigade, came out of the
Town for Hostages for the Besieged. Colonel Seymour, and Lieutenant Colonel
Sterkin of the Hannouer Troops, and Major of Brigade, went up the Breach into
the Town, for Hostages of our side. The Baron de Noirmont went in for the
Elector of Bavaria, to Treat about the Terms of the Capitulation; which was
after some contestation, agreed upon, and Signed the next day by the Elector of
Bavaria; and consisted of the Articles following. Major General Salisch mounted
the Trenches at Night to guard the Posts, with Brigadier Selwyn, and the
Regiments of Tidcomb, Stanley, Collingwood, and Lauder.

ARTICLES proposed for the Capitulation of NAMUR, to the Elector of Bavaria,
jointly with the Allies, by the Count de Guiscard, Lieutenant General of His
Most Christian Majesty's Armies, and Governor of Namur.
1. THAT the Roman Catholic Religion only shall be maintained and preserved in
the Town of Namur, and that no other shall have a free Exercise there. Granted.

2. That all the Privileges, Franchises, Usages, and Customs, as well general
as particular, which the Ecclesiastics, Nobles, and Burghers, have enjoyed,
shall be maintained: to them; and that every one of them shall be restored to
the Enjoyment of their Confiscated Goods. Granted.

3. That all the Burghers, and other Inhabitants of the said Town of Namur, as
well French as others, of both Sexes, and of what Quality or Condition soever,
shall have the Liberty to remain there, or to leave the Place in Three Months,
with their Families and Effects, to retire where they shall think fit, without
any Trouble or Injury, whether they be Tradesmen, or that they have any other
Employments: For which end, such Passports and Safeguards shall be given them
gratis, as shall be requisite. Granted.

4. That none of the said Burghers, nor others of what Nation soever, shall be
pursued or molested under pretext of the Employments which they have had in the
King's Service; and that they shall have a general Amnesty, as well as the
Deserters Granted to all but the Deserters.

5. That the Horses taken in the War, and bought by the Burghers or Officers of
the Garrison, or any others, shall not be retaken from them. Granted.

6. That all the Officers, Soldiers. Dragoons, and others, as well French as
Strangers, of what Quality or Condition soever, that are Sick or Wounded,
either in the Hospitals of the said Town, or in the Burghers Houses, shall be
transported to Dinant, with the Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries, and
other Persons appointed to tend them; and that the Allies shall provide Boats
for them, and other Carriage necessary, paying for it, with sufficient Convoys
and Passports, to be safely conducted the shortest way thither, Six Days after
the Signing of this present Capitulation.

The Besieged are to provide themselves Boats for the Transportation of their
Sick and Wounded, and Passports shall be given them to go to Dinant, to get the
Boats and Boat-men requisite, over and above what shall be found in the Town,
which they may make use of, as well as of the Boatmen, upon Condition that they
shall send them back again.

7. That the Sick and Wounded, who are not in a Condition to be transported,
shall remain in the Town in the same Lodgings they have at present, till their
perfect Recovery; and that the Allies, at their own Expense, shall furnish them
with Victuals and Medicines, according to their Character; and after their
Recovery, they shall have Passports and Carriage to be transported safely the
shortest way to Dinant. Granted.

8. That the Garrison of the Town shall have Six Days leave, reckoning from the
beginning of the Capitulation, to retire into the Castle and Dependencies, with
their Families, Domestics, and Effects; and that during the said Six Days no
Hostility shall be committed of either side, neither from the Trenches, nor
Batteries, nor from the Town, or Castle; and least there should happen some
Disorder between the Troops in the Town during that time, the Allies shall only
have the Gate of the outer Wall, and none of the Soldiers of the Allies shall
have liberty to go into the Town, till the Garrison shall be all retired in the
Castle; and the inner Gate shall be kept by the Garrison till the end of the
Six Days.

The Besieged shall have but two Days, beginning the 25th. at Noon, and they
shall deliver the Port de Fer, with the inner Gate, or Gate of the old Wall,
where the Allies shall have a Guard jointly with the Besieged, to hinder any
body from going in, and to prevent Disorders.

9. That the Troops which are in Garrison in the Redoubts of St. Fiacre,
Piednoir, and St. Anthony, shall have leave to come into the Town, to retire in
the Castle, the Day after the signing of this Capitulation. Granted.

10. That all those who have been put in any Offices by the King, either
Judicatory or others, shall be maintained and continued in the exercise of
them, and shall enjoy the Rights, Perquisites, and Privileges annexed
thereunto. Granted.

11. That no Officers, Sick, Wounded, or others, shall be Arrested for Debt, or
for any other Pretext; but that those who can make their Debts justly to
appear, shall have Security for their Payment. Granted.

12. That all Contracts and Obligations made between the French and the
Inhabitants of the Town, shall be accomplished bona fide, on both sides,
according to their form and tenure, as well as those which have been made with
the Magistrates of the Town. Granted, Provided it be not to his Catholic
Majesty's Prejudice.

13. That the Officers Equipages and Horses, and the Horses of the Troops in
Garrison, shall be conducted safely the nearest way to Dinant, under a good
Escort; and that they shall not be searched, nor stopped, nor any other harm
done them, either to the Equipage, or to those that take care of it. Denied.

14. That the Prisoners made during the Siege, shall be freed on both sides.
Granted.

15. That all the Hostages shall be conducted safely, and the nearest way to
Dinam, under a good Escort. Granted. This Article is understood of the Hostages
for Contributions, which the Enemies had in the Town, and which they had the
liberty to send to Dinant by this Capitulation.

16. That the Town only shall be yielded by this present Capitulation, which is
between the Sambre, and the Attack of St. Nicholas's Gate; but at the same time
that the Besieged shall deliver the Port de Fer* they will also give up the
two Towers at the end of the Meuse Bridge, of the Condros side, except the
Drawbridge, which shall remain to the besieged. Granted.

By this Capitulation, the Besieged remained Masters of that part of the Town
which is at the Foot of the Castle, along the Sambre, and along the Meuse,
called the Basse Ville, or Lower Town.

17. That the Hostages, given for the Security of the Execution of this present
Capitulation, shall be restored of both sides, after the full Accomplishment of
it. Granted.

And that besides, the Besieged shall discover faithfully all their Mines and
Fougaces to Persons appointed, which shall be but Three; and the Besieged shall
not comm^^ any Disorder among, nor insult the Inhabitants in quitting the Town.

Emanuel, Elector. Guiscard.
Signed at the Camp before. Namur, Aug. 4. 1695. New Style.
The Evening after the Capitulation signed, Colonel Lauder took Possession of
the Port de Fer, with 500 Men, as it is agreed upon in the Eighth Article,
putting a Guard in the inner Gate, in a Line opposite to the Guard of the
Besieged. His Majesty was present, and the French Officers crowded very much
upon the Rampart to see the King, asking still where the King was, and which
was the King? After we had Possession of this Gate, we began to draw off our
Batteries, and the Day following, in the Morning, the Garrison of the Redoubts
of St. Fiacre, St. Anthony, and Pieanoir; the two first upon the side of the
Hill, before the Town, between St. Nicolas's Gate, and the Port de Fer, and
the last at the Foot of the Hill, before the Port de Fer, covering the Sluyce
of the Brook of Vederin, which runs in the Fosse at this Place. We found their
Falconnets in these Forts, which had so galled us in our Trenches before the
Counterscarp; one was of King Henry the Fourth's Reign, with his Artillery
Devise upon it, Ratio ultima regum. As soon as the Capitulation was signed.
Count de Nassu-weilbourg Major General, was detached with about 22 Squadrons of
Horse toward Brussels, to join and reinforce Prince Vaudemont's Army. The
Elector of Bavaria named the Count de Brouay Governor of Namur, till such a
time as the King of Spain should approve of him, or appoint another: this
Government, with that of Mons, the Citadels of Antwerp, and Ghendt, and the
Town of Ostend, being always reserved to the King's own Nomination; the rest is
at the Choice of the Governors of the Low Countries. The 27th. the Count de
Brouay, Governor of Namur, and Sergeant-General de Bataille, took Possession
of the Place, with Six Dutch Regiments, after the French had withdrawn into the
Castle. The Town was not much endammag'd by the Siege; that Street only which
leads to St. Nicolas's Gate being battered by our Cannon and Bombs, it being
impossible to fire 'em so justly always, but that some must get into the Town;
however, we avoided it as much as we could: And as for the Condition of the
Breaches, they were such, that the Besieged could yet have sustained another
Assault; for the Breach of the Bastion of St. Roch was not yet sufficiently
applanish'd to attack it, and if it had been carried by Assault, the Besieged
had still a Fosse, and an old Wall within, besides the Retrenchment they had
made within the old Wall, to make their Capitulation. But I believe, the Truth
is, they had lost so many Men in the defense of the Town, that the Marechal de
Bouflers, and Count de Guiscard, thought it convenient to reserve the rest for
the more necessary defense of the Castle, and its strong Appendencies, where
they expected a certain Relief, and therefore they would provide for a good
Resistance there to expect it. The Garrison marched into the Castle 7000
effective Men, having lost about 5000. in* Defense of the Town, killed,
wounded, and deserted; of the last there were a great many, and particularly
the day that they evacuated the Town several hundreds hid themselves in the
Inhabitants Cellars, and others got over the Walls near the Gate we had in
Possession. The French, in quitting this place, broke the Bridge over the
Sambre that leads to the Castle, and pulled down all the Houses along the
Sambre opposite to the Town, to make a good Breast-Work against it.

The same day we took Possession of the Town Count Nassau Lieutenant General,
with Major-Generals Ramsay, Salisch, and Heukelom, Brigadiers Fitzpatrick,
Selwyn, and Lord George Hamilton, Frishyem, and Heyden, were sent away from the
Siege with 30. Battalions, to march toward Brussels, to reinforce Prince
Vaudemont, and to make an Army capable for the future to make Head against
Villeroy: Thirteen of these Battalions were English, and seventeen Dutch; Six
English remained for the Siege of the Castle, the Battalion of the second
Regiment of English Guards, the first Battalion of Dutch Guards, Seymour,
Columbine, Stanley, and Lauder. That day the 30. Battalions Commanded by Count
Nassau encamped at Templeux, the same place where we encamped the beginning of
the Siege: The English having left a Horse, a Company as before, to bring up
our Mortars from Louvain to Namur. The 28th. we marched by Masy to Sombr^f, and
were reinforced by 32. Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, Commanded by
Lieutenant-Generals du Puy, and la Forest: Lieutenant General du Puy Commanded
the Spanish Cavalry, and la Forest the King's and that of the States The 29th
we Marched to Genap through the Plains of Fleuri, and by Mell^: we passed by my
Lord of Athlone's Camp at ^^bercey, which remained on our right Flank. After my
Lord of Athlone had consumed the Forage at Herlaymont Capelle, Marimont, and
about Binch, he Marched back to the River Pi^t^n, to Pont de Celles, where he
had Encamped before at the beginning of the Siege of Namur: From thence, when
the Town Capitulated, he marched to this Camp of Libercey, in order to advance
toward Prince Vaudemont's Army. The same Evening we came to Genap, my Lord of
Athlone came up to us, and took the Command of the Army: he brought along with
him 80. Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, so that we had now beside the 30.
Battalions, 112. Squadrons. The Cavalry Encamped higher up the Dyle before the
Foot, and the Foot with the right at Genap, and left toward the Abbey of
Villers-Perwys, with the Causey that goes to Namur before them. The 30th. my
Lord of Athlone took his Quarter in Genap, and we halted to observe the motions
of the Marechal de Villeroy, who was now advanced as far as Enghien, in order
to march back, and take the Post of Masy, if Villeroy should march on to
Nivelle: or else to be ready to join Prince Vaudemont, if Villeroy should make
toward Brussels. In order to this, Lieutenant General du Puy, was Detached
with 1000. Horse to observe the motions of the Enemy, (the 30th.) and to secure
the strong Pass of Brain le Chasteau, if we should be obliged to march nearer
to Brussels: by which the French could otherwise cut off the Communication
between us and the Prince, and have hindered us from Incamping at Braine-Alleu,
and Waterlo. This brings me back from the Siege of Namur, to speak of our
Affairs in Flanders, and of the motions of Prince Vaudemont, and the Enemy's
Army.

We have left Prince Vaudemont Encamped at Oostackre, without Antwerp-Porte at
Ghendt, between the Scheld, and the Canal of Sasvan-Ghendt, with 18.
Battalions, (including Mackay, and Torsay, that lay Encamped upon his Right to
defend the passage of the Canal of Sasvan-Ghendt at Mulenstein,) and 22.
Squadrons of English Horse, and 7. Dutch, all the Dragoons were with the Duke
of Wirtemberg near Bruges Villeroy was Encamped with the French Army, since the
taking of Deinse, near Ghendt, with his Right at Nevel, and his Left at Gothem
upon the Lys where he remained five or six days; but before we attend his Army
from hence to Brabant, we must not forget the Barbarities and Inhumanities
which the French Soldiers Committed in this Desolate Country which was all at
their devotion, of the French side of the Canal of Bruges: They Plundered all
the Inhabitants, and stripped a great many naked; and not only the Villages and
Country People felt the Barbarous Usage of the Soldiers, but the Churches and
Cloisters; and nothing, though never so Sacred and Holy, could escape their
Sacrilegious Hands. They stole all the Chalices that they could find either in
Churches or Priests Houses, without any regard to their God and Savior, whom
they pretend to be in it; and Robbed the Transubstantiated Sacrament of his
Dwelling and Habitation. At Torhout, a considerable Borough, they Ruined the
Place, Plundered the Inhabitants, stripping the best of them naked; and their
beastly Fury carried them to the very Cloister, Ravishing, without distinction,
the Nuns, as well as other Women: And yet these are the Men whom the French
pretend to be the only Defenders of the Catholic Cause; as if the Emperor, and
King of Spain, were the greatest Betrayers of this Interest, by their Alliance
with the King, and the States of Holland. Whereas, not only those whom they
brand with the name of Heretics, but the very Turks and Barbarians would
scarce be guilty of so much disrespect to their Holy Places. This is a short
Account of the crying Mischiefs the Enemies committed in Flanders, whilst it
was exposed to the Licentious Fury of their Soldiers; and no doubt, they could
have done more; they could have Crowned this Masterpiece of Cruelty by the
Bombarding of Ghendt, and Bruges, but the French King thought it would make
more noise in the World, and more Mischief in the Spanish Netherlands to
Bombard its Metropolis, the Seat of its Governors, its chief place of Wealth
and Trade, and the dwelling of the Court, and of its chiefest Nobility; and
then afterward to Raise the Siege of Namur, and command, or give (as they term
it) Peace to Europe. It Is in the pursuit of this important Attempt, that we
must now follow Villeroy and his Army. Prince Vaudemont having Intelligence of
the Enemy's Designs to pass the Scheld, and march toward Brabant, drew Sir
David Collier with his eight Battalions, from the Guard of the Canal of Bruges,
and the Dragoons from the Duke of Wirtemberg's Army, who joined him back again
at Oostackre the day before he marched to Dendermonde. The 26th. the Mar^echal
de Villeroy re-passed the Lys at Wacken, and Encamped near the Scheld within
the Line. Prince Vaudemont having notice of this Motion of the Enemies,
decamped the same day from Oostackre, having then 26 Battalions with him, and
all the English Horse and Dragoons, (except the Dragoons of Rosse and
Cunningham, which remained with Lieutenant General Bellasis, and those which
went with the King, of which we have given an Account) making in all 48
Squadrons, he passed the Scheld this day about a League above Dendermond, upon
a Bridge of Boats with the Foot, which Encamped along the Scheld as far as this
place; the Horse and Dragoons passed the Scheld at Dendermond and encamped
between Dendermond and Baesrode. The next day, the Prince had information that
Villeroy was re passing the Lys, which made him suspect that Villeroy had made
the motion the day before only to send him toward Brabant, and in the mean
while to come back, and pass the Canal of Bruges to put the Paijs de Waes under
Contribution, for which Reason the Prince was hastening back again to his former
Camp of Oostackre, and had re-passed the Scheld, when he received a more
certain Account of Villeroy's Motions, that he was then passing the Scheld to
march toward Brabant; the Prince then caused the Columns of the March to Face
to the Right-about, and march back toward the Scheld, where the Horse and Foot
passed as they had done the day before, and so went with all speed toward
Brussels, having then a good Account of Villeroy's Orders and Designs: The Army
marched the whole night, except a halt it made of two or three hours about the
middle of the night; but the Baggage still continued loaded, and the Soldiers
rested upon their Arms. The halt being over, the Army marched on toward the
Canal of Brussels, which it passed the next Day, the Foot at Vilvorde, and the
Horse at Burnt Bridge, and so gained that Evening being the 28th. the Camp of
Deghem, having marched two Days and one Night about Thirty six Hours; and
notwithstanding the feeble and valetudinary Disposition of the Prince, yet in
so long a March he was very often on Horseback, taking care of every thing; his
Zeal for the Cause, and Affection for the Service, overcoming all the
Infirmities of his Body, which seemed to make prodigious Efforts to execute the
wise Orders of his Mind. By this great March he gained the Advantage of the
Enemy to get between them and Namur, though he could not hinder the Bombarding of
Brussels. At the same time that Prince Vaudemont left the Camp of Oostackre to
march toward Derdermond, the Duke of Wirtemberg left the Neighborhood of
Bruges, to follow the Prince with all speed, in order to join him with the 12
Battalions under his Command, and marched the same Day (being the 26th.) to
Ghendt.

Villeroy, who had passed the Scheld the same Day at Escanaffe marched with his
whole Army to Lessines upon the River Dender below Aeth, which being a
considerable March to pass the Scheld and advance thus far, obliged him to halt
the next Day, and to stay till all the Artillery, Baggage, and Stragglers, were
come up. Montal was left in the Lines with no more Men than was just necessary
to do the Duty of a Guard upon them. Sir Henry Bellasis, who encamped at
Placendal, whilst the Duke of Wirtemberg was at Bruges, came up to this Place
upon the Duke's marching to Ghendt; and the Regiments of Tiffany and Buchan,
were detached from his Body to reinforce Prince Vaudemont's Army; so that Sir
Henry Bellasis had at Bruges under his Command, 10 Battalions and 2 Regiments
of Dragoons, having drawn off the Regiments of Strathnaver and George Hamilton,
from Newport, and Belcastell from Ostend. The 29th. Prince Vaudemont marched
through Brussels from Deghem, and encamped without Halleporte and Fort de
Monterey, with his Right upon the Hill that lies just over the River Senne and
his Left at the Namur Port; where he immediately ordered the Army to retrench
and fortify this Rising Ground, which was very strong, and where it had been
very difficult for Villeroy to have forced, even this small Army: The high
Ground near the Senne, this River and the Fort de Monterey, fortified his
Right; besides the Retrenchments in the Front, it was covered by the Bois de
Sogne, which came up close to the Left, and Brussels remained just in the Rear.
Prince Vaudemont could have taken the Camp of Anderleck, where he could (being
joined by my Lord of Athlone and Count Nassau) have prevented the Bombarding of
Brussels; but then the Enemies would have had the Advantage of us in marching
toward Namur: so that it was impossible at the same time to cover the Siege of
Namur, and to prevent the Bombarding of this Place. The Foot only of Prince
Vaudement's Army encamped within the Retrenchment, between Halle Port, and
that of Namur; the Cavalry and Dragoons being re-inforc'd with the 22 Squadrons
detached from the Siege of Namur with Count Nassau Weilbourg, encamped at
Scarbeck, between Deghem and Brussels, to guard the passages of the Canal,
being commanded by Monsieur D' Auverquerque. But Prince Vaudemont being
extremely fatigued with the long March to Deghem was forced to keep his Bed at
Brussels.

Villeroy, who halted the 28th. at Lessines, for all his Army to come up,
marched the 29th. to come nearer to Brussels and at the same time to receive a
Convoy of Provisions of Artillery, Mortars, and Ammunitions from Mons, passed
the Dender at Lessines, and encamped with his Right near Steinkirk and his left
toward Enghein; and here he halted the next day for the Convoy from Mons,
which was escorted by the Marquis de Harcourt, who had passed the Sambre some
days before, to join and reinforce the Marechal de Villeroy. My Lord of
Athlone, with the Horse and Count Nassau, with the Foot, whom we have brought
to the Camp of Genap the 29th. halted here the next day: The Enemies being then
at Enghien and Steinkirk, we had not one Piece of Cannon; and we were very much
afraid, that Villeroy, instead of going to Brussels, should have marched to
Nivelle; for then we must have retreated from Genap, (which is but a League
from Nivelle) to the Camp of Masy: And Prince Vaudemont being encamped at
Brussels, the Enemies from Nivelle would have hindered his Passage by the Bois
de S^gne, and Genap; so that he must have marched about by Louvain, to come to
Namur, which consequently would have given the Enemies the Advantage of a March
for the Relief of the Siege: But Villeroy had Orders to Bombard Brussels, and
he must execute them; which has lost the French the best opportunity they could
have to relieve the Siege of Namur. The 30th. Prince Vaudemont was re-inforc'd
by the Duke of Wirtemberg, who came up to Brussels this Day with the 12
Battalions under his Command, and encamped within the Retrenchment between the
Gates of Halle and Namur, where we had now, by this junction, 38 Battalions:
And this is the mighty Army in whose presence Villeroy bombarded Brussels,
which (as the Paris Gazetteer boasted) dared not attack the French Army, which
sought, by this undertaking, an occasion of fighting, and to bring us to a
Battle.

The French being now Masters of all the Country between Brussels, Ghendt, and
Dendermond, Sir Henry Bellasis sent Sir Bevil Granville's Regiment to
reinforce the Garrison of Dendermond, where the Lunenbourgh Regiment of Luck
had been ordered before, and marched himself with the Body under his command to
Ghendt. The 31st. the Marechal de Villeroy being expected before Brussels, my
Lord of Athlone had Orders to march from Genap to come nearer to Brussels, to
be ready to join Prince Vaudemont, if Villeroy should offer to attack him in
his Retrenchment: Accordingly my Lord of Athlone passed the little River Dyle,
below Genap upon two Bridges, and encamped with his Right at Waterloo in the
Skirts of the ^^is de S^gne, where the Marquis de Gastanaga has built a very
pretty Chapel, made in the Figure of Four Demi-Domes joined together, and one
in the Center raised upon them. This Chapel was dedicated by him to the Virgin
Mary, to interceed for Issue to the King of Spain. My Lord of Athlone's Left
was at Brain Alleu, and here he had his Quarter in the House where Prince
Vaudemont was born: The Causey between Brussels and Genap remained in the Rear.
Upon our March to this Place, we had 12 Pieces of Cannon sent by Prince
Vaudemont. Besides this, Count Nassau-weilbourg was ordered by the Prince to
post himself with about 30 Squadrons of Horse along the way through the Bois de
Sogne, to make the Communication good from the Army at Brussels to that at
Waterloo. In the Evening, his Majesty came from the Camp before the Castle of
Namur, with a good Escorte of Horse to Waterloo, where his Majesty lay that
Night to conferr with Prince Vaudemont upon the present Conjuncture of Affairs;
who waited the next Day, though still indisposed upon the King. The same Day,
(31.) the Marechal de Villeroy marched from Enghien and Steinkirk, in order to
execute the Commands of his Master against Brussels, and encamped with his
Right within two English Miles of Anderlecht, and his Left at Halle. My Lord of
Athlone commanded a good Guard at Brain le Chasteau to defend the Passage from
Halle to his Camp, and the same Evening Rantzaw's Brigade was commanded from
the Army within the Retrenchment, to encamp between Anderlecht Port and that
of Flanders, for the Defense of the Town on this side, being the only Place
where the Enemies could make an Attack. The Magistrates, upon the first News of
the Enemies coming toward them, had stopped up all the Sluices of the River
Senne, which run under the Walls of this Town and through the lower part of it,
which by degrees o'erflow'd all the bottom from the Canal before the Gates of
Flanders and Anderlecht quite to that of Halle, and all the Meadows near the
Banks of the Senne from Brussels to Anderlecht: But the Country between
Anderlecht Port and that of Flanders, being pretty high, and the bottom near
the Ramparts but narrow, the Water could not so overflow here, but that the
Enemies could make their Battery; of Cannon and Mortars just by the Place, and
near enough to ruin afterward the best and the most wealthy part of the Town.

The first of August the French advanced to come close to Brussels, August.
and encamped this Day with the Right toward the Canal of Brussels and the
Left beyond Anderlecht toward Halle: The Marquis de Harcourt was left at
Halle, to make the Communication good between Mon^ and the Army. All this being
joined together, Villeroy was supposed to have full ^00 Battalions, and about
220 Squadrons* for besides the Regiments he had from Montal's Army to increase
his own, the French King had ordered out of his Frontier Garrisons all the
Regiments he could possibly spare to make up a formidable Army: So far that I
have heard several of our Officers that have been Prisoners this Year with the
Garrisons of Dixmuyde and Deinse, say, That they could easily have mastered the
Towns they were sent to, if they had had but Arms; so weak were their
Garrisons. And over and above all this, the Marechal de Villeroy still expected
a Detachment from the Rhine, and some Regiments from the Coasts of Normandy and
Britanny, and the rest of the French and Swisse Guards, which had remained to
mount the Guard upon the French King's Person: All this was hastening to join
the Marechal de Villeroy, to march to the Relief of Namur, after Brussels
should have suffered the severe Effects of our Enemies Anger, or rather of the
provoking Disappointments they met with in this Campaign. Upon this March of
the Marechal de Villeroy before Brussels ^0 Battalions were detached from my
Lord of Athlone's Army at Waterloo, to reinforce the Army of Prince Vaudemont,
commanded by Major General Heukelem; Four were English, Collingwood, Ingoldsby,
Saunderson and Maitland; And this Night we mounted a Guard of 100 Men a
Battalion between the Gates of Anderlecht and Flanders, being in all 3800 Men,
commanded by a Major General, a Brigadier, and other Officers proportionably.
Major General la M^l^^^re mounted the first with Brigadier Earl. This same
Evening Colonel Tiffeny's Regiment came up to Brussels, having been detached
from Lieutenant General Bellasis his Army in Flanders, with the Regiment of
Buchan, which was commanded for that time to Garrison in Malines. Ransaw's
Brigade was re-inforc'd with 4 Battalions more; so that besides the Guard
commanded by the Major General, between 4 and 5000 Men encamped within the
Ports of Flanders and Anderlecht.

During all this hurry, and terrible preparations for the Bombarding of
Brussels, the Elect'ress of Bavaria was in her 7th. Month big with Child; which
so affected her, that she miscarried this Evening of a Boy, to the great Grief
of the Elector of Bavaria, and the whole Court, and I dare say no less, to the
Regret of the King and Queen of Poland: This Miscarriage made the Elect'ress
dangerously ill; and the Elector at this time was carrying on the Siege of the
Castle of Namur. So that the French Bombs have not only kindled a Fire in
Brussels, but (may be) as far as Warsaw, where the French Ambassador has used
all his Art to extenuate the Matter at the Court of Poland. At Night the
Enemies opened the Trench between the Fauxbourg of Coukelberg and the Gate of
Anderlecht, to erect here their Batteries, where they could not only bring them
nearer to the Town, but also the Town lying upon the descent of a Hill toward
this Place, it was all open and exposed to the Enemy's Cannon and Mortars; and
that which did very much facilitate the making of their Bomb batteries close to
the Town, was two great Barns, one thatched and the other slated, just the other
side of the over-flow'd bottom before Anderlecht Port: They worked securely
and undiscovered behind these two Barns, where they had placed their Mortars;
and because the thatched Barn could easily be set on fire by our Cannon from
the Rampart, they filled it all up with Earth to hinder the effect of the fire.
There was a good Breast-work upon the Causey between Brussels and Anderlecht,
where the Garrison had always an advanced Guard: This Post was now defended by
a Major and 200 Men; but because it was too near Anderlecht the head Quarter,
by which, Parties could go into their Camp every Night from the Town, the
Marechal de Villeroy ordered a good Detachment of the French and Swiss Guards
to attack this Post about Midnight; which the Major defended very bravely for
near an Hour, but was at last forced to yield to the Enemies Power: The Fire of
this Attack alarmed our Camp, but without any farther Consequence. The Enemies
having this Post, placed Guards in all the Houses along the Causey to the very
Gate of Anderlecht, the Meadows on both sides of it lying ^under Water. The 2d.
in the Morning we found that the Enemies were working at their Trench, which
they had drawn almost parallel to the Walls of the Town, between Anderlecht and
Flanders Ports; which Work they had considerably advanced. The Magistrates of
Brussels had ordered all their best Cannon to be mounted upon the Bastions and
Half-moons on this side of the Town, of which some of them were 24 Pounders;
but they were so ill provided with Ammunition that they could be but ill
served: They had 24 Pounders, but they had no Ball for this Ca^^bre, their
biggest being 12 pound Ball; their Gunners had but little Experience, and we
supplied 'em with a Detachment of our own. However, the Cannon played the whole
Day from the Town, and did the Enemies some Mischief, and killed them several
Men, though not so many as they would have done, nor ruined so much their Works,
if they had had better Ball to good Cannon. Some fired from the Bastions and
Half-moons of Anderlecht Port against the Enemies Trenches, others aganst the
two Barns; these fired with red Ball to put them on ^ire; and others from the
Bastion, upon the Right of Halle Port, against the Houses the Enemies
possessed along the Causey, but with little or no effect. This Evening,
Major General Churchil mounted the Guard of the Town against the Enemies with
Brigadier C^llier. The King returned from Waterloo this Day to the Camp before
the Castle of Namur; and the next, the Elector of Bavaria came from thence to
visit the Elect'ress, and also to assist the People of the Town as much as lay
in his Power, with his Presence, with his Authority, and with his Counsel: And
indeed he was sensibly touched with the Misfortunes and Barbarous Usage of this
poor Town, and exposed himself among the thickest of the Bombs to encourage the
People, and to comfort them in their Losses, and to keep order as much as was
possible in so much Confusion and Misery. The 3d. in the Morning, the Enemies
had finished their Trench and Battteries; they had made two Batteries, of about
10 Pieces of Cannon each, upon the height of the Rising Ground behind their
Trench; they had a deep hollow way just within their Trench, which very much
added to the strength and safety of it; and they mounted it daily by the Left,
toward Flanders Port, under the cover of Hedges, and rows of Trees. Between
Twelve and One of the Clock, the Marechal de Villeroy sent the following LETTER
to the Prince of Bergues, Governor of the Town, by a Trumpet dated from the
Camp at Anderlecht the 13th. of August, New Style, about Noon.

THE King being full of Goodness toward his Subjects, and Care to contribute
to their Defense, seeing the P. of O. sends his Fleet upon the Coasts of
France, to bombard his Seaport Towns, and endeavor to ruin them, without
getting any other Advantage by it, has thought that he could not put a stop to
such Disorders, but by using Reprisals; which is the Reason that his Majesty
has sent me an Order to come and bombard Brussels, and at the same time to
declare, that it is with Reluctance that the King has put himself upon it; and
that as soon as he shall be assured, that the Seaports of France shall be no
more Bombarded, the King likewise will not bombard any Places belonging to the
Princes against whom he is at War, reserving nevertheless the liberty on both
sides, to do it in such Places as shall be besieged. His Majesty has resolved
upon the Bombarding of Brussels with so much the more Pain, that the Elect'ress
of Bavaria is there: If you will let me know in what part of the Town she is,
the King has commanded me to forbid to fire there. I shall stay for your Answer
till Five of the Clock in the Evening; after that, I shall obey the Orders the
King has given me without delay.


The Prince of Bergu^s having received this Letter, communicated it to the
Elector, and immediately after sent the following ANSWER, dated at Brussels the
13th. of August, New Style, 1695.

SIR,
THE Declaration you have sent me of the Orders you have from the King your
Master, to Bombard the Town of Brussels, and the Reason which his said Majesty
does allege, upon which you demand an Answer, it cannot be given by his
Electoral Highness, who is just now arrived, since it regards the King of
Great Britain, who is before the Castle of Namur; but his Electoral Highness
will acquaint him with it, to have an Answer in 24 Hours, if you agree to it.
As for the Consisideration his most Christian Majesty has for the Elect'ress,
she is ^^t the King's Palace.


A Manifesto of the same Nature was published in the Paris-Gazette only with
this difference. That it magnifies more the French King's Reluctance to such
Undertakings, and his Abhorrence of such Executions, as if he knew nothing of
the Matter before, till the Inhumane Allies taught it him at Dieppe,
Havre-de-Grace, St. Malo's Granville, and Calais. Besides, That the Allies had
hitherto made it their principal Glory to bombard Places, which had no other
share in the War, but their Sighs, Wishes, and Prayers to see an end of it.
Alas! poor People! they have had no other share in the War, but their Wishes
for Peace, they have not done the least Prejudice to the English and Dutch
Commerce, and Navigation; their Privateers have not infested our Coasts, and
enriched themselves by the Spoils of our best Merchant-Ships. No, these poor
innocent harmless People have had no share in the Mischiefs of this War, they
have remained quiet at home praying for Peace. The Gentleman adds, That it has
been in the King's Power to bombard the Towns belonging to the Allies, but that
he had hitherto avoided it, expecting that the Allies themselves would put a
stop to such Proceedings, but now that he was forced to it by way of Reprisal;
witness Liege; it is true that he could have bombarded Ghendt and Bruges this
Campaign, but the bombarding of Brussels would make more noise of the
invincible Monarch's Power; and then the Castle of Namur was pressed, and the
French were resolved to attempt the Relief of it, so that we need not thank the
French King's Goodness if Ghendt and Bruges escaped. At last the Manifesto
concludes with magnifying the Greatness of the Action, that it was done in the
Face of Prince Vaudemont's Army, who did not dare to prevent the Bombarding of
this Place, by hazarding of a Battle; whereas Villeroy's Army only looked for
an occasion of fighting. And here he tells a Truth which he all along seemed to
conceal: Before, the Bombarding of Brussels was for a Reprisal to return the
Mischiefs upon this Town, which the English and Dutch did to the Seaports of
France; but now at last it is to bring the Allies to a Battle, that they
attempt the bombarding of Brussels: They thought the Allies would have hazarded
any thing rather than suffer the burning of this Town; but they have been
mistaken, and Namur taken; their coming before Brussels has not relieved it as
they expected.

As for Villeroy's Letter, it is more a Wonder that such Reasons should be
alleged for the bombarding of it, than that the French King should bombard it
at all: For the ways of the French are so well known, that without pretending
to allege any thing to justify their Proceeding, I dare say no body wou^d
have been surpised at it: But to pretend to bombard Brussels with Pain and
Reluctance, as if they were forced to it by way of Reprisal* and as if his Most
Christian Majstey abhorred such Proceedings, is such incoherent Stuff, that the
whole World knows the contrary. If a Man red this Letter that knew nothing of
the Actions of the foregoing Years, he would believe the French to be the most
merciful People in the World, and that they did not know what Bombarding was,
till we had taught it them. Whereas this barbarous Treatment of Towns is wholly
due to them, and it is they themselves that have first practiced it in the
World: They began first with Argiers; and it is 12 Years since they began to
treat Christians in the same manner as they had chastis'd this Nest of
miscreant Pirates. Genoua, Audenarde* and Luxembourg, above all Places, should
not read the Marechal de Villeroy's Letter. But in this War the French have
more openly practiced their incendiary Trade; they have not only bombarded
Liege, the last Campaign was Four Years, but at the beginning of this War, they
have more cruelly and barbarously destroyed Towns that were in their own
Possession, and that relied upon the public Faith of their own Capitulations:
Some Reason may be alleged to justify the bombarding of an Enemy's Town. We
have bombarded their Sea Ports, because they do us all the Mischief they can:
But what Reason can be given for the burning of so many Towns in the
Palatinate, that had delivered themselves up to the Dauphin's Army, as Worms,
Spire, Openheim, and Frankendal, Manheim, and afterward Heidelberg? In short,
if the Enemies published these Reasons to fling Dust in the Eyes of the Allies,
they have been mightily mistaken; and whereas they would have thrown the
original Cause of the bombarding of Brussels upon the King of England, to
animate the People of this Country against him, their Mine has sprung
backwards, and has rather served to increase their Hatred against the French.
They know that we have bombarded those Nests of Privateers that interrupt and
spoil our Trade to the utmost of their Power; but they expected better
Treatment to a Town that had never done the French the least harm, but had
rather in a manner a free Trade with them* so far the bombarding of Brussels
has done a great deal of Mischief to the French King's own Subjects, who had
vast Effects in this Town, and several have been ruined by it; but Mischief
must be done, to magnify an invincible Monarch's Power in 'spite of the Siege
of Namur, let it fall where it will. I have yet omitted a considerable
Reflection upon this Letter, and that is, That the Marechal de Villeroy would
have an Answer from the Town in Five Hours about a Proposal to make a Cessation
of Bombarding on both sides, which regarded not only the King but all the
Allies; and yet this Answer must be given in Five Hours, else he must execute
without delay the Orders of his Master, which makes his Letter a Jest, and
nothing else.

As Villeroy had promised to execute the Orders of his Master after Five of the
Clock, he was then as good as his Word. Between Five and Six the Enemies began
to throw their Bombs into the Town, firing them one by one, and their red
Balls, till about Ten of the Clock at Night. The Marquis de Mirmont
Major General had then the Guard toward the Enemy, with Brigadier Packmoer.
About this time of Night the Enemies began to play most furiously, with their
Mortars and red Balls by whole Batteries: The Fire was then in several Places
of the Town, and there they were sure to throw their Bombs, and fire their red
Balls to increase the Fire, and to hinder the Inhabitants from quenching of it:
They had 25 Mortars in two Batteries behind the two Barns, which (I reckon)
they fired three times an Hour round at least, and all together, so that one
could see 25 Bombs at once in the Air, which they immediately followed with
their Batteries of Cannon, charged with red Balls, which did so much the more
Execution, that the most wealthy part of the Town is all open on this side
lying upon the descent of a Hill toward the River: The Enemies continued this
Fire-work all Night. The next Day we fired upon them as much as we could from
our Batteries by the Gate of Anderlecht, still endeavoring to beat down the
Barns about their Ears which covered their Mortars The Chevalier de Montgon,
and Two Officers of the French King's Guards were killed with a Cannon Ball by
the Duke du Maine. The whole Day the Enemies fired with their Mortars and
Cannon as they had done the Night before; and by this time the Stadthuys and
Marketplace was all burnt down and several Streets about it. They neglected
the nearest part of the Town, toward the Gates of Anderlecht and Flanders, as
being the poorest: The upper or nobler part of the Town, about the Court, and
toward the Gate of Namur, they could not reach, but 'twas the Wealthy and
Trading Part they were resolved to destroy, which lay about the Heart of the
Town. In the Evening, Major General La Meloniere had the Guard with Brigadier
St. Paul. The Elector of Bavaria ordered besides, a Detachment of Ten Squadrons
of our Horse, encamped at Scarbeck, to guard all the Streets leading to the
Fire, to prevent Rogues and Thieves from going in, and to prevent all
Disorders; the Ten Squadrons were commanded by a Brigadier. A Detachment of
Foot was also ordered to go in, and help the Burghers to pull down the Houses,
and quench the Fre. At Night the Wind grew high and stormy, which very much
enraged the Fire, and made the Mischief of the Enemies Bombs and red Balls
greater than it would otherwise have been. Notwithstanding the Care that was
taken to prevent Plundering in the Confusion of the Fire, several Soldiers made
a shift to get within the Guards, and plundered the Houses whilst they were
burning: The Elector of Bavaria caused one to be hanged upon the spot. Several
Thieves of the Town took (no doubt) this convenient occasion to make Booty; for
the Inhabitants thought that the Enemies Bombs could not reach beyond the
Marketplace, which made them crow'd all their Wealth in the Houses beyond it,
where they thought them secure; but 'twas in these very Places that the
thickest of the Enemies Bombs fell, which made the Inhabitants Loss so much the
greater. The 5th. about Nine of the Clock in the Morning, the Mortars ceased,
and about Noon the Cannon, having fired from Saturday. Six of the Clock in the
Evening to this time, and always (except the first three or four Hours) by
whole Batteries, which made the most terrible Bombarding that (I believe) ever
has been known, and rendered the Town a most piteous and dismal Spectacle. They
fired their Mortars, being 25 in number, 39 hours full; which being (as I
computed it) fired three times an hour at least, amounts to 2925 Bombs thrown
into the Place. The fire of the Cannon lasted from the same time Saturday Night
till Monday Noon, in all 42 hours, which at three times an hour amounts to 2268
red Balls. This Computation of the Bombs and Red Balls, is (I dare say) much
within compass. And indeed, the Damage done to the Town has too much answered
the Enemies terrible Preparations; all the Heart of the Town (the Wealthy and
Trading Part of it) being burnt down to the very Ground: and as the Figure of
the Town is Oval, so are the Ruins caused by the Enemy, rekoning your cross
Diameters of the Circle, the one from the Stein Port to the Fish-Market, and
the other from half way up the Berg-street, and near the Wood-Market, over the
Marketplace, and so toward the Rampart between Halle Port and that of
Anderlecht; all this is in a manner burnt down to the Ground, with a great many
rich Churches, and fine Cloisters involved in the Ruins. The last Church they
burnt, which was that without Steine Port, they seemed to do it on purpose on
the Monday Morning, firing all their Red Balls upon it; and this was the
wealthiest Parish Church in Brussels, being enriched within with very costly
Ornaments, such as Altars, (which were the finest and the most stately in the
Town) Pictures, and Images, and abundance of Marble and Porphyry to adorn and
set out the Altars. It is no wonder that several Churches should suffer in the
thick of such a Conflagration, and so this cannot be taxed of particular
disrespect to these Holy Places: But that this Church should be particularly
singl'd out, as it was in the Monday Morning, cannot but be thought on with
horror, by Persons who believe that their Savior dwells there Bodily: And yet
this has been done by those very Persons who pretend to be the only Asserters
and Maintainers of this Catholic Cause.

A little before the Enemies Mortars had done, we at last fired with our Red
Balls one of the Barns, behind which the Enemies had made their Bomb-Batteries;
and it had been well for the Town if they had pulled them down at first, as
soon as they heard of the Enemies approach; they had then wanted this
Convenience of bringing their Mortars under cover so close to the Town. After
the Enemies had done with their Mortars and Cannon, they began this Afternoon
to draw them off their Batteries; and because 'twas expected the Army would
have marched back toward Halle, the General beat in our Camp by Brussels, to
be ready to march of our side: However the French did not stir; which made some
People believe they designed to exchange their Batteries, and bring them
toward the Lacker Port, and the Canal, to burn the King's Magazines of Hay,
which were of the other side, and see how far their Bombs would reach in the
Town this way. But I suppose their Bombs were spent, and the King's Magazines,
which were very great, were saved. The farthest Bomb the Enemies shot from
before Anderlecht Port, reached just below Prince Vaudemont's House, belonging
to the King, and just by the Court; it broke in the fall before it came to the
Ground, and a piece of the Shell killed an English Woman in the Street: She was
dressed like a Gentlewoman, and had a considerable quantity of Gold and Silver
in her Pocket; but I have never heard who she was. The 6th. the Enemies having
drawn off the Day and Night before all their Cannon and Mortars, (though not
without Loss, for the Cannon from the Town still fired upon them the Afternoon
before, during their Work) they sent them back again to Mons before with a
strong Detachment, and their Army was ready to follow them. The 7th. the
Marechal de Villeroy withdrew his Army from before Brussels, and marched back
and encamped between Halle, and Enghien. The same Day, the Two Battalions that
had been detached from my Lord of Athlone's Army at Brain Alleu to Brussels,
under Major General Heukelem, marched back through the Bois de Sogne, and
rejoined my Lord of Athlone, who had now changed his Camp, with his Right
before Brain Alleu, and his Left toward Bois-Seigneur-Isaac, to be nearer to
defend the Passage from Halle to Namur at Brain le Chasteau. This Night the
Artillery marched from Prince Vaudemont's Army, and the Baggage, toward Genap;
and the next Day, Prince Vaudemont followed with his Army, marching upon one
Line through the Bois de Sogne: My Lord of Athlone likewise marched from his
Camp at Brain Alleu, and the Cavalry from Scarbeck, commanded by Monsieur
D'Auverquerque, (which marched through Brussels, and the Bois de Sogne;) and so
both Armies joined in one Line of Battle, encamping with the Left at Genap, and
the Right at Waterlo, with the Causey of Brussels before us: Prince Vaudemont
had his Quarter at a House called the King's House upon it. And this is the
first time since the Siege of Namur, that we had an Army to oppose the Marechal
de Villeroy, which consisted of 182 Squadrons and 70 Battalions, including that
of Buchan, which had not yet joined us from Malines, where he had been sent to
Garrison during the Bombarding of Brussels: And the Elector of Bavaria went
back this Day from Brussels to the Siege of Nam^r.

Villeroy was now encamped between Enghien and Steinkirk, epecting the Rhine
Detachment, the Remainder of the King's House, and some Battalions from the
Coast, to march to the Relief of Namur, which they made sure of, and so to give
(as they boasted) Peace to Christendom. The Rhine Detachment was already
arrived at Rocroy the 7th. having marched through Lorrain, Luxembourg, and
Champagne, being now upon the Frontiers of Hainault, were Monsieur de Pracontal
Major General was sent to march them up to Villeroy's Army. This Detachment
consisted of 12 Battalions, 3 of Champagne, 2 of Anjou, 2 of la Chatre, 1 of
Thiange, 2 of Lorrain, and 2 of Blaisois; and 4 Regiments of Dragoons of 3
Squadrons each, in all 12 Squadrons^, being the Regiments of Gobert, Estrade,
Br^toncelle, and Sailly. At the same time that the Enemies had made this
Detachment from the Rhine, the Prince Lewis of Baden made another for Flanders
to counterballance it, the King having writ to the Prince before, that if the
French King ordered a Detachment from the Rhine to the Low Countries, he should
send another to reinforce our Army, and make head against all the united Forces
of Villeroy. This Detachment consisted of 10 Battalions, of the Troops of
Lunenburg and Hesse, and 22 Squadrons commanded by Count de Lip,
Velt-Marechal of the Landtgrave of Hesse's Forces; but the Landtgrave himself,
who is extremely affection'd to the common Cause of the Allies, but more
particularly to his Majesty's, and the Protestant Interest, came himself to
command in Person: He arrived at the Camp before Namur the 5th. of August, with
the Prince his Son; his Army followed him, having marched from Prince Lewis's
Army upon the Neckre to the Rhine at Coblentz, from whence the Foot came down
by Water to Cologne, and by this time they were got between Aix la Chapelle and
Liege.

The 8th. Prince Vaudemont decamped from between Genap and Waterlo, and marched
upon the Left to Sombref, passing the Dyle at old Genap, upon four Bridges laid
over this little River, two for each Column, and so on between the Abbey of
Villers Perwijs upon our Left Flank, and Melle upon our Right, the Artillery
and Baggage by the Causey. We came late to the Camp, by reason of some Desiles
which interrupted our March between these two Places. Prince Vaudemont had his
Quarter at Sombref, with our Left here, and our Right at Marbais, and the
Plains of Fleury before us* The 10th. we marched still on upon the Left, to
take up the strong Camp of Masy. Buchan's Regiment joined us upon this March
from Malines. We encamped at Masy, our two Lines in the Figure of a Semicircle;
the Unequal part of it at Masy, our Right before Temploux and the Cense or Farm
de Boquet, and our Left between Spy and Melmont toward the Sambre. Prince
Vaudemont took his Quarter at Golsines, an old ruinous Castle, formerly the
Dewlling Place of the Counts of Namur. Fitspatrick's, and Selwyn's Brigades,
encamped before the Prince's Quarter, at Bessire, to take up a high Ground
which forms a Tongue of Land toward Masy, something steep toward Sombref, and
covered with thick Woods. Some Horse and Dragoons encamped upon the left of
these two Brigades, close to the Village of Bessire, and two Regiments of
Dragoons at the Prince's Quarter. And because this is the Camp that must decide
the Fate of the Castle of Namur, I shall give a short Description of it. There
is a little River that has its spring about Gemblours, and falls into the
Sambre, which contributes very much to the strength of this Camp; for in its
short course to the Sambre, it runs along a narrow Valley, with Hills upon each
side, which makes the Passage of it difficult, and so much the more that the
side of the Hills toward the River is covered with thick Trees. At Masy the
Ground is more level on both sides of the River, which makes this a
considerable Passage, being the only one from Gemblours to the Sambre that is
convenient for an Army. Beyond Masy, as this River comes near the Sambre by
Melmont, it runs at the Foot of a steep Hill covered with thick Trees, which
made our Left between Spy and Melmont inaccessible to the Enemy. Our Right was
covered from Bessire and Golsines, the Prince's Quarter, (besides the little
River now mentioned) with several thick Woods, as far as Gemblours; and there
was no passage from the Enemy into this Camp, but by Gemblours, Conroy le
Chasteau, and so to the narrow Plain before our Camp taken up by the Brigades
of Fitspatrick and Selwyn, which Plain goes from Gemblours to Bessire, with a
Wood upon the Right, and another upon the Left: This we took care to fortify
with a Retrenchment from the River of Masy (which the Maps call Orne) to Prince
Vaudemont's Quarter, cross this narrow Plain, to defend the Passage from
Gemblours to our Camp. Masy (which is a Gentlemen's House just upon the little
River now mentioned, where it commands a Stone Bridge over it) is two Leagues
distant from Namur, and is the Passage from thence to Brussels, Mons, and
Charleroy. And being now so near this Place, it brings me to speak of our
Progress in the Siege of the Castle, Cohorne, and other Outworks between the
Sambre and the Meuse, which render it one of the strongest Fortresses of
Christendom.

We took Possession of the Town (as we have said before) the 27th. of July,
after the French had all withdrawn into the Castle for the defense of it; We
quitted likewise the Line of Circumvallation before the Town, which of it self,
with the Sambre and the Posts we had upon it at the Abbey of Salsen, and the
Balance, did sufficiently invest the Castle. Thirty Battalions, English and
Dutch, were sent the same Day out of this Line of Circumvallation to join
Prince Vaudemont; and the day after, (28th.) the King left his Quarter at
Maison rouge, to get the other side of the Sambre at the Abbey of Malogne, which
hitherto had been the Elector's Quarter; he left it to the King, and took his
Quarter, during the Siege of the Castle, at a Cloister of the Carmelites near
the Meuse: The rest of the Troops before the Town passed the Sambre (whereof
Six were English) to be employed in the Siege. So that we had now before the
Castle, to carry on the Siege, 42 Battalions. The English Regiments of Seymour,
Columbine, Stanley, and Lauder, encamped at the Maison Blanch, the Duke of
Holstein Ploen's Quarter, opposite to Flavennes. The next Day, Colonel
Seymour's Regiment mounted in the Line we had made before the Casotte when we
gained the Stone Line made by the French: Captain Congrave of the same Regiment
was killed. And this Day the manner of mounting the Trenches before the Castle
was agreed upon: That it should be mounted by Detachments of 100 Men out of
each Regiment, making the Number of 4000 Men, (besides 700 Men to work)
commanded by a Major General, a Brigadier, Four Colonels, Four
Lieutenant-Collonels, Four Majors, and one Major of Brigade, 37 Captains, 40
Lieutenants, and 35 Ensigns: The two Battalions of Guards gave none. The 30th.
according to this Regulation, Count de Rivera, Major General of the Bavarians,
mounted the Guard of the Lines, and my Lord Cuts Brigadier, with the Colonels
Lauder, Stochausen, Marquet, and Count d'Enhoff Colonel of the Brandenbourghs,
who had the Misfortune to be wounded. The 31st. the King went from hence to my
Lord of Athlone's Camp at Waterlo. At Night Major General Arnheim, of the
Brandenbourgh Troops, mounted the Guard, with the Prince of Holstein Norbourg
Brigadier, and Colonels Stanley, Sparre, Capol and Bekel, the last of
Brandenbourghs. The Enemies still fired from the Casotte and covered way upon
our Line, but hitherto with little damage. The 1st. of August, Major General
Lindeboom commanded, with Brigadier Dedem, and Colonel Seymour commanded the
English Detachment. We had by this time finished several Batteries to fire
against the Castle and Cohorne, being ready for the Cannon and Mortars. The 2d.
some of the said Batteries began first to play, 20 Pieces of Cannon disposed in
Three Batteries at the Fauxbourg St. Croix upon the Sambre, just without
Brussels Port, which fired against the side of the Cohorne opposite to the
Sambre. We had another Battery of the Brandenbourgh side of the Meuse to fire
against the Lower Town along this River; besides several Mortars to incommode
the Enemies in the Lower Town, and to hinder their coming to the Waterside. We
had another of (...) Haubitz and Four Mortars upon the Left of our Line, before
the Casotte toward the Sambre: But all this did no great damage to the
Enemies. Major General Cohorne, who had the Management of the Siege of the
Castle, was preparing another Entertainment for them from the Town. For though
Count Guiscard pretended to deliver up the Town for its Safety and
Preservation, not that they were forced to it by the Necessity of their own
Affairs, yet it was forgot in the Capitulation; wherein there was no Provision
made to prevent Hostilities between the Town and Castle, as it had been agreed
upon in the Capitulation made with the French when they took it. At Night
Major General Sweryn commanded, with my Lord Cuts Brigadier, and Colonel
Columbine of the English. We opened the Trench this Night before the Cohorne in
two places, to make two parallel Lines for our Approaches between the Cohorne
and the Sambre. The first upon the Right was opened at the Left of our Line
against the Casotte, producing it down the Hill toward the Sambre: The second
upon the Left, where the English mounted, was opened in the Descent of the Hill
nearer to the Sambre. A Brandenbourgh Major was wounded this Night. The 2d. in
the Evening, His Majesty came back to the Siege from the Camp at Waterlo by
Brussels; and the next Morning his Electoral Highness went to see the
Elect'ress that had miscarried upon the Approach of the French before Brussels,
and to be present to give his Orders during the bombarding. The same Day,
Major General la Cave of the Brandenbourgh Forces relieved the Trenches, with
the Prince of Holstein Norbourg Brigadier, and Colonel Lauder. I shall omit the
Names of the other Colonels, being Forraigners, and unknown in England. We
continued to advance our Trench upon the Right down the Hill, and the other
upon the Left nearer to the Sambre, between which we began to work at a Line of
Communication. The Besieged had Three Fauconets or Drakes within the
Pallisado's of the Casotte to fire upon our Workmen, from whence they would
sometimes detach small Pellotoons of Men to incommode our Work. The 4th.
Major General Rivera, and Brigadier Dedem, mounted the Trenches: Colonel
Stanley commanded the English. We advanced our Trenches near 250 Paces, which
Work we traversed with Fascines to hinder it from being flocked by the Enemy.
On the other side of the Meuse, opposite to the foot or first precinct of the
Terra nova, at the bottom of the Hill, we opened a Battery of 17 Pieces of
Cannon to fire against the Lower Town, and the Horn-work of Bale. We
re-inforc'd at the same time our Battery before Brussels Port at Sancte Croix
against the side of the Cohorne. Upon the Right of all toward the Meuse, where
our great Line against the Works of the Castle finishes, we placed three 12
Pounders in the room of three others of a lesser Calibre, to fire in the Lower
Town which lay open to our view from this Place. Lieutenant Wallis of the Royal
Regiment, one of our Engineers that served in the Siege of the Castle, was
wounded this Night. The other English Engineers were, Major Blood, then of
Colonel Seymour's Regiment, now Lieutenant Colonel to Sir Matthew Bridges his
Regiment, known before for his Services of this kind in Ireland; Captain Burgh,
of the Royal Regiment, Son to the late Lord-Bishop of Ardagh; and Lieutenant
Richards, of Brigadier Selwyn's Regiment, Brother to Colonel Richards; who all
gave very good Proofs of their Abilities in this kind.

The 5th. we produced our Trenches 100 Paces, turning the Line to the Left
toward the Sambre, and the Point of the Cohorne, where we made an Angle
saillant, turning again a little to the Right, which we advanced 100 Paces
more. About 60 Dragoons sallied out of the Cohorne, which at first put our
Workmen in some disorder; but they were immediately rallied by the Care of the
Officers. The Enemies placed this Day Three Fauconnets o^ Drakes upon the point
of the Cover'd-way of the Cohorne which looks toward the Sambre, to incommode
us from hence in our Lines. A Bomb fell this Day in the Casotte, which put fire
to some Grenades, not without some damage to the Enemies. Major General Arnheim
commanded the Trenches this Night, with the Prince of Anhalt Brigadier, of the
English Colonel Seymour. The 6th we advanced our Trench upon the Left 170
Paces, and that upon the Right considerably, to bring both between the side of
the Cohorne and the Sambre: But the Rain was very troublesome to us at this
time, which coming down in Torrents from the top of the Hill, filled our
Trenches with Water, which were made upon the side of it. The Enemy worked at
anouter Line before the Cover'd-way of the Ravelin of the Cohorne, upon the
Descent of the Hill* and indeed, from the taking of the Town, to this time,
they have still been making new Retrenchments down the Hill before the
Cover'd-way of the Cohorne. They placed Three Pieces of Cannon more in one of
these Trenches to fire upon our Works; for the Cannon of the Cohorne being
considerably high upon the Hill, could not bear down upon our Trenches, for
which reason they were obliged to make these Retrenchments lower without the
Cover'd-way. Major General Lindeboom had the Trenches this Night, with the Duke
of Holstein Norbourg Brigadier, and Colonel Columbine of the English. We began
at this time to work at several Batteries within the Town, some along the
Sambre, and others upon the Rampart between the Port de Fer and the Sambre,
which were to fire over the Town upon the Terra nova. Upon which the Marechal
de Boufflers threatened to lay the Town in Ashes, if we should offer to make
any Batteries from thence. But 'twas replied of our side, That above 500 Sick
and Wounded which they had still in our Hospitals, which could not be
transported to Dinant, (where we had sent above 1600 since the Town was taken)
should answer for it. This Answer, besides that they could only do Mischief to
the Town, (if we would sacrifice it) without hindering our Batteries, made them
civil, and never offered to fire in the Town, but where they saw us work to
attack them.

The 7th. we began to draw a Line of Communication from the upper Trench upon
the Right, to the lower upon the Left: We advanced the upper Trench with an
Angle saillant toward the side of the Cohorne; we continued to work at our new
Batteries in the Town, and re-inforc'd the old ones with several Pieces of
Cannon and Mortars. Major General Swerin relieved the Trenches this Night, with
Brigadier Dedem, and Colonel Lauder of the English. The 8th. the Elector of
Bavaria returned to the Siege from Brussels. Major General la Cave commanded
the Trenches and Brigadier Horn of Brandenbourgh, with Colonel Stanley of the
English. The Rain hindered us this Night from advancing our Works; so that we
only applied our selves to put what we had done in a better defense. Our Works
were now brought near the Enemy, which made them fire very briskly upon us,
both with Cannon and Small-shot. The 9th. Major General Rivera, and my Lord
Cuts Brigadier, mounted the Trenches, and Colonel Seymour of the English. In
the Evening, a French Officer was taken swimming down the Meuse, endeavoring
to get into the Place: He came from Dinant, and had swam a great way to come
undiscovered in the beginning of the Night. He denied that he had any
particular Commission, but that his Regiment was in the Place, and that he
endeavored to repair to his Post. About Midnight, the Enemies made a Sally of
200 Dragoons and 600 Grenadiers: Major General Rivera commanded the Right
Trench, and my Lord Cuts the Left. Major General Rivera had placed a Captain
and 60 Men without the Trench upon the Right, to lie down upon their Arms, and
to have Centries to observe the Enemy to prevent surprisal. My Lord Cuts had
done the same upon the Left. The Centries of the Right gave notice, That they
saw a Body of Men coming down the Hill from the Casotte. Upon which we stood
all to our Arms in our Trenches, and made some Detachments without to oppose to
the Enemies. The French Grenadiers came down with a mighty Fury, making a great
Noise as soon as they came near our Works, to strike a Terror amongst our Men;
but we were ready for them, which they found by the briskness of our fire: The
Van of the Enemies would then have retreated the same way they came, but being
hindered by those that sustained them, they were obliged to turn to the Right,
where they fell into the fire of the Out guards we had placed to cover our
Trenches. The Dragoons sallied (much about the same time with the Grenadiers)
out of the Castle, coming between the Cohorne and the Sambre, where they fell
among the Out-guards placed by my Lord Cuts to cover our Left Trench. We had
then, as we had every Night, a Body of Dragoons commanded by a Major, between
our Left Trench and the Abbey of Salsen; this Night they were Spaniards,
commanded by Major Zuniga: My Lord Cuts brought him up immediately with his
Body to succor our Men, where he fell upon the Enemies Dragoons, and pursued
them to the very Palisiades of the Castle, making a considerable Slaughter
among them. The Major had his Horse shot under him in this Action; for which,
and for his considerable Service at this time, his Majesty sent him a Horse out
of his Stable the next Day, with rich Furniture, and a very fine Sword. We had
in this Occasion but Four- English, One Brandenbourgh, and Three Dutch
Soldiers, kill^d. One English Ensign, and Seven Soldiers; One Bavarian
Lieutenant, and one Soldier; one Major, one Lieutenant, and 17 Brandenburgh
Soldiers; one Dutch Ensign, and 11 Soldiers, wounded. We continued this Day
(9th.) to work with great vigor upon our new Batteries in the Town, from
whence we expected the Success of this Siege; for hitherto we had done no
damage to the Enemies Works, and had only advanced our Trenches. The 10th. the
Enemies beat a Parley to reclaim some considerable Officers they had lost the
Night before, if Prisoners, or to have leave to look for their Bodies among the
Dead. At Night Major General Arnheim commanded in the Trenches, with the Prince
of Anhalt Brigadier, and Colonel Columbine of our Forces. We perfected this
Night our Communication between the upper and the lower Trench. Prince
Vaudemont came and encamped at Masy this Evening, as has been said before.

The 11th. early in the Morning we opened all the Batteries we had made in the
Town, which made a most terrible noise, and no doubt caused a great Disorder
and Consternation among the Enemies; for the Bombs played incessantly in all
their Works, and from all sides, so that the Besieged could hardly stir,
without running the hazard of being wounded, or knocked on the Head with our
Bombs that were still showring down among them. Our Batteries were made along
the Sambre; the first at the Village of Saint Croix, where we had 20 Guns
disposed in Two Batteries: the next in the Sambre and Brussels's Bastions,
these fired against the side of the Cohorne toward the River to make a breach.
Some from the Brussel's Bastion fired against the Courtin of the Terra nova,
which comes down the Hill toward the Sambre. Several other Batteries were made
upon the very Bank of the Sambre within the Town, upon the Wall they have along
this River, which fired very furiously upon the ^fore-said Courtin of the Terra
nova. We had some other Batteries of a lesser Calibre (the others being
generally 24 Pounders) disposed upon the Walk, or Chemin des rondes of the
Courtin, between the Port de Fer and that of Brussels; these fired in reverse
over the Town, and the River, upon the ascent of the Terra nova, and old
Castle, which over-looks the Town, and lay open to our view, which very much
incommoded the Enemies; for they could hardly stir in the Castle without being
seen, and all the Houses in it lay exposed to this Cannon. Our Mortars were
disposed up and down in several Courts and Gardens along the Sambre, where the
House^ or Walls served for Blinds to cover them; some in the Governor's
Garden, and in the Court of his House, which is a very stately Fabric, built
by the Prince of Barbar^^n; others in the Jesuits-Garden, and in that of the
Ursuline Nuns; others in the Garden of the Refuge, and the Court of the
Arsenal; and most of the Lanes, which go to the Sambre, had Mortars or Haubitz
(these are little Mortars which have under a Foot diameter) in them, covered
with Blinds. The Batteries from the Brandenburgh Quarter, of the other side of
the M^use, played with equal Fury against the Lower Town, and Horn-work of
Bul^, to ruin the Work, and to incommode the Enemies, who had their Stables
and Stores in the Lower Town along the Meuse, and a great many, both Officers
and Soldiers, were quartered here, being more under cover. 'Twas computed that
we had now 136 Pieces of Cannon disposed in several Batteries against the
Castle and Outworks, and 50 Mortars and Haubitz; which from this Day, till the
Surrender of the Castle, played without Intermission: And this being the first
Day that we opened our Batteries to make a breach, we may reckon that we have
carried the Castle, with all its prodigious Outworks, in 11 Days, having
capitulated the 22d. The Besieged had 9 Pieces of Cannon, and 3 Mortars, with
which they endeavored to incommode us in our Batteries in the Town, but they
were soon silenced. Monsieur de Rondeau, formerly Governor of the Castle for
the King of Spain, and 82 Years old, was killed this Day by one of these
Cannons. Prince Vaudemont having encamped with his Army at Masy the overnight,
the King went this day to his Camp, who with the Elector had hitherto gone
twice a day in the Trenches, to visit our Approaches, and to give their
Directions. At Night, Major General Lindeboom, and the Duke of Holstein-Norburg
Brigadier, mounted the Trenches, with Colonel Buchan of our National Forces;
the Regiments of Seymour, Columbine, Stanley, and Lauder, having been relieved
this Day by the Regiments of Courthop, Mackay, Friderick Hamilton, and Buchan,
from the Camp at Masy.

The 12th. our Batteries continued with the same Fury they had began Yesterday,
and we found that they played to the purpose; for they had already tore up the
side of the Cohorne, and the descending Courtin of the Terra nova, where they
had made breach in so little time. Major General Swerin, and Brigadier Dedem,
mounted the Trenches with Colonel Mackay of our Forces. The 13th. Major General
la Cave, and Brigadier Horn, with Colonel Friderick Hamilton commanding our
Forces, mounted the Trenches. The 14th. Major General Rivera, my Lord Cuts
Brigadier, and Colonel Courthop. The 15th. Major General Arnheim, the Prince of
Anhalt Brigadier, and Colonel Buchan. These Four Days, our Artillery and
Mortars continued as before, and widen'd very much the Breaches, and struck
such a Terror among the Enemies, that they kept close, hardly daring to show
their Heads over their Works, for which reason we lost but very few Men in our
Trenches, having had but 2 killed and 9 wounded the 4 last Days; in which we
advanced our Trenches considerably, having brought them now under the side of
the Cohorne, between it and the Sambre. The Enemies were Masters of a Half Moon
upon the side of the Sambre, at the foot of the bottom which runs down between
the Terra nova and the Cohorne: This was made for an Out-work to the Town
formerly, before the Cohorne was built, for which Reason it faces outward
toward the Hill of the Cohorne. Our Trenches being now so far advanced between
the Cohorne and the Sambre, it was thought fit to dislodge the Enemies from it.
This Place was so much under the command of our Batteries, along the Sambre, on
the Town side, that the Enemies did not dare to show themselves in it. We put a
Detachment in a Bilander at the Abbey of Salsen, which came down the River, to
attack this Post; but upon the approach of our Men, the Enemies made little
Resistance, and delivered it up; a Lieutenant, and 17 Men, were made Prisoners
in it, having lived in the Vault several Days without appearing. The
Brandenbourghers at the same time made another Attack to dislodge the Enemies
out of some Houses they had along the Meuse, just without the Gate of the
Horn-work of Bule, upon the way that goes to Givet, from whence they beat the
Enemy with little or no loss, and made some Prisoners. The Marechal de Villeroy
being now expected for the Relief of the Castle of Namur, Orders were given to
fortify the Avenues of the King's Quarter at Malogne, and the Hills that
command it: For though there was no probability that the Body of the Army could
march this Way to relieve the Place, being all close Woods between the Sambre
and the Meuse; yet this was necessary to prevent the surprisal of flying
Detachments, which having passed the Sambre, could have marched by the Abbey of
Floreff to this Place, which is in the way between Floreff and Namur.

Prince Vaudemont's Army being now so near Namur, (which we have brought to the
Camp at Masy) we shall leave the Account of the Siege for a while, to speak of
the Proceedings of the Prince's Army, and of that of the Enemies commanded by
the Marechal de Villeroy. Prince Vaudemont came to the Camp of Masy the 10th.
his Army consisting then of 70 Battalions, and 182 Squadrons. The 11th. the
second Battalion of Scots Guards, and the second of Dutch Guards, which
hitherto had not been concerned in this Siege, were commanded to the King's
Quarter at Malogne, to relieve the Battalion of the Coldstream Regiment of
Guards, and the first Battalion of Dutch; and the Regiments of Cou^thop,
Mackay, Friderick Hamilton, and Buchan, relieved those of Seymour, Columbine,
Stanley, and Lauder, employed in the Siege; so that we still kept the same
Complement of ^0 Battalions. The 12th. in the Morning, all the heavy Baggage of
the Army was commanded away, to draw up at the Bridge of Communication upon the
Meuse below Namur: We expected now the Enemies; and as we were then to be still
in Motion to observe them, the heavy Baggage was sent away, to make the Marches
of the Army easier, less difficult, and quicker; and besides Forage was not
plenty in our Camp after so long a Siege, and such Armies, which the Horses
belonging to the Baggage could find more conveniently here, having the liberty
of both sides of the Meuse. The same Morning, Count Tilly Lieutenant General,
was detached with Pyper's, and another Brigade of Horse, by Louvain to
Brussels, where the Marquis de Bedmar, Mestre de Camp General of the Spanish
Infantry, commanded a small body of Spanish Horse; and both these Generals were
joined and re-inforc'd at Brussels by Lieutenant General Bellasis, who upon
Villeroy's Motion toward Namur, marched hither with the 10 Battalions under
his Command, to cover either Louvain or Brussels, which (our Army being now at
Masy) were both exposed to the French Army. The same Day (12th.) the Regiments
of Sparre and Knoring, and that of the Marquet, joined us at the Camp of Masy,
having been detached from the Siege. I cannot tell whether others were sent
from the Camp to the Siege in their Place. The 15th. being informed that the
Marechal de Villeroy, (who after the bombarding of Brussels had retired to
Soigny) had passed the Senne, above Nivelle, to join the Rhine Detachment, and
the other Troops he expected from the Coast, and the Remainder of the Household
of France, which was all commanded away from Versailles, and that he was
encamped with his Right at Seneffe, and his Left toward Arkiennes and Feluy,
in order to march to the Plains of Fleury: For this Reason our Right Wing of
Horse which encamped toward Temploux, turning back from the Line, was ordered
to march up, and rectify our Camp, and possess the Woods and Avenues between
Gemblours and our Camp; Collier's Brigade was detached at the same time to
interline the Right Wing of Horse. The Hesse and Lunenburgh Troops that had
been detached from the Rhine by Prince Lewis of Baden, commanded by the Count
de Lip, (which we have left in their way in the Neighborhood of Aix la
Chapelle, and had passed the Meuse some Days before between Liege and
Maestricht, and had halted to refresh themselves between Huy and Namur) came up
this Day, and encamped upon our Right at St. Denis, a Village situated in the
Skirts of a Wood, near the Springs of the Mehaigne. The Landtgrave of Hesse,
who had come before to wait upon the King in this Siege, put himself at the
Head of his Troops here, which were in a very fine and serviceable Condition,
both Foot, Horse, and Dragoons, but especially the Foot, which made
extraordinary good Battalions, very well Clothed, and very good Men. At their
coming, they worked at a very good Retrenchment to cover the narrow Plain,
between the Wood of St. Denis upon the Right, and that of Meux upon their Left.

Villeroy, as we have said just now, encamped the 15th. between Seneff and
Arkiennes, upon the River Senne, with Nivelle before his Left: He was joined
here by the Rhine Detachment, which we have brought in their way as far as
Rocroy, where they arrived the 7th. and being headed by the Marechal de Camp
Pracontal, who was sent from Villeroy's Army to meet them, he marched them
toward the Sambre, which they passed at Maubeuge, and joined the Marechal de
Villeroy this Day: And now having all the Reinforcements he expected, and
having a prodigious Army, consisting of 119 Battalions and 235 Squadrons, 'twas
resolved to march the next Day to the Plains of Fleury, in order to attempt the
Relief of Namur. The French having such an Army, spoke of it as of a certain
thing, and began to maltreat strangely our Prisoner-Garrisons of Dixmuyde and
Deinse, to force them from our Service, as if our Army had been lost. 'Twas
given out, that the Marechal de Villeroy had express and positive Orders to
attack us, and the Devotions of the People were required to implore the divine
Blessing. And here I cannot forbear mentioning the Preface, the Dean and
Chapter of Paris put to their Mandate for the Prayers of 40 Hours, to be used
in that Diocese, (the Sea being now vacant) That as God punishes Princes, who
make War only to attack their Neighbors, and make themselves great; so he
blesses those who act only for the defense of their People, and to procure
Peace. Certainly People must be very much put to it for want of a Preface, who
made this the French King's Case: For it is a very plain Matter of Fact, that he
himself has been the Aggressor in this War, by attacking the Emperor, and the
States; and if other Princes have entered into an offensive and defensive
Alliance with them, it has been for their own necessary Safety and
Preservation, which had such a certain and visible dependence upon that of the
Empire, and States of the United Provinces. I do not know any Places where the
French King's Subjects have been attacked, but by our Sea-Bombardments; and in
this case he has taken more care to maintain his Conquests, than to defend his
People. If this Character is, or has been due to any Princes engaged in War, it
is certainly to our King, who was now engaged in the Siege of Namur, for no
other Interest but to establish the Liberties of Christendom, oppressed by the
ambitious Greatness of our Enemies, who were still incroaching upon their
Neighbors, and had lately ravished this important Place out of the King of
Spain's Hands. He does not aggrandize his Dominions by it, and has no other
Interest in it, but the glory of doing so much Good to the World in general,
and of establishing the Welfare and Security of his Subjects in particular, by
the Reduction of this strong Key of the Spanish and United Provinces. Thus much
for this Preface. I believe the French depended more upon the strength and
greatness of their Army, than upon any Hopes the Dean and Chapter's Preface
could give them.

The 16th. the Marechal de Villeroy left the Camp of Seneff and Nivelle: He
commanded all the heavy Baggage away to Mons, and marched with the whole Army
to the Plains of Fleury, where he encamped with his Right between St. Amand and
Fleury, and his Left toward Sombref; the head Quarter was at Marbais. At Night
he caused about 50 Pieces of Cannon to be drawn at the Head of his Camp upon
the Causey that goes to Namur, which were discharged round to give the Besieged
notice of his Arrival, who now made every Night some Signals from the top of
the Cavalier of the Terra nova, with lighted Torches, sometimes Four, and
Three, and Two, which we supposed to signify the time of the Resistance they
could make. The Besieged did not answer Villeroy's Signal, and (as 'twas told
after the Siege) did not hear it, the Wind being contrary, though 'twas a still
Night. The King, upon Villeroy's Approach with the French Army, left his
Quarter at Malogne, and the Siege of the Castle to the Elector of Bavaria, and
the Duke of Holstein Ploen, and took his Quarter that very Night at the Castle
of Bovesse, a Gentleman's House, in the Rear of our Right Wing of Horse; but
most of His Majesty's Domestics remained at the more convenient Quarter in the
Abbey of Malogne. The next Day the King was very early with Prince Vaudemont,
at his Quarter at Golsines, being then indisposed, which hindered him from
waiting upon the King at his own Quarter. Measures were then taken for the
Security of our Camp, by making Retrenchments where they were requisite. The
King brought with him from the Siege Velt-Marechal-General Fleming, and Count
d'Arco General of the Bavarians, to command our Right-Wing of Horse; and
Lumley's Brigade of English Horse was detached from the Left to the Right Wing,
which was most exposed to the Enemy, to reinforce it: They encamped at St.
Denis, between the Hesse Troops, and the Right of our Army, which we advanced
yet farther in the Front, and drew our Line closer to the Woods and the Avenues
between them. The same Day (17th.) the second Battalion of Dutch Guards, and
the second of Scots, which had relieved some Days before my Lord Cuts his
Battalion, and the first Battalion of Dutch Guards, were countermanded back to
the Camp, and 12 Battalions more of the Elector of Brandenbourgh's and States
Forces, besides more of the Horse employed in the Siege; so that 'twas computed
we had this Day 97 Battalions, and 237 Squadrons to oppose to the Marechal de
Villeroy, besides about 30 Battalions, which continued the Siege, and Six in
Garrison in the Town. This is the true state of our Forces in this great
Conjuncture: and at this time 500 Men is the most that we can rate a Battalion
at, one with another, and 110 each Squadron in either Armies. I leave the
Calculation to the Reader, and the difference of the two Armies will appear
upon it. This Day we began to work at our Retrenchments, to fortify the House
and Bridge of Masy; we made a Retrenchment at Bossire before Fits-patrick and
Selwyn's Brigades, which had before Prince Vaudemont's Quarter at Golsines in
their Rear, and Bossire upon their Left; but upon the approach of Villeroy,
they changed their Ground, and encamped with their Right at the Prince's
Quarter, and Left toward the little River which runs by Gemblours and Masy to
the Sambre, and Bossire in their Rear, their Line being perpendicular to the
Line of our Army: This Retrenchment defended the Plain which runs with a Wood
upon the Right, and another upon the Left toward Conroy and Gemblours. Farther
toward Conroy we cut down Trees to barricade the Highways, and placed there a
Captain and 60 Men, detached out of the two 'fore-said Brigades, with Orders to
maintain the Post as long as possibly they could, to give notice of the Enemies
Approach: These two Brigades were then under the Command of Major General
Ramsay. The same Day (17th.) Brigadier Fitspatrick was detached with 8
Battalions (3 whereof were Maitland, Tiffeny, and Ferguson, the rest Dutch and
Germans) to the Village of St. Denis, which lying upon the skirt of a Wood,
they fortified very strongly. The Hessians were more to the Right, where they
defended with a good Retrenchment the little Plain between St. Denis, and Meux,
situated on the skirts of another Wood more toward the Mehaigne. Velt-Marechal
Fleming, and Count d'Arco, with Lumley's Brigade, and the Brandenbourgh Horse,
and Bavarian Cuirassiers, were ordered more to the Right, between the Wood of
Meux, and the Village of Du, where they made another Retrenchment over the
Plain, from the Wood upon the Left, to Du upon the Right. The Mehaigne has
several little Springs, and some in this Place This was the Disposition of our
Affairs the 1^th. in the Army. As for the Enemies, they did not march this Day,
but continued in their Camp between Fleury and Sombref; they had made a
considerable March the Day before with such a vast Body, that they halted this
Day, to complete their Army, to Forage, and give out Bread to the Soldiers.
The 18th. they marched more upon their Left, toward Gemblours, to come nearer
to our Right, which was the most open part of our Camp, our Left toward the
Sambre being very strongly encamped, as we have described it above. They
encamped with their Right at Gemblours, and Left at Grandlez, the head Quarter
at Saunier: Upon which Motion of the Enemy, Orders were given in our Army not
to stir out of the Camp, and every Body to be ready at a Minute's warning,
which should be given by the firing of three Pieces of Cannon. The same Day
(18th.) 22 Grenadiers per Company out of his Majesty's Forces, were ordered to
be ready to march, and make an Assault upon the Breach we had made in the Terra
nova, jointly with the rest of the Besiegers, who were to attack the Breach of
the Cohorne, and other Outworks: But his Majesty expecting the Enemies should
attack us the next Day, thought it more convenient to deferr the Assault
longer, and in the mean while to widen and applanish the Breaches, with the
usual violence of our Cannon, these Grenadiers being more necessary in our Camp
at this time. The Marechal de Villeroy intended to attack us the next Day, the
King was informed of it, and the Army expected it; for which Reason all
Officers and Soldiers were ordered to lie in their Clothes with their Arms,
ready to turn out upon call. Prince Vaudemont, though very much indisposed, came
by Three of the Clock in the Morning in his Coach, and stood at the Head of the
English Guards, notwithstanding that he had kept his Bed Three or Four Days
before, and had then a Fever upon him; the whole Army turned out an Hour
before Day. We formed our Battalions and Squadrons in a readiness, and the King
came at the same time to see us in a posture of defense, and went in Prince
Vaudemont's Coach to conferr with him upon the present Conjuncture. The Weather
was very thick and foggy, so that we could hardly see 50 Yards before us, but
we had Out-guards all along beyond our Retrenchments, to prevent any surprise;
nevertheless we were very much concerned at the unseasonableness of the Fog,
though 'twas as inconvenient to the Enemy as to us. In the Morning, the Brigade
of Guards was commanded to the Right at St. Denis, under the Command of Major
General Churchil, to form a Reserve, and sustain the Eight Regiments, that had
been posted here under Brigadier Fitspatrick, which were all fresh, and had not
been concerned in the Siege of Namur. This was the most convenient Passage in
our Camp, and 'twas expected that the most vigorous Attack of the Enemies would
be here; therefore there was a great deal of Care taken to fortify all the
Avenues, and Churchyard of this Village. The Brigade of Guards continued the
Retrenchment from the Village within the Hedges, and a marshy bottom, by which
they continued it to the Hesse Retrenchment. And we had now provided so well
for the defense of this Passage, that we had no great Apprehension of the
Enemies coming here. The Hessians had made very good Batteries upon their
Retrenchments covered with Gabions, from whence they commanded the whole Plain.
There was another Passage to the Left of St. Denis, about an English Mile
before our Right Wing of Horse, which we retrenched and fortified; and Sir
David Collier was posted here with his Brigade and some Artillery: We
retrenched all the Rising Ground within Masy and Golsines, and so to the Woods
we had upon our Right. This was the Posture of our Camp this Day. The Enemies
had made several Motions the Night before, and this Morning sending several
Bodies, sometimes to their Right, and sometimes to their Left, and their whole
Camp was under Arms most part of the Night before, and this whole Day. About
Noon the Weather began to clear up, upon which Villeroy advanced to St. Denis,
to observe our Posts and our Army. We had barricaded the way through the Wood
with several Trees we had cut down; and the Boughs being thick and green, and
there being a large Barn hard by, he came by this way through the Wood, and
took the opportunity of this Cover, to come up close to this Retrenchment. As
soon as he was perceived, all our Men within the Retrenchment took the Alarm,
and stood to their Arms, expecting it to be the Vanguard of the Enemies Army:
The King was at Dinner in his Tent, which was pitched hard by for that purpose,
who immediately got on Horseback to observe the Enemy: But Villeroy finding
himself discovered, retired immediately, having seen enough to convince him
that 'twas not fit to meddle with us here.

The Day being passed without any Action, and the Time pressing, (for now we
began to wait in our Camp) the King thought it not convenient to deferr the
Assault of the Breaches of the Terra nova, and Cohorne, any longer; wherefore a
Detachment was made this Evening (19th.) of 36 Grenadiers per Company out of
those Regiments of His Majesty's Forces, which had not been concerned in the
Siege, and 18 out of those that had been employed in it. The Grenadiers of the
Brigade of Guards were commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Evans, Captain of
Grenadiers in the first Battalion; and the rest by Colonel Epping, Colonel of
one of the Danish Battalions. But before I proceed to give an Account of this
Assault, it is necessary to continue the Affairs of the Siege to this time.

The 15th. as (we have said it before) we took the Half Moon of the Sambre,
which would otherwise have flanked our Trenches, if we had not beat the Enemies
from it, and likewise our Assault upon the Breach of Terra nova. The 16th.
being Masters of this Half Moon, we began to work at a Pattery of 10 Pieces of
Cannon, upon the Left of our inferior Trench, between it and the Half Moon,
which fired upon the inward Face of the small Bastion, at the Foot of the
descending Courtin of Terra nova: Our Batteries from the Town could only fire
upon the outward Face toward the Sambre; and besides, this Battery firing more
perpendicular upon the Breach of Terra nova, had yet a better effect than those
from the Town. Captain Heart, of Colonel Courthop's Regiment, was killed this
Day in the Trenches. In the Evening his Majesty left the Siege, to put himself
at the Head of the Army, upon Villeroy's Approach. Major General Lindeboom
relieved the Trenches this Night, with the Prince of Holstein Norbourg
Brigadier, and Colonel Mackay of our Forces. This Night we advanced our
Trenches between the side of the Cohorne, and the Sambre. The Descent of the
Hill from the Cohorne to the Sambre being steep, this gave the Enemies
opportunity to make use of a Machine to hinder our Work; they filled some Casks
with Powder, Bombs, and Grenades, with a Fuzee at each end of the Cask, which
they tumbled down the Hill upon our Men; but the Bombs and Grenades being too
heavy in the Casks for the Powder, caused an unequal Motion of the Machine,
which hindered its Effect; for it could not roll down strait, but inclined
either to the Right or to the Left, and if it fell per chance among our
Workmen, they only opened to the Right and Left, and let it run down the Hill,
though at first it put them into some disorder; but the Machine made more Noise
than Mischief. The 17th. early in the Morning, our Battery of 10 Pieces of
Cannon, upon the Left of our inferior Trench, began to play with very good
success, and contributed very much to level the Breach of the Terra nova for a
more easy Assault. By this time most of the Enemies Cannon were dismounted,
except some great Pieces upon the Cavalier of Terra nova, which could not bear
low enough upon us that attacked from the bottom of the Hill, and so did us no
harm; but their Drakes were still troublesome, which being light, they could
easily draw up and down where they were most convenient for them. In the
Afternoon we discovered a Party of the Enemies, of 20 Troopers from the
Garrison of Dinant, which had posted themselves in Ambuscade just by our Line
of Circumvallation toward the Meuse, where a Detachment of the Elector's
Guards were posted, who attacked them, killing 6 of the Enemy. and made the
Lieutenant Prisoner, and 7 more of his Party. In the Evening Major General
Swerin commanded the Trenches, with Brigadier Dedem, and Colonel Friderick
Hamilton. The Breaches being now considerable, the Enemies worked hard every
Night to make Retrenchments and Traverses within the Breaches of the Terra
nova, and Cohorne: and our Bombs playing without intermission in these Works,
did (no doubt) kill them a great many Men. The 18th Major General la Cave had
the Trenches, and Brigadier Horn, with Colonel Courthop of the English. Our
Artillery from all Parts continued its usual Fury, and the Enemies, whilst we
worked in our Trenches, still used their Machines to interrupt our Men; they
tumbled down Six Bombs this Night, but with as little effect as before. The
19th. upon expectation that the Marechal de Villeroy would attack the King's
Army, the Elector waited upon his Majesty: But Villeroy having thought it more
convenient to let it alone, the King, with the Elector, and Prince Vaudemont,
and other chief Generals, concerted the Assault for the next Day.

A MEMOIR of the General Attack made upon the CASTLE of NAMUR.
The Disposition of this Attack was as follows:

MY Lord Cutts, with 3000 English, was to attack the Counterscarp and Breach of
the Terra nova, and that part of the Line of Communication between the Cohorne
and the Terra nova, which was next to the Terra nova. The Count de Rivera was
to attack the Breach of the Cohorne, and that part of the aforesaid Line of
Communication, next the Cohorne, with 3000 Bavarians, and others. Major General
la Cave was to attack on the Right of Count Rivera, (with 2000 Brandenburghers)
the upper point of the Cohorne, and part of the Communication to the Casotte.
Major General Swerin was to attack the Casotte with 2000 Dutch; and at the same
a time, Colonel was to attack the Lower Town with 600 Men. The Signal was to be
a considerable Quantity of Powder, blown-up upon the old Battery near the
Brussels Port; and the Word of Battle, given by the Elector of Bavaria, was
God-with-us.

The Directions given by the Elector of Bavaria, to the aforesaid General
Officers, that were to Command the respective Attacks in chief, were as follows:

That a certain Number of Men should be commanded in each Attack upon the
Forlorn-hope, another Number to sustain them, and the rest to be upon the
Reserve; and as to Particulars, he left it to each General Officer, commanding
an Attack in chief, to do as his own Judgment, and the Occasion, should direct
him; only it was ordered that Count Rivera's Attack, and those upon the Right
of him, should begin some Minutes before the English Attack, because that was
like to be the most difficult.

The Lord Cutts, the Night before the Attack, received a Detachment from the
King, of 1000 chosen Men, which were to be part of his 3000: For His Majesty
was now at the head of the Confederates Army, and had left my Lord Cutts to
command all the English that stayed with the Duke of Bavaria to carry on the
Siege.

It was ordered by the Duke of Bavaria, the Night before the Action, That all
the Troops designed for the several Attacks, should march into the Trenches
before Day, there to lie undiscovered till the Hour of the Signal.

The Lord Cutts, in pursuance of this Order, marched into the Trenches with his
Men some Hours before Day; but there not being room enough to cover all his
Men, he was forced to place Three Regiments at the Abbey of Salsen, which was
the nearest Place to the Trenches where they could lie undiscovered.

The Disposition which my Lord Cutts made for the English, was as follows:

He commanded 4 Sergeants, each with 15 Men, (promising, in His Majesty's Name,
Advancement to the Sergeants, and Rewards to the private Men, if they did their
Duty) to go upon the Forlorn Hope: These were to be followed by the Grenadiers
of the Guards, under the Command of Colonel Evans; and those by the rest of the
Grenadeers, designed for the Attack of the Breach, making in all 700, under the
Command of a Colonel: 300 Grenadeers were ordered to attack the Line of
Communication. Colonel Courthop, and Colonel Mackay's Regiments, were ordered
to sustain those that attacked the Breach: Colonel Hamilton, and Colonel
Buchan's Regiments, were to make the Reserve: And that this might be the better
performed, it was ordered that the Regiments of Mackay, Hamilton, and Buchan,
which were placed at the Abbey of Salsen, should immediately after the Signal
given; march to the Place of Action, and draw up-behind the Regiment of
Courthop, there to receive further Orders. About Noon, or soon after the Attack
was begun, the English marching out of the Trenches, drew up under the Enemies
Fire, and notwithstanding they had 900 Paces to march before they came to the
Breach, exposed all the way to the Enemies great and small shot, which fired
sorely upon their Flank all the way, they went on with a great deal of firmness
and resolution. Immediately after the Grenadeers followed Colonel Courthop's
Regiment, with Dr^^ ^eating, and Colors flying.

The (...) of this Attack looked very hopeful; but the Three Regiments at
Salsen not marching so soon as was intended (either by a failure or mistake in
the Signal) the English Troops that were already engaged, were overpowered by
the Numbers of the Enemies; and that which contributed to their Misfortune, was
the Count de Rivera's being shot dead upon the spot; the Count de Marsilly,
(who commanded the 600 Men that were to attack the Line of Communication next
the* Cohorne) with his Lieutenant Colonel, being both immediately shot dead;
Colonel Courthop being likewise shot dead, and his Lieutenant Colonel, Sir
Matthew Bridges, desperately wounded; most of the Officers of the Grenadeers
being killed or wounded, particularly Captain Mitchel of the Guards shot dead,
and Colonel Evans desperately wounded; my Lord Cutts receiving a shot in his
Head, which disabl'd him for some time; the Count de Mercy, Colonel Windsor,
Colonel Stanhop, Mr. Thompson, and several other Gentlemen, who went Volunteers
with my Lord Cutts in this Action, being wounded, and totally disabled. And
Count Rivera's Attack not beginning quite so soon as was intended (by reason of
the aforesaid Mistake of the Signal) all the Fire of that part of the Cohorne,
which was next the Terra nova, fell upon the English, which had been otherwise
employed, if every thing, had succeeded as was intended. After some time, the 3
Regiments from Salsen arrived; but things were then in such a Posture, that
they were forced to begin a new Attack, instead of sustaining that already
begun: For Count Nogent, and Monsieur L'Abadie were by this time come down, by
Order of the Marechal de Boufflers, (as we were afterward informed by the
French Commanders) in the space which is between the Cohorne and Terra nova,
with 1200 Foot and Dragoons, all fresh Men, whereof 200 were of the Dragoons of
the French King's Household; and with these Troops they charged our Forces in
Flank and Rear, which were already in the middle of 6 different Fires. The
Battalions from Salsen, though they came too late to do us the Service intended,
did not want their share of suffering, as appears by the List of their killed
and wounded Officers and Soldiers.

By this time my Lord Cutts being dressed of his Wounds, and come to himself,
finding the Affair of the Terra nova not possibly to be retrieved, and
observing the Bavarians, upon Count Rivera's Attack, engaged in a very hot
^ire, who (notwithstanding Count Rivera was killed, and the Prince of Holstem
Norburg Brigadier, wounded; and that most of the Officers of the Bavarian
Guards, and other Regiments, were killed and wounded) had fixed themselves upon
the outermost Retrenchment of the Point of the Cohorne next to the Sambre, and
maintained the Post with a great deal of obstinacy, but could not gain any more
Ground; ordered 200 Men to be detached out of the English Troops, and that none
should be chosen, but such as were resolved to carry their Point or dye by it,
upon Promise of distinguishing Rewards to such as should do any extraordinary
Action; and ordering those to be sustained by the Regiment of Mackay, and that
the other English Forces should rally and come after as soon as they could, he
resolved to bend his whole Force, to make good the Bavarian Attack: And as soon
as he was come to the Place of Action, he detached Lieutenant Cockle, of
Mackay's Regiment, with a Party of chosen Men, with the following Orders:

That he should attack the Face of the saillant Angle, next to the Breach,
Sword in Hand, without firing a Shot, that he should pass the Palissades, and
enter the covered way; That if he could not maintain the Post, he should make
the best Retreat he could with his Men, but that he should lodge himself, if he
found any Place capable of it, with a Promise, in his Majesty's Name, of a
distinguishing Reward if he succeeded, and outlived it. At the same time he
commanded the Ensigns of Mackay's Regiment to march strait to the Palissades,
and plant their Colors upon 'em, with Promises of suitable Rewards. All this
succeeded so well, that Lieutenant Cockle entering the Palisades, beat the Enemy
from the covered way, and lodged himself in a Battery of theirs, having first
turned their own Cannon upon them, for which his Majesty has since rewarded him
with Advancement and Money. Whilst Colonel Mackay's Ensigns were advancing to
the Palissades, the Bavarians renewed their Attack with undaunted Vigiour,
(though, as was said before, most of their Officers were killed and wounded) and
so this Post was made good.

The Elector of Bavaria exposed himself to a degree not to be imagined, going
from Place to Place, to observe what passed, and give such Orders as he thought
fit, several Persons being killed and wounded very near him; he gave away
Handfuls of Gold to the English Soldiers, as well as his own, and saying many
kind things of the Bravery both of the Officers and Soldiers. No Gentleman ever
fell more generally lamented, than Colonel Courthop did on this Occasion,
giving all possible Hopes of an extraordinary Man in the Military Art, if he
had lived. Colonel Windsor, Colonel Stanhop, the Count de Mercy, Mr. Tomson,
(eldest Son to Sir John Tomson) and other Gentlemen of Note beforementioned,
behaved themselves on this Occasion with all the Bravery it was possible for
Men to show. And many other remarkable Actions were done by several of the
English and Scotch, too many to set down here.

Having gained the Covered way before the Breach of the Cohorne, and the
inferior Angle saillant, or Point toward the Sambre, and our Troops being
fatigued by so long an Assault, and the Enemies Resistance, we contented our
selves to make a Lodgment here without any farther Attempt upon the Breach.
Upon this Re-inforcement of the Dutch and Bavarians, at this Attack, by my Lord
Cutts, and the English Troops under his Command, the Enemies were so employed
in the defense of this most dangerous Post, as very much facilitated
Major General la Cave's Enterprise upon the Cover'd-way before the Ravelin, and
upper Point of the Cohorne, and so on toward the Casotte, where he lodged
himself without any considerable Loss.

Major General Swerin commanding the Right Attack of all, before the Cas^tte
and so toward the Meuse, designed to beat the Enemies from the Covered way,
and Retrenchment between the Casotte and the Meuse, (which reaches to the Brow
of the Hill, which has here a very steep descent to the River) overcame the
Enemies Resistance, and made a very good Lodgment all along this Cover'd-way
and Retrenchment, of about 300 Paces, which he extended to the Left, turning in
toward the Cohorne, about 140 Paces more, to join it to that of Major General
la Cave, which reached to the Ravelin of the Cohorne. The Dutch and Bavarians
(commanded at first by Major General Rivera) carried it to the Angle saillant,
or inferior Point of the Cohorne toward the Sambre; and our rallied Forces
continued it to the other side of this Angle before the Breach, so that we were
now Masters of one of the greatest Lodgments that ever have been made in one
Assault, being near an English Mile in length. Though we miscarried in the great
Design of this general Storm, (which was to have taken the Castle, with all its
prodigious Outworks, by assault) for want of a due Correspondence among our
several Attacks, either by the Failure or Mistake of the Signals. Such a vast
Lodgment could not be done in a moment, the Assault lasted till the Evening,
nor could it be gained without Loss. I have not seen the particular List of the
Foreigners, but the chief Officers amongst them killed, were Count Rivera,
Major General of the Bavarians, and Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of
Bavaria, to condole His Majesty upon the Death of our late most Gracious Queen;
Monsieur de Marsilly Colonel, commanding the Regiment du Theil, and Fabrice
Lieutenant Colonel; Colonel Lindrcot of the Brandenbourghers, and Heckeren of
the Dutch. Their chief Officers wounded, were the Prince of Holstein Norbourg
Brigadier, the Colonels Lindsburg, Caunits, Horn, d'Ohna, and Denhoff, and
Monsieur de Milune, Colonel of a Swisse Regiment, besides a great many
Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, Captains, and subaltern Officers.

As for our Loss, it was as follows: My Lord Cutts was wounded in the Head, who
commanded our Attack; Colonel Eppingen of the Danes, who commanded our
Detachment of Grenadeers, wounded. In the first Battalion of he first Regiment
of English Guards, Lieutenant Colonel Evans, who commanded the Grenadeers of
the Brigade, wounded; he had been wounded before in the Assault, July 8. In the
second Battalion, Captain Mitchel kill'd' in the Dutch Guards, Captain Cock
wounded; in the Scots Guards, Captain Campbel wounded; in the Royal Regiment,
Lieutenant William Hamilton killed, Lieutenant Archibald Hamilton wounded, he
had been wounded before in the Third Assault before the Town, July ^3. In
Selwyn's Regiment, Lieutenant Gilpin wounded, Lieutenant Richards wounded among
the Engineers; in Trelauney, Lieutenant d' Aneau killed; in Seymour's,
Lieutenant Campbel killed; in Columbine's, Captain Cummins killed, Lieutenant
Twinhoe wounded; in the Fusiliers, Captain Groves, and Lieutenant Rainsford,
wounded; in Tidcomb's, Lieutenant Sowell wounded; in Stanley's, Lieutenant
Mordant killed; in Ingoldsby's, Captain Parry killed; in Saunderson's,
Lieutenant Midlemore killed; in Maitland's, Lieutenant Arthurs wounded. All
these were Officers of Grenadeers: There were yet some others of the same,
whose Names I could not get

The Loss of the Four Regiments concerned in the Attack, was as follows: In
Colonel Courthop's Regiment, the Colonel, Captain Coot, and Lieutenant Evans
killed; Sir Matthew Bridges, Lieutenant Colonel, who now has the Regiment,
wounded; Captains, Wolf, and du Bourguay; Lieutenants, Disbordes, and Ash;
Ensigns, Foncebran, Eyres, and Denis, with 101 Soldiers killed, and 149
wounded. In Colonel Friderick Hamilton's Regiment, Lieutenant Colonel Ormsby;
Captains, Purefoy, Pinsent, and Carteret; Lieutenants, Fitsmorris, and Ram;
Ensigns, Fettyplace, Blunt, Baker, and Hayter, killed. Captain John Southwel,
and Ensign Lister, dead of their Wounds. Colonel Friderick Hamilton; Captains,
Kane, du Roure, Seymour, and William Southwel; Lieutenants, la Planche,
Brereton, Hybert, Arphaxad, R^leston; Ensigns, John Gifford, Ormsby, and
Blackney, wounded: Soldiers killed 86, wounded 185. In Colonel Mackay's
Regiment, Captain Catenberg, Ensign Macdo^gal, killed. Major Cunningham;
Captains, Cunningham, Mackenzy, Camerone, and Bruce; Lieutenants, Macleod,
Monro, Dickson, and Wilson; Ensigns, Neil Macleod, Monro, John Macleod,
Macdonald, Gordon, and Martyn, wounded: Sergeants and Soldiers killed, 73.
wounded 166. In Colonel Buchan's Regiment, Captains, Johnston, Baily, and Wear,
Lieutenant Bailly, killed: Lieutenant Colonel Guilliams; Captains, Dalham,
Cassin, and Orach; Lieutenants, Levingston, and Windram; Ensigns, Gordon,
Lesley, and Urguhart, wounded: Soldiers and Sergeants killed 65, wounded 140.
The Loss in these 4 Regiments of Officers and Soldiers, killed and wounded,
being joined together, amounts to 1028. besides the Grenadiers, which, I Am
sure, had near 300 killed and wounded: So that the whole Loss of His Majesty's
Forces, concerned in this Action, amounted to about 1400 Men; though most Prints,
that speak of this Business, make the whole Loss of the Allies to come to
little more than this. It Is true, that the other Forces concerned in the
Attacks of the Cohorne and Casotte, did not suffer near so much as we did, or
rather, their Loss was but inconsiderable, except the Dutch and Bavarians,
employed in the Attack of the Breach of the Cohorne, under Major General
Rivera, who had many, both Officers, and Soldiers, killed and wounded; and if
the Loss of all the rest of the Allies put together be supposed equal to that
we sustained, we must have had in all, killed and wounded in this Action, near
3000 Men. We had a great many Volunteers to signalize themselves in this
Occasion. If I could have got a List of all these worthy Gentlemen, I would
have mentioned them in this Place. What Loss the Enemies sustained,
particularly in this Attack, is not known, no more than in any of the others;
but we need not doubt, but such an Attack, which lasted so long, and where our
Bombs played at the same time incessantly in their Works, must destroy them a
great many Men. This Night, (30th.) Major General Arnheim had the Trenches,
with the Prince of Anhalt Brigadier. We worked all Night to strengthen and
fortify the great Lodgment we had made the Day before.

To return to the two Armies, in presence of one another; the one to endeavor
to relieve the Besieged, and the other to cover the Besiegers. Villeroy had
been the Day before, to visit our Posts at St. Denis; and though he began then
to apprehend the great Difficulty there was to attack us in our strong Posts,
and the apparent Hazard of a Battle, yet to endeavor all Ways possible to
relieve the Place, he ordered the Army in the Morning, (20th.) to march upon
the Left toward Perwys, to try a Passage at the Springs of the Mehaigne, the
Country being more open thereabouts. The King, who expected this Motion of the
Enemies, ordered in the Morning our Cavalry of the Right, under the Command of
Velt-Marechal Fleming, and Count d' Arco, with Lumley's Brigade, to march on
upon the Right toward the Mehaigne: The Hesse Troops made the same Motion, and
they all encamped with a Wood upon their Right, their Left toward the Village
of Du, and that of Ypigny's before them. Lieutenant General la Forest was
detached at the same time with 20 Squadrons of Horse to Taviers and Bonef, upon
the Mehaigne, to observe the Enemies March, who came early in the Afternoon to
their Camp near the Mehaigne. Lieutenant General la Forest continued in his
Post, till the Left Wing of the Enemies Horse (which, upon this March, had the
Van of the Army) was come up to the Ground, which extended it self along the
River, between Ramelies, and Harlue, and Taviers, upon the Mehaigne. As soon as
the Left Wing was come up, they detached about 40 Squadrons of Horse and
Dragoons, to beat us out of the Post of Bonef: But la Forest, who was here
posted, had Orders not to dispute it, but only to observe the Enemies March,
and abandon it; the Enemies being so near, and so much superior to him in
number, this occasioned some disorder in his Retreat. The Detachment of Dopf,
and Eppinger's Dragoons, that had been posted in some Hedges, to make good our
Retreat, were forced out of it; and the Enemies having gained the Pass,
endeavored to flank our Horse, which marched off in two Columns, and to
surround them with their Line of Squadrons: However, after some Skirmishes on
both sides, our Cavalry made their Retreat good. Major Crowther commanded a
Squadron of Brigadier Lumley's Regiment in this occasion, with which he faced
about in the Retreat, and with some others skirmish'd with the Enemies. The
French expected that this would bring both Armies to a Battle, and the Princes
of the Blood put themselves at the Head of the Cavalry, to show a good Example
in so important an Action. The Duke du Maine had a Horse killed under him; the
Marquis de Villequier was dangerously wounded. On our side, the Major of
Eppinger's Dragoons was killed, and Lieutenant Alexander, of Brigadier Lumley's
Regiment, was made Prisoner, and we lost about 10 Horses. The French made much
of this inconsiderable Success; an Express was immediately dispatched, to give
an Account of it to Court. They had already broke in upon our Right Wing of
Horse; and nothing less was expected by the next Courier, than the Defeat and
Rout of our Army, and the Relief of Namur; nay, the thing was thought so sure,
that 'twas immediately communicated to Foreign Ministers, as it is credibly
reported. This also contributed very much to the Oppression of our Dixmuyde and
Deinse Prisoners, who were now very ill treated and abused; though afterward
the Pretext was for Reprisal of their Sick and Wounded in the Town of Namur,
which they pretended were not well used among us. Some of the most Hotheaded
of our National Enemies abroad, would then tell the Soldiers, to terrify them,
That they must not expect to be treated as Prisoners of War, but as Rebels. But
this was making a Triumph before the Victory, as it proved to their Confusion.

The King being informed of the Enemies March upon their Left, toward Perwys,
ordered the Army to march upon the Right, at the same time that our Besiegers
were engaged in the Assault against the Castle and Outworks The King took his
Quarter this Day at a Gentleman's House, called Ostin, near the Village of Du.
The Brigade of Guards being now in the Reserve, encamped upon the Right of the
King's Quarter, in a third Line, near the Hesse Troops: Our Body of Foot
encamped within the Retrenchment of Du, and our Cavalry encamped behind them,
to sustain the Foot in the defense of the Retrenchments. We abandoned the
perpendicular Retrenchment at Bossire, between Masy and Gemblours. Livingston's
Dragoons, with the Regiment of Foot, of Holstein Ploen, was left to guard the
Post of Masy: my Lord George Hamilton Brigadier, was left to guard the
Retrenchment of Golsines, with three Battalions. This was made upon the
quitting of the Retrenchment of Bossire, leaving Golsines (Prince Vaudemont's
Quarter) before it, who was Quartered at Ostin, in the same House with His
Majesty. Brigadier Fitspatrick continued with his Eight Battalions at St.
Denis. We had a good Body of Horse posted at Ypignies before our Right. At our
coming to this Ground, we saw the Enemies encamped with their Left near the
Mehaigne, between Ramelies and Taviers, and their Right stretching toward
Orbais, with Perwys before them, and Malevre in their Rear. At Night we
continued our Retrenchment from Du, to the Wood upon our Right, to be defended
by the Hesse Troops, and some of the Body of Foot.

The 21st. we continued our Fire against the Castle with the usual Fury, to
make all Things ready for another Assault. We began to apply the Miner to the
Breach of the Cohorne; for our Cannon firing from the Town, and the other side
of the River up the Hill, could only break down the upper part of the Work,
whilst the Foot of it remained entire under the Shot of our Cannon; and
besides, having gained the Counterscarp of this Work, our Cannon could not play
against the Cohorne, without doing harm to our own Men: And this I suppose was
the Reason why we designed in the last Attack to carry the Counterscarp and
Breach all at once. At Night Major General Lindeboom mounted the Trenches, with
Brigadier Dedem. The same Day, the Marechal de Villeroy passed the Mehaigne,
with a good Body of Horse, and advanced as far as Ypignies. The grand Guard we
had here, retreated to the Camp upon his Approach, their Orders being not to
engage. The Marechal de Villeroy left the main of his Body of Horse, and rid
on, full speed, with two Squadrons of Hussars, (whose Horses are very fleet,
and fit for such a purpose) close to our Retrenchments, upon our Right, to view
our Works, and to observe our Camp: He continued here, wheeling sometime to the
Right, and sometime to the Left, near a little Hedge that covered him. We
brought down some Pieces of Cannon to fire upon him, which as soon as he
perceived it, he rid off full speed with his two Squadrons under the shelter of
a Wood we had before the Hesse Retrenchment. At the same time that we brought
down our Cannon, we drew up several Regiments of Foot within our Line,
expecting the Enemies; but no Action happened, only some pickeering (as they
term it;) that is, when single Men detach themselves voluntarily from both
sides, to meet and fire upon one another, and then retire to their several
Bodies again. The Marechal de Villeroy having observed the Posture of our Camp,
and our strong Retrenchments, rid back again full speed with his Hussars, to
the main Body of Horse he had left at the height of Ypignies. We detached some
Squadrons after him, the grand Mousquetaires of Brandenbourgh being one of
them; but without any other Action, than the former Pickeering. Villeroy having
found us so well posted in this Place, would yet try to find out a Passage for
the Relief of Namur, between our Right and the Meuse; and therefore he went
with his Detachment of Hussars, toward the Village of Verderin, where there is
another narrow Plain upon the skirt of a thick Wood, which from hence continues
to the Meuse. The Dragoons of Dopf and Eppinger were posted here, where they
made a Retrenchment; and the Cavalry of the Right was commanded this Day, with
Lumley's Brigade, to join these Dragoons, for the Defense of this Post, with
Collier's Brigade, which hitherto had continued in the little Retrenchment, in
the Wood between St. Denis, and Golsines. Thus Villeroy found all the Passages
guarded before the Town from the Sambre, where the River of Masy falls into it,
by all these Villages we have mentioned, round to the Meuse below Namur, at our
Bridge of Communication; making, with Woods, Rivulets, and Retrenchments, a
kind of an outer Line of Circumvallation, near Twelve English Miles in length.
And this was thought a better Defense, than to have disputed the Passage of the
Mehaigne to the Enemies, when they came to Perwys.

Although Villeroy had now lost all Hopes of doing any thing for the Relief of
the Castle, for he found that he could not attack us without hazarding the Loss
of his whole Army, and that ours was in a good Condition, and strongly posted,
(and indeed our Strength was such, that, I believe, had not the Siege of the
Castle depended upon the Issue of a Battle, we should hardly have put a Spade
in the Ground to have made a Retrenchment) yet the Enemies Presence at Perwys
was very inconvenient to our Army, which was now shut up in a kind of a Line of
Circumvallation, where Forage was very scarce: They had cut off all
Communication with Brussels and Louvain, from whence we had our Provisions:
They were now Masters of the Riverside, between Namur and Liege, so that we
could have nothing from thence by Water, but must be brought by Land, on the
Dinant side, through a difficult Country. But the Marechal de Villeroy had
secured his Communication with Charleroy and Mons, by leaving the Marquis de
Harcourt with a small Army near Fleury: From whence it appears, that if the
French had not left the Castle to the last Extremity, before they came to
Relieve it, it might have proved of a very dangerous Consequence to our Army,
which would have been in a manner deprived of Subsistence for Man and Horse.
But they must bombard Brussels first, and so they came too late; and I cannot
imagine the Reason of this Proceeding, unless they believed all the Reports of
our Losses, published in the Paris Gazette; and so to let the Siege run on, to
shatter our Army, and then to come at last with their Army, to give the
finishing Stroke to our Ruin. If they say, their Rhine Detachment was not yet
come up, ours had not joined us neither, and so there had still been the same
Proportion between the two Armies. Though we began to want at this time, yet
our Soldiers suffered it with a great Constancy, and few or none deserted to
the Enemies. Upon the Marechal de Villeroy's posting himself near the Mehaigne,
a Re-inforcement of Horse and Foot was sent to L^uvain, from our little Army at
Brussels, commanded by the Marquis de Bedmar, Lieutenant General Bellasis, and
Count Tilly, to watch after the Security of this great and defenseless Place,
which was now wholly exposed to the Enemies.

The 22th, in the Morning the Thunder of our Canons continued against the
Castle, and we were working hard to bring our Mine to perfection under the
breach of the Cohorne, when about Noon the Besieged beat a Parley to bury the
Dead which had been killed in the Assault the 20th. which began to stink and
incommode them very much: A Cessation was agreed upon for Two Hours to bury the
Dead: But the Besieged finding that the Marechal de Villeroy could not relieve
them; that they had already sustained a desperate Assault; that we had made a
great Lodgment upon the Covered way of the Cohorne, and Casotte; that the
Cohorne could not hold out anothet Assault, and the breach of the Terra Nova,
which was wholly commanded by it was not then defensible; that the Soldiers
were reduced to eat Horseflesh; (For though at the beginning, when Athlone was
marching to invest the place, they had brought in all the Cattle of the
Country round about, yet it being Salted in have, and in the Heat of Summer,
when they came to make use of it in the Siege of the Castle, it was so
corrupted, that they were forced to throw it away, and to prefer Horseflesh
before it,) and that the whole Garrison was extremely fatigued by their long
Service in this Siege, and by the fury of our Boombs which fell in their Works
without ceasing: For these reasons they resolved to Capitulate and Surrender
the Place: The Count de Guiscard came upon the Breach a little before the
Cessation was over, and called for the Major General of the Trenches, who was
then Lindeboom, and told him that he desired to speak with the Elector. Count
Verita one of the Gentlemen to his Electoral Highness was then in the Trenches,
and he immediately gave notice of it to the Elector, who thereupon came to the
Breach. Count de Guiscard at first offered to surrender the Cohorne, but the
Elector refu'sd to Capitulate for any part, but for the whole: The Count de
Guiscard replied that the Marechal de Boufflers Commanded in the Castle, and
that he would let him know it; and in the mean while desired the Cessation to
be continued. The Marechal de Boufflers consented to surrender the whole upon
Honorable Terms, and the Count de Guiscard came back to the Breach of the
Cohorne to acquaint the Elector with it, The White Flag was immediately put up
upon the Breach, and Hostages exchanged; which for the Besieged were Monsieur
de l' Abadie Brigadier, and the Count de Monthron Colonel of the Dauphin's
Regiment of Foot; and for us, Major General La Cave, and Colonel Frederick
Hamilton, who had been lightly wounded in the Assault, and Baron Meyer one of
the Electors Ministers was sent in to manage the Capitulation. An Express was
immediately dispatched to give Notice of it to the King at Ostin: But His
Majesty was then coming to the Siege with Prince Vaudemont, in his Coach to
order a second Assault, and the Express met His Majesty in the way. The
Capitulation was agreed upon, and Signed that very Night. The Count d' Guiscard
obliged the Marechal d' Boufflers to Sign it, because he had Commanded in the
Castle during the Siege; but the Count de Guiscard had only Commanded in the
Cohorne and Outworks, and so could not Sign for the Surrender of the Castle;
and this I believe is the first Capitulation that has been Signed by a Marechal
of France, which was as follows.

Articles proposed for the Capitulation of the Castle of Namur, to His
Electoral Highness of Bavaria, jointly with the Allies by the Marechal de
Boufflers.
1 THAT the said Castle, with the Lower Town shall be delivered up to the
Troops of the Allies the 10th of this Instant September, in case it be not
relieved: And that during the said time no Act of Hostility shall be committed
between the Besieged and the Besiegers.

2. That on the said 10th. of September, the Outer-gate of the said Castle
toward the Country shall be given up to the Troops of the Allies, where a
Guard of the Troops of the Garrison shall be likewise placed to prevent the
Troops mixing together, and all disorders. The outward Fortifications, viz. The
Fort of Cohorne, the Redoubt with a Casematte, the Casotte and the Horne-work
of Bule shall be delivered up to Morrow Morning, being the second Instant, at 9
of the Clock.

3. That the Marechal de Boufflers, the Count de Guiscard, Lieutenant General
of the Kings Armies, and Governor of Namur, with all the General Officers, and
Officers of the State-Major of the place, the Officer and Guards of the
Marechal, all the Troops, as well French as Foreigners, the Officers of the
Artillery, and all others whatsoever that are in the Castle, in the most
Christian Kings service, shall march the 12th of this Month out of the Breach,
with their Arms, Baggage and Horses, Drums beating, lighted Match and Colors
flying, with 12 Pieces of Great Canon and Mortars as the Besieged shall choose
with their Carriages and Arms, and Ammunitions for Twelve Shot to each Piece;
in order to march altogether to Givet, the nearest way along the Meuse; and in
two or three days at the choice of the Besieged, without being obliged to go
any other way under any pretense whatsoever; And they shall have a Convoy given
them by the Allies, as well for the security of the Garrisons, as for that of
the Equipages. They shall march out the 5th. of this Month at Seven in the
Morning, with Two Twenty-four Pounders, Two Twelve Pounders, and Two Six
Pounders, and Two Mortars. The rest of the Article is granted.

4. That for transporting the said Twelve Pieces of Canon and Morters, the
Equipages of the Troops, and the sick and wounded of the said Garrison, a
Hundred Draught Horses with their Harnesses, besides a Hundred Wagons, drawn
each by Four Horses, and Fifty great Boats of the Meuse shall be furnished by
the Allies at their own charge; with a sufficient Number of Watermen and Horses
to bring them to Givet; all which shall be provided by the 10th. of this
Month, that so they may load them time enough to go out with the Garrison, and
to take the same way, that they may arrive together at Givet.

5. That the sick and wounded remaiing in the Town of Namur, who are in a
Condition to go out with the Garrison of the Castle, may do it at the same
time; and that Boats and Watermen shall be provided for them at the charge of
the Allies to transport them to Givet.

A sufficient Number of Horses for the Canon and Mortars shall be provided for
them, and Eighty Wagons, and as many Boats as can be found in two days, before
that which is fixed for the going out of the Garrison, and the rest as fast as
they can be got, so as the whole shall be furnished by the Twelfth of this
Month. The Besieged may leave Officers and Commissaries to take care of the
Sick and Wounded, and the Equipages who cannot depart with the Garrison for
want of Boats on the 5th. Instant, and Pasports shall be given them. The rest
of these Articles is granted.

6. That such of the Sick and Wounded as are at present in the Castle, and
Lower Town, and who shall not be in a condition to be Transported to Givet at
the same time the Garrison marches out of the Castle shall be carried in the
Town of Namur, by such Conveniences as the Besieged shall furnish before the
evacuation of the Castle; and shall have Convenient Lodgings provided there by
the Allies, for the Officers, Dragoons, and Soldiers, with Beds, Provisions,
and Medicines at the charge of the Allies, until their perfect recovery, in the
same manner they are use to be treated and provided for in the Most Christian
Kings Hospitals; as also to the Physicians, Surgeons, and other Persons
appointed to take care of them. And as soon as any of the Sick and Wounded
shall recover, they shall have Passports from the Allies, and Boats and
Watermen to Conduct them safely by the Meuse to Givet, together with the
Physicians, Surgeons, and others appointed to take care of them on the way.
Granted.

7. That Monsieur de Megrigny, Marechal de Camp of the Kings Armies, The Sieur
Fellet Director of the Fortifications, the Ingeniers, Undertakers, and others
Employed in the Fortifications, shall enjoy the Benefit of this Capitulation,
and shall march out with the Troops, in order to repair the same way to Givet,
with their Equipages and Effects. Granted.

8. That the Sieur de Fumeron employed in the Finances, the Commissaries of
War, the Recievers of Contributions and Confiscations, the Treasurers
extraordinary of War, the Commissaries of the Provisions, and of the Hospitals,
and generally all those employed in the Castle whether named or not named in
this present Capitulation, shall march out of the said Castle with the
Garrison, in order to go the same way to Givet, without stopping any of their
Equipages, Papers or Effects, whether they be in the Castle or Town of Namur,
under any pretense whatsoever.

9. That no Officer nor other Person to whom the Burghers of Namur have lent
any Money, or Furnished Goods or Merchandise, shall be Arrested for it.
Granted, provided they give sufficient Security or Hostages to his Electoral
Highness for what they owe.

10. That Six covered Wagons shall be provided by the Allies for the Besieged,
which shall go out of the Castle to be Conducted to Givet with the Garrison,
and the Allies shall not take notice of what they are loaded with, nor visit
them. Granted.

11. That the Prisoners taken during the present Siege shall be released on
both sides, and that those who are in the Allies Army, or in the Town, shall be
sent back to the Castle before the Garrison marches out: And the rest that are
in places more remote, shall be sent back to Dinant in Fifteen Days, reckoning
from this Day, with necessary Pasports that they may repair thither safely, and
the nearest way. Granted.

12. That no Satisfaction shall be demanded from the Besieged, either upon
account of any Cattle taken in the County of Namur before the Siege, or for the
Houses that have been demolished in the Lower Town, or elsewhere, for the
defense of the place; nor for the Boats burnt or broak during the Siege.
Granted only for what concerns the Houses demolished: The rest shall be paid.

13. That the Hostages given on both sides for the due performance of this
Capitulation, shall be reciprocally restored after the full Execution thereof,
and the Arrival of the Garrison at Givett. Granted.

The Besieged shall deliver up faithfully their Magazines, Ammunition, Canon,
Mortars, Carriages, and Dependances, and all other Instruments of War, none
reserved or excepted, which shall be in the Castle or Outworks to Morrow
Morning the second Instant, to such Commissaries as his Electoral Highness
shall appoint for that purpose.

They shall also faithfully discover their Mines, and Fougaces, (a little
Superficial Mine) to the Officers of the Mines sent to inspect the same.

They shall likewise deliver, with the same Fidelity, all the Provisions that
are in the Magazines over and above what they shall consume before the time of
their quitting the Castle, and what shall be necessary in their March to Givet,
without spoiling or wasting any; which shall be inspected to Morrow by
Commissaries appointed by His Electoral Highness for that purpose.

That all Spaniards, Italians, and others of His Catholic Majesty's Subjects,
which shall be found among the Troops of the Castle shall have liberty to
return without any molestation or trouble either from the one side or the other.

Given at the Camp before the Castle of Namur, the First day of September, N.
S. 1695. and Signed, Emanuel, Elector. Boufflers. Guiscard.


That Evening the Castle Capitulated, Orders were given in His Majesty's Camp
for all Officers to lie in their Clothes, and the Soldiers the same, with their
Arms ready; and the Bywacht or Camp-Guard of a Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, and
60 Men per Batallion was commanded to reinforce our Post at Masy, then defended
by Levingston's Dragoons, and the Regiment of Foot of Holstein-Ploen: This was
to prevent all manner of surprise from the Enemies, who upon the news of the
Capitulation might have presumed upon our negligence, to fall upon us, or might
have been prompted to it by their own despair, to give this last endeavor to
have this Important Place; but we did not find it, so we past the Night
quietly. The 23d. in the Morning we took possession of the Cohorne, Redoubt,
with the Casematte, Casotte, etc. according to the Capitulation Signed over
Night. The Marechal de Villeroy having notice of the Capitulation, was
extremely concerned at it, and was some Hours without admitting any Body to see
him; It is probable he did not hear of it before this Morning; for great part
of the Army was gone to Forage this day: The Marechal would not be a Witness
to our Rejoicing for this great Conquest, but Decamped in the Afternoon from
Perwys and Grand Rosiers to march back upon his Right to Sombref, and the
Plain of Fleury, which he did all Night with such haste and precipitation,
that he left many Forragers and Out-guards behind him. This Evening we had a
Feu de Joy in our Camp for the taking of the Castle of Namur, which being
dispersed in the several Posts along our Retrenchments from Masy to the Meuse;
the confusion of the Fire from so many places was really agreeable, and the
triple Discharge of our Small Shot seemed to be but one of a long Continuance:
Our Artillery was drawn from all the Posts upon a Line behind the Kings
Quarter, consisting of 56 Pieces of English, 10 Dutch, 10 of Brandenburgh, and
10 of Hesse, in all 86 Pieces of Canon. The 24th. the Marecal de Villeroy
continued his March toward the Sambre, and Encamped at Montigny near
Charleroy; The same Day His Majesty removed His Quarters from Ostin to the
Chasteau of Boucquet near Templeaux, to be nearest to Namur, we rectified our
Camp, quitting the Retrenchments and former Posts to Incamp upon a Line, with
our Right of Foot at St. Dennis, the Right Wing between Du and Meux, and the
Left at Masy; The Coldstream Batallion, and the first of Dutch Guards Encamped
at the Kings Quarter at Boucquet. The 25th. the Marechal de Villeroy passed the
Sambre at Montigny below Charleroy, and Encamped between the Sambre and the
Meuse about Gerpynes and Florennes, in the way between Charleroy and
Philipville, after having viewed the Fortifications of Charleroy, and given
Orders for the safety of that place. The same Day, the Count de Guiscard
Governor of Namur Dined with the Duke of Ormond at His Graces Quarter. Whilst
the Duke of Ormond was Prisoner at Namur after the Battle of Landen, they
contracted a Reciprocal Esteem and Friendship, which must needs be very great,
being grounded upon so much Worth and Generosity on both sides. In the Evening
Major General Churchill was commanded with Twenty Batallions to Encamp within
the Line of Circumvallation between Maison Rouge (the Kings Quarter during the
Siege of the Town of Namur) and the Town: All the Regiments employed in the
Siege of the Castle Encamped within the Stone-Line between the Sambre and the
Meuse just before the Cohorne and Casotte as soon as we took Possession of
those Outworks. Every Body wondered at this Detachment of 20 Batallions under
the Command of Major General Churchill to march near the Town; but I believe
the Design being laid to Arrest the Marechal de Boufflers, this Detachment was
made to Reinforce our Troops there, in case of any Opposition from the Garrison.

The 26th. being the Day prefixed for the marching out of the Garrison four
Brigades of Foot were commanded to make a Lane, drawing up on both sides from
the Breach of Terra Nova up the Hill, and so down again to the Meuse, to the
way that leads to Givet; Colliers Brigade had the Right next to the Meuse, the
rest being Dutch. A Bridge of Boats was made upon the Sambre between the
Fauxbourg, St. Croix and the Town for His Majesty to come over to be present at
the marching out of the Garrison; and likewise for the Troops Encamped on the
other side, if there had been occasion. About Ten of the Clock the Garrison
began to march out of the Breach: The Marechal de Bouffler's Guards du Corpse
marched out first, and then the Marechal's Domestics; The Marechal himself
followed with the Count de Guiscard Governor, at the Head of as many of the
King's and Alfeld's Dragoons as were Mounted, being between Seventy or Eighty:
His Majesty was on Horseback with the Elector before the Breach; the Marshall
and the Count de Guiscard Saluted at the Head of the Garrison on Horseback with
their Swords. Monsieur Dickvelt having been acquainted with the Marechal de
Boufflers in his Embassyes in France Accosted him, and Rid with him to the top
of the Hill, where Monsieur de L' Etang Brigadier of the Brigade of Lifeguard
rid up to the Marechal, with about Twelve Gentlemen of the Lifeguard, and
Arrested him in His Majesty's Name for Satisfaction for the Garrisons of
Dixmuyde and Deinse, Detained still Prisoners by the French King contrary to
the Cartel. The Marechal was very much Incensed at first with our Proceeding,
alleging the Public Faith of the Capitulation, wherein he was expressly
mentioned: That the French King his Master would resent this Treatment to a Man
of his Character, and revenge it to the utmost of his Power, and that for his
part he had defended the place like a Man of Honor, and did not deserve it; To
which Monsieur Dickvelt replied, That the French King, by his little regard to
Capitulations, and particularly to that of Dixmuyde and Deynse had forced us to
this way of demanding Satisfaction for the infraction of these Capitulations,
That if he was Arrested, 'twas not out of any disrespect to his Person and
Character; On the contrary, That when 'twas proposed to His Majesty of Great
Britain to retain the whole Garrison by way of Reprizal: The King expressed so
much value for his Person, that he looked upon him as sufficient Caution to
answer for Six Thousand Men, the Number of the Two Garrisons of Dixmude and
Deinse: And at the same time offered him his Liberty by His Majesty's Order, if
he would pass his word for the sending back the said Garrisons, or return
himself Prisoner within a Fortnight, or words to this effect; The Marshall
answered, That he could not pass his word of Honor in a Matter which he could
not execute himself, that it was in vain for him to resist: And so he put up
his Sword, and went back with his Domestics to Namur, where he was detained
Prisoner, and treated with all the Honor due to his Character, and to a
Marechal of France: A Captain Lieutenant and Ensign mounted the Guard upon his
Quarter with Colors, and beat a March to him, and saluted him when he went
abroad, having the Liberty of the Town upon his word. The Garrison marched on
with the Count de Guiscard at the Head of it, in this order, The Dragoons of
the Kings and Asfeld's Regiments (as many as were mounted) on Horseback,
preceeded by Boufflers Life-Guards: Next followed the Infantry of the Garrison
which marched out in this Order, One Battallion of Nice, then One of Navar,
then Three of Piemont severally, One of La Mar, One of Foix, One of Court
Swisse, One of Solre: Then the Independent Companies marched in the Center of
the Foot, followed by a Battallion of Haynault, One of Bugey, Two of Maulevrier
severally, One of Beauvoisis, Two of Dauphin, Salade together; and Three more
Battallions of Dauphin severally; In all 19 Battallions. The Dragoons on Foot
followed in this Order, Du Barreau, Asfeld Estranger, de Ganges, St. Hermine,
Gramont, Quelus, Dauphin, and the King's, brought up by Monsieur de L' aumont,
Lieutenant-Governour: All the Officers were very desirous to see the King in
Marching out, asking where the King was, and they saluted with their Pikes and
Portuisanes the King and the Elector, who stood by one another. The Artillery
granted by the Capitulation, and Wagons, marched out of the Lower Town by the
Meuse, and the Horn-work of Bule, with the Battallion of Fuziliers, the
Gunners, Miners, Pioneers, etc. The Four Brigades abovementioned still
standing to their Arms, and the Forces that had taken possession of the
Cohorne, Redoubt, Casotte, etc. And by Four in the Afternoon the whole Place
was evacuated, and delivered up into our hands. The Battallions which marched
out of the Breach according to the List which I have seen and cast up, made
3867 Effective Men, and the Dragoons 1085, which in all amounts to 4942 Men,
Foot and Dragoons, besides the Independent Companies, and the Battallion of
Fusiliers, which marched out of the Gate by the Meuse with the Artillery, all
which supposing to amount to 500 Men, with the Gunners, Miners, etc. must make
the Garrison marching out to be 5442 Effective Men; which being deducted from
12000 Effective under Arms at the beginning of the Siege, makes the loss of
the Besieged to amount to 6558 Men killed, wounded, and deserted, supposing the
Garrison to have been at first but 12000 Effective Men. As for the Losses of
the Allies in this Siege, I could not get an Exact Calculation of it; and
therefore shall pass it over; but by the best accounts I could see, it did not
come up to the double of the Loss of the Besieged.

The Garrison being all marched out, the Spanish Terces (Regiments) of
Manriques and Marino, which had been sent from Brussels for that purpose, took
possession of the Castle to do Duty there, according to their Ancient Custom;
the Forces of the Allies having the Town, and all the Outworks of the Castle.
His Majesty went this Evening into the Castle, Cohorne, etc. to view the Works,
the Breaches, and the Ruins, which were very great; the Ground was all full of
Bomb pits, and the stink of the Dead Men and Horses very noisome. The Officers
and Soldiers had cut in the foot of the Walls within, and Counterscarps, little
Cabbins, where they sheltered themselves from the fall of our Bombs; some of
which were lined with Deal-Boards, like a kind of Wainscot: The Marechal de
Boufflers had his dwelling in a Cas^matie upon the top of the Terra nova. We
found 104 Pieces of Canon, of different bigness, Ten Mortars, and a great
quantity of Powder, and other Ammunitions, but most of the Canon was
Dismounted. His Electoral Highness went this same Evening in a Solemn manner to
take possession of the Town, as Governor of the Low Countries, being received
by the Clergy, and Magistrates, and the Confrairies, (i. e.) Companies of
Tradesmen under the Patronage of some Saint: The last mounted upon Stilts about
four Foot high, upon which they walked and danced very dexterously, Beat Drums,
Represented Battles, and Displayed their Banners, etc. The Elector went in this
order to the Cathedral, dedicated to St. Aubin, where the Bishop sang Te Deum
Pontifically, with Trumpets and Kettle-Drums. A Stately Pyramid of Fireworks
was prepared before the Electors Lodgings for the Night, when all the Cannon
round the Place was thrice Discharged for its Deliverance from the French;
under which it had been (reckoning from the Capitulation June 20th. 1692, to
the Capitulation Aug. 22. 1695.) Three Years Two Months and Two Days*

Thus this Important Place is fallen into our hands, which as the French said,
could be Restored, but not Taken, which justly deserves the name of one of the
strongest Towns of Europe. When Don John of Austria took it by Stratagem out of
the hands of the States of the Low Countries, who kept a Garrison in it by the
Pacification of Ghent, he said that he had now the Key of the Netherlands in
his Pocket, and that he was Master of the Country: We may as well say now,
That since Namur opens the way between the Sambre and the Meuse, where the
French have their weakest Frontier; that if we maintain that superiority of
Forces we had the last Campaign, (as it is our Interest, and the sure way of
bringing the War to a speedy and happy Conclusion) that it is the Key of Peace
in our hands: And if we consider the vast strength of the Place, both by Nature
and by Art, the great Garrison in it, the Character of a Marechal of France in
general, and that of the Marechal of Boufflers in particular, that defended it
with the many High and Considerable Officers under him: The great Armies
concerned on both sides, either to Cover or Attempt the Relief of this Siege,
it may justly be ranked among the most Famous Sieges Registered in History: But
that which adds very much to the Boldness of the Undertaking, and which shows
the Visible Blessing of Almighty God upon it (which we ought always thankfully
to acknowledge) is, that at the same time we had a weak Frontier left Naked,
and exposed to a Powerful Enemy: Brusselles, Bruges, and Ghendt seem^d to be at
their Discretion; and though we had both A^^h and (...), yet they covered none
of these great and defenseless Places: And it is no^ to be doubted, but that the
French could have done us a vast deal of Mischief in our weak Frontiers, such
as would have over balanced the Loss of N^mur, if they had not set their heart
upon the Raising of this Siege; but it was the Darling of the the French Kings
Conquests, the finest S^ene of his History, and therefore a Place not to be
taken, but by the Arms of France, and Lewis the 14th. in Person: If we likewise
compare the present Strength of Namur to what it was when the French took it,
and our Frontier to theirs; this must raise a vast difference between the Siege
of Namur 1692, and that of 1695. And that which must Elevate the Glory of His
Majesty, the Great and Happy Conductor of this Siege, above all that other
Conquerors have done, is, That such Monarchs have made Conquests for
themselves, Conquests to oppress their Neighbors, and to Raise a Mighty Empire
upon their Ruin: But here His Majesty Exposed Himself daily to the greatest
Dangers to Conquer for the good of Europe, to free it from Oppression, and to
Establish its Peace and Liberties upon a Lasting Foundation. I shall say no
more concerning this Famous Siege, but that the Forces of all the Allies
concerned in it, have Acquitted themselves like Gallant Men, and by forcing
this strongest Ra^part the Enemies had in the Conquered Low Countries, they
give us a very good Earnest of what we are to expect in other like attempts;
but particularly his Majesty's National Forces have done Wonders; they have
Encountered the greatest Dangers with so little Fear and Concern as surprised
the Besieged, and made them believe our Men were flush't with Brandy before
they went on; as if Humane Nature, without some adventitious Supply was not
capable of so little Fear and Concern in such Dangers.

The same day we took possession of the Castle of Namur, Prince Vaud^mont went
sick from the Camp to Brussels; And though he was so at the very first coming
of the Marechal de Villeroy to the Plains of Fleury, yet his Zeal and Courage
had the better of his weakness, and carried him through all the Fatigues to see
this great Affair over. Whilst we continued in this Camp near Namur, His
Majesty went daily to view the Fortifications of the Castle and Outworks, to
give Orders about the reparation of them, and the making new ones to defend the
weakest parts; where we had found our advantage, not to give the same to others
The Brigades that had been present at the marching out of the Enemies,
continued Encamped about the Cohorne, Casotte, and Abbey of Salsen; and Major
General Churchil with his 20 Battallions in the Retrenchments before the Town.
The 28th. the Marechal de Villeroy repassed the Sambre at Bussiere and encamped
along the River Haisne between the Sambre and Mons, with his Head Quarters at
Binche, leaving the Marquis ^e Harcourt with a flying Army to return into the
^ay's de Luxembourg to observe the Brandenburgh Forces in their return home,
and the Sieur de Pracontal, with a little Body about Philipville. The same day
the Regiments of ^erguson and Marton, etc. were sent to join Sir David
Collier's Regiment by Namur, in order to remain there under his Command the
Winter following; the rest of ^ir David's Collier's Brigade marched back this
day into the Camp. The 29th. the Army marched upon the left from Boucqu^t by
Masy, and Encamped with the Right at the Abbey of Villers Pe^wys, and the left
at Sombref the Kings Quarters, and the Electors at Marbais, glad to remove from
the Neighborhood of Namur, where Forage was so scarce: The Army consisted then
of Seventy Five Battallions, and all the Cavalry except that of Brandenburgh
and Hesse, which with the rest of those Troops march^d to Falais, and Encamped
with their Right upon the Mehaigne, and Left upon the Mense, but the Lantgrave
of H^sse attended His Majesty to Sombreff, and took his leave the next day to
return into Germany, leaving his Troops under the Command of Count Lip, which
with the Brandenburg Troops continued here sometime till the middle of
September to cover Namur, whilst we were working daily very hard to Repair the
Breaches. Twenty Five Battallions remain^d besides at Namur under the Command
of Major General Cohorne, who has since been made Lieutenant General for his
extraordinary Services in the Siege, and the King of Spain has conferred upon
him the Title of Baron. The same Day ( 29th.) the Marechal de Boufflers was
sent from Namur to Maestricht (under the Escort of the Fourth Troop of Guards)
which went this day to Loo to expect His Majesty. The Marechal de Boufflers had
the Liberty of the Town at Maestricht, and was treated with the same Respect by
the Garrison, as if it had been the Duke of Holstein Ploen himself, beating a
March, etc. Upon the Marching of our Army from Namur toward Halle, Sir Henry
Bellasis left Brussels with the Ten Battallions under His Command, and marched
back to Gh^nd^ to Incamp at Bellem upon the Canal of Bruges, where he continued
till the separation into Winter Quarters.

The 30th. the Army marched upon the Right from Villers Perwys and Sombref to
Bois Seigneur Isaac, a Rich Abbey, where the King had his Quarter: We passed the
Dyle above Genap, and Incamp^d with our Right at Brain le Chateau, and our Left
at Witersey by Nivelle: The same day the Elector left the Camp to go to
Louvain, and meet the Duchess of Bavaria, who was going to the Baths at Aix la
Chapelle. The Marechal de Villeroy marched this day from Bin^he to the Plains
of Cambron, where he Encamped with his Right near the Dender, above Aeth, and
his Left near the Abbey of Cambron, the Marechal de Villeroy had his Quarters
at Chievres: Aeth was just in the Rear of their Right, and very much incommoded
them in this Camp. 'Twas said at first they designed to Besiege Aeth, but Namur
was taken, and we had too considerable an Army in the Field for them to
undertake it.

The 31. the Kings Army marched from Bois Seigneur Isaac by Brain le Chateau,
and passed the Senne between Lembeck and Halle upon Two Bridges, the Artillery
and Wheel-Baggage by the Town of Halle, and so we Encamped as formerly, with
our Right beyond Halle, and our Left beyond Tubise, the King's Quarters at
Lembeck, and the Electors at Halle.

The first of September the Elector of Bavaria having attended her Electoral
Highness some part of the way between Louvain and Maestricht came to
Brusselles, where he assisted at the Te Deum, sung in the Great Church of St.
Gudules by the Archbishop of Malines for the Reduction of Namur; All the High
Officers of the Court, the Council of State, and that of the Finances, September.
all the Magistrates and Clergy being present: The Canon was Thrice discharged
round the Ramparts in the Evening, and the Elector received the Complements of
the Court, of the Officers of State, Magistrates, etc. for his Success in this
great Enterprise, where he has Exposed himself wonderfully in all Dangers for
the good of the Country. And here I cannot forbear mentioning the great
Expressions of Joy this poor City made for the taking of Namur, though it had
been so severely us^d by the French in the late Bombardment, and had so much
suffered for this Victory. The News of the Capitulation came to the Town the
same Night it was made, about One in the Morning; when every Body, without
staying for the Day, immediately got up, and made Bonfires out of the very
Ruins of their Houses, crying, God save the King of England, and the Elector of
Bavaria. The Joy was Universal all over the Country, and they had
Extraordinary Solemnities in Antwerp, Ghent, and Bruges, and all the
considerable Towns, with Fireworks, Feasting and Rejoicing. The 2d. the
Elector of Bavaria came from Brussels to the Camp at Hal^e.

The 3d. His Majesty being shortly to leave the Army to go to Loo, Reviewed it
this Day, drawn up in Two Lines, the Duke of Holstein Ploen Saluting at the
Head of it, and all the General Officers in their several Posts. The King rid
round every Squadron and Battallion, though it was very foul Weather, which had
continued almost daily, since the Capitulation of Namur. The French King having
ordered the Marechal of Boufflers to pass his word of Honor for the Garrisons
of Dixmuyde and Deinse (who were now better treated than before the taking of
Namur) a Gentleman sent express to the Camp from the Marechal, was dispatched
this day with a Pass for his Liberty to return to the French Court upon his
Promise, That the said Garrison should be sent back forthwith. When the
Duchess of Bavaria passed through Maestricht in her way to Aix la Chapelle,
the Marechal of Boufflers went to wait upon her Highness: And now having his
Liberty, he left Maestricht the 5th, being highly satisfied of his Treatment,
and of the Honor and Respect that he met with here, and so went on by Huy to
Dinant, and from thence to Court, where he Arrived the 11th. The Marechal was
Escorted from Maestricht to the French Frontier, by a Captain of Dragoons, to
whom he gave a Rich Sword for a Present, and other Presents to the rest of the
Officers, besides a Louis d' Or to every Dragoon of the Detachment: In his way
going to Dinant he met with the Brevet, by which he was Created Duke and Peer
of France, as a Mark of the French Kings satisfaction of his Conduct in this
Siege The Count de ^uis^ard was at the same time promised the Order of the Holy
Ghost in the first promotion. Monsieur de Megrigny Ingenier, and Major General
was made Lieutenant General and the Brigadiers Laumont, Quelus, St. Laurens and
L' Abadie Major-Generals, and several Colonels, Brigadiers, as a Mark of his
Favor, and that he was sensible they had done their Duty in this Siege.

The Armies having now done on both sides all that could be expected this
Campaign, His Majesty left the Field the 4th. in order to go to Loo, to divert
himself in Hunting, after the Fatigues of the Campaign, and went this day as
far as Malines. Prince Vaudemont waited upon the King at Vilvorde, half way
between Brussels and Malines. From Malines His Majesty went to Breda the next
day, and arrived at Loo the 10th. The King having now left the Field, I shall
hasten to bring both Armies to their Winter Quarters. The 5th. part of the
Dutch Cavalry to be Quartered in Guelderland and Towns upon the M^use, were
sent from the Camp to Cantoon that way, and the Brigades of Boncou^t and
Schack, which were to Quarter at Bruges, marched near Ghent to Incamp there,
for the better convenience of Forage. The 6th. the Regiment of Slaben^orf was
sent to Garrison in H^y to relieve that of Oxensterne to be sent to Brussels.
The 8th. being appointed for a Solemn Thanksgiving-day for the taking of Namur
in His Majesty's Forces in the Camp, as it was Appointed to be kept at the same
time by the Lords Justices of England, in London, Westminster, etc. The same
was observed accordingly, with Prayers and Sermons suitable to the occasion;
the first Composed by Dr. Willis, Chaplain-General, to supply our want of the
Form set out for that purpose by Authority in England. The 9th. we still
continued Encamped at Halle, though ^^^age was scarce, the Ways being not only
very bad by reason of the foul Weather, and consequently difficult for our
Artillery, but also because Namur was not yet in such a condition of defense as
to venture the Enemies between the Sambre and our Army, who were still incampt
in the Plains of Cambron, to ruin all the Forage and Country about Aeth; but
that Garrison was very troublesome to them in this Camp, sending out daily
Parties to take their Horses, and to make Prisoners; in which they had such
success, that before the French had left this Camp, they had got above 500
Horses from them; and Count Nassau himself, one of the Major Generals upon
their Left Wing of Horse narrowly escaped falling into the hands of one of
these Parties, who fell one Night upon his Quarter; he was in Bed, and made his
Escape in his Shirt, but the best of his Baggage was lost.

The 11th. The Marechal de Villeroy marched upon the Right from Cambron and
Chievres to Leuze, where the Army had Orders to Hurt, i.e. to make Straw
Barracks instead of Tents. The Duke of Chartres, with most of the Princes of
the Blood left the Army here to repair to Court. The 12th. our Army marched
from Halle upon the right to St. Quintin Linneck, where we Encamped with our
Right near Ternath, and our left a little beyond St. Quintin Linneck toward
Halle; The Elector had his Quarter at Esringen, the Duke of Holstein, Ploen at
St. Quintin. The 13th. our Army had orders to Hutt the Ways were very bad and
difficult to fetch Straw. The 14th. Prince Vaudemont came from Brussels to the
Camp to wait upon the Elector; The 15th. the Duke of Wirtemberg, and Count
Nassau Lieutenant General went to Brussels to wait upon Prince Vaudemont to
receive his Orders for our Army before he went to Loo, where the Prince was to
go the next day to concert with His Majesty the business about Winter Quarters,
and to be present at a Conference with the Elector of Brandenburgh about the
Operations of the next Campagn; But the Duke of Wirtemberg and Count Nassau
missed very narrowly falling into the hands of a French Party that had crept
between Halle and Brussels, in their return to the Camp; Count Nassaus two Aid
de Camps were made Prisoners just behind him, and carried to Charleroy: These
were not the only Gentlemen that had the misfortune to fall into their hands:
Their Little Sculking Parties were very troublesome between the Camp and
Brussels, having the way open to get between our Camp and this Town by Halle;
if they came in great Parties they were more apt to be discovered, for which
reason they came but few together; and if they met with Parties of Strangers to
the Country, as English, Germans, etc. they would pretend themselves to be
Walloons in the King of Spains Service. The 17th. Captains Hamilton and Hemsly
of Colonel Seymour's Regiment, with the Surgeon fell into the hands of one of
these little Parties, they endeavored to resist, Captain Hemsly had a
dangerous Wound upon his left Wrist, and they were all Three made Prisoners,
but the Party left Captain Hemsly wounded at Halle, upon the promise of the
other two to see his Ransom paid.

The Breaches of the Town and Castle of Namur being now considerably repaired,
and the French Line upon the Hill between the Sambre and the Meuse produced
down to the Sambre, besides some Works began to defend the passages of this
River, between the Line and the Castle, and others to defend the side of the
Cohorne against the Town, that it may not for the future be attacked the same
way we reduced this strong place; this I say being now the Condition of Namur,
the Hesse and Lunenbourgh Troops Decamped from the Mehaigne to march by the
Meuse (which they passed between Liege and Maestricht) to Germany* And the
Brandenbourg Forces Cantoned in the Neighborhood of Liege, expecting to go
into their Winter Quarters (as formerly) at Liege, Aix la Chapelle etc. Upon
our coming to the Camp at S. Quintin Linneck, the Spanish and Bavarian Cavalry
was likewise sent to Canton along the Dendre between Alost and Dendermond: And
the Weather having been very bad now, and most part of the Summer, and Forage
scarce, and the Troops very much fatigued, and no fear of any Enterprise from
the Enemies, this made our Army separate very early to go into Quarters. The
19th. our heavy Artillery consisting of Thirty Pieces of Canon, began to march
to Winter Quarters at Ghent, being escorted by the Regiments of Colonel
Frederick Hamilton and Cinqvilles. The 20th. My Lord of Athlone, General of the
Dutch Horse, Reviewed all the Cavalry here in the States Service. The 21th. The
Life-Guards and Horse-Granadiers were ordered to their Winter Quarters, the
first to Breda, and the last to Boisleduc. The 23th. the Dutch Artillery
marched to Malines its usual Winter Quarter, under the Convoy of the Regiments
of Seymour and Collingwood to be quartered there, and some Dutch Regiments
going to the Frontiers of Holland. Colonel Collingwood's Regiment afterward
was sent to Ghent, and Colonel Trelawnyes to Malines, where it had been
formerly. This day the Elector had notice that the French Army had broke up the
day before, not to go yet into Quarters, but to Canton in the Villages between
the A little River which falls into the Scheld at Escana^^e.
Run and the Scheld, Villeroy having his Quarter at Cords; upon which the
Garrisons of Ghendt and Bruges, Ostend, Camerlings Ambacht, and Canal of Bruges
marched the 24. toward their respective Winter Quarters, with the remainder of
the English Train of Artillery and Foot, under the Command of the Duke of
Wirtemberg, Count Nassau, etc. the Horse under the Command of Monsieur d'
Auverquerque: We encamped this day upon the Dender (which we passed at Alost)
at Arenbodeghem. The 25th. at Mallem near Ghent, where the Artillery and
Garrison began to march into Quarters the next day. The Garrisons of Bruges,
Ostend, etc. marched on under the Command of Major General Ramsay to their
Winter Quarters; as the Ten Battallions of Foot, and Two of Dragoons Encamped
at Bellem upon this Canal, had done some days before: Sir Henry Bellasis, who
Commanded them, went to the Hague to receive His Majesty's Instructions about
the Trial of the Officers concerned in the Capitulations of Dixmuyde and
Deinse, being appointed President of the High Court Marshal to try them: For
about this time the foresaid Garrisons were set at liberty by the French Kings
Order, and come to Ghendt, but the Officers Commanding the respective Regiments
of these Garrisons were either Confined in Ghent, or sent Prisoners to the Sas
van Ghendt, Major General Ellembergh Governor of Dixmuyde was among the last.
These Garrisons were sent back with the usual Fidelity of the French, they
still retained those, whom by their ill usage and infraction of the Cartel and
Capitulation, they had forced to take on in their Service. It Is true, as it is
said that they published by Beat of Drum in several of their Frontier Garrisons,
that those who had so been Listed among them had liberty to return, but they
took care that none of the Parties concerned should have any benefit by it;
however many of these forced Soldiers have deserted back to us this Summer, as
English, Scots, and Danes, and do Desert daily. The 26th. the Elector left the
Army at St. Quintin Linneck to go to Brussels, and the 27th. the Duke of
Holstein Ploen, and the rest of the Army here separated into Winter Quarters.
The same day His Majesty came from Loo to the Hague with Prince Vaudemont; and
the 28th the Elector of Brandenbourgh; who had been retarded at Cleves by some
extraordinay Business, and so could not come to Loo. The State of our Army in
Flanders was resolved upon here for the next Campaign, and to Augment
considerably our Forces, whereby (notwithstanding the great preparations of the
Enemies, and their new Levyes) we may still be proportionably Superior to them
in the Field, and pursue that Success which it has pleased God to give us the
last Summer over our Enemies, to advance the great and necessary work of
asserting our Liberties, and the Liberties of all Christendom, the only end of
our Just and Righteous Cause, and thereupon to ground a firm, lasting, and
happy Peace, which, (if we maintain that Power over our Enemies it has pleased
God to give us the last Campaign) we need not doubt of effecting very speedily.
One thing is certain, That if the Allies Money holds out as long as that of the
French Kings, (as it is very reasonable to think it should) his Forces must fail
before ours; for he has only France and his Conquests, with part of Switzerland
to recruit his Forces, and to make new Levyes, but the Allies have all the rest
of Christendom for an Inexhaustible Supply to make up their Armies. The King
having spent some days in Conferences with the Elector of Brandenbourgh and
States General concerning this Important Work, Sailed the 9th. for England,
where His Majesty Arrived the 10th at Margate, and lay that Night at
Canterbury, and so His Majesty came the next day to Kensington, being every
where received by His good and loving Subjects with all the demonstration of
the greatest Joy imaginable for the preservation of His Sacred Person, amidst
all the Dangers to which the King has exposed Himself, and for the great
Success of his Arms during the Campaign, which next under God, is due to His
Majesty.

Though our Armies were separated into Winter Quarters, October.
yet the Enemies still continued to Canton up and down the Country near their
Lines, to cover their new Works here, and at Courtray. The First of October the
French Army (Quartered along the Run) passed the Scheld, and cantoned along
their Lines between the Lys and the Scheld; and the 2d. they passed the Lys by
Courtray to Canton between the Lys and the Mandel, where they continued till
about the 18th. of October, that the Merechal de Villeroy went to Court, and
the Army into Quarters; but upon their passage of the Lys to Canton along the
River Mandel, they made a Detachment of all their Forces designed to quarter
near the Sea to form a Body near Furnes, which gave us some Jealousy for
Newport; and upon this Motion, the Duke of Wirtemberg drew out 125 Men out of
every Regiment of Foot of our Forces, besides the Regiments of Fairfax Danish
Guards, and Packmore entire, which made a Body of about Ten Thousand Men, and
Encamped, with a small Train of Artillery sent from Ghent for that purpose,
upon the Sandhills near Newport, for the safety of that place. But it does not
appear that the Enemies had any other design, than to make some new Works about
Furnes and Kenoque, which the Marechal de Villeroy came to view, and the
Fortifications of Dunkirk, before his going to Court. The Weather was
extraordinary fair and favorable, more than is usual at this time of the Year,
which I suppose kept the Enemies out so much the longer. The 22th. the Duke of
Wirtemberg with the Detachment under his Command returned from the
Neighborhood of Newport back into Winter Quarters, after the Enemies had
separated on their side.

Sir Henry Bellasis having received His Majesty's Instructions at the Hague,
came to Ghent the beginning of October, to be President of the Council of War
appointed for the Trial of the Commanding Officers in the Garrisons of Dixmuyde
and Deinse, which sat at the Golden Apple a great Inn in Ghent where all the
said Officers were brought and detained Prisoners. The Council of War began to
sit the 9th. Composed of Sir Henry Bellasiss Lieutenant General and President,
Major-Generals Meloniere, Ramsay and Eppinger; ^rigadiers, Fitz-Patrick,
Anhalt, and Haxhausen; Colonels Fairfax, Collingwood, Schoor, Erff, Arents and
Bernstorf. The Court sat till the 25th. that they came to Sentence after a full
hearing on both sides, which Sir Henry Bellasis brought over to be approved of
by His Majesty, which was done without any alterations. Executed at Ghent, Nov.
20.
Major General Ellembergh Governor of Dixmuyde was Condemned to be Beheaded,
and his Goods Confiscated; some Colonels were Broke and rendered incapable of
Serving the King, others deprived of their Regiments without any such clause,
others Suspended, and others acquitted with Honor. The Sentence (I suppose)
will be Published, and I need not swell this Account of the Campaign to a
greater Bulk, to give a particular Relation of it.

Gloria in Excelsis Deo, in Terris Pax.
List of the Forces in the Line of Circumvallation at the Siege A of Namur.
Before the Town the King, the Duke of Holstein Ploen, Earl of Portland, and
the D. of Ormond Lieutenant-Generals of Horse.
Infantry in the Kings Pay before the Town, Count Nassau, Lieutenant General,
Major General Ramsay. Brigadiers, Lord Cutts, Fitzpatrick, Selwyn, and L.
George Hamilton.
Battal. English Guards. First Regiment 2 Second Regiment 1
Dutch-Guards 1 Scots-Guards 1 Royal 1 Selwyn 1 Trelawney 1 Seymour 1 Columbine
1 Fusiliers 1 Tidcomb 1 Stanley 1 Collingwood 1 Lauder 1 Ingoldesby 1
Saunderson 1 Maitland 1 Nassau 1 Battallions 19 English Squadrons, 3 Dutch
37-40.
In all before the Town 45 Battallions.

Dutch Infantry before the Town, Lieut. General Tettau. Major-Generals, Fagel,
Salisch, Lindeboom, and Heukelom. Brigadiers, Holstein Norbourg, Frisheim and
Heyden.
Battal. Tettau 1 Weed 1 Salisch 1 Lindeboom 1 Dumont 1 Ameliswert 1 Frisheim 1
Oxenstern 1 Braha 1 Capol 2 Marquet 1 Wolfembuttel 1 Hasfert 1 La Mothe 1
Holstein Norburg 1 Fagel 1 Spar 1 Carle 1 Gohr 1 Harscholt 1 Lottum 1 Essen 1
Arents 1 Heukelom 1 Holstein Ploen 1 Battallions 26
In the Line of Circumvallation between the Sambre and the Meuse, the Elector
with the Spanish and Bavarian Generals. Prince Cerclas of Tilly. Major-Generals
Cohorne and Suerin. Brigadier Dedem, etc.
Battallions Ravarian Foot 4 Brandenbourgh Foot 8 Dutch Nassau Friesland 2
Cohorne 1 Dedem 1 Obergen 1 Stockhausen 1 Altholstein 1 Heckeren 1 Knoring 1
Margrave Lodowick 1 Swerin 3
Battallions 25 Spanish and Bavarian Cavalry, Squadrons 20
In the Line of Circumvallation, between the two Meuses, (i e.) on the
Condros-side before the Fauxbourg de Jambe, Velt-Marechal Fleming. Lieutenant
General Hyden: Major-Generals, Arnheim and La Cave. Count de Berlo,
Major General of the Liege Horse.
Battallions Brandenbourgh 10 Brandenbourgh and Liege Cavalry, 60 Squadr. 60

Battal. in all in this Siege 80 Squadrons 120
A Particular List of the Brandenbourgh Foot concerned in the Siege of Namur.
Battallions. Guards 3 Lottum 1 Slabendorf 1 Prince Philip 1 Anhalt 1 Huet 1
Electoral Prince 1 Prince Christian Lodowick 1 D'orfling 1 Barfus 1 Dohnhoff 1
Heyden 1 Dona 1 Brand 1 Horn 1 Young Heyden 1 Battallions -- 18
A List of the Forces come from the Rhine, Commanded by the Landtgrave of
Hesse, and under His Highness by the Count de la Lip.
Cavalry, Major General Spiegel.
Squadrons Hanover Noyelles 3 Hesse Regiments of Life-Guards 3 Lip 3 Spiegel 4

Dragoons.
Zell Bottmer 2 Hanover Aremberg 1 Hesse The Prince 3 Tettau 3 Squadrons 22
Infantry, Major General Goerts. Battallions Hanover Hanover Guards 1
Velt-Marechal Padewits 1
Zell Holstein, alias Bulaw 1 Hesse Guards 1 Prince William 1 Goerts 1 Sames 1
Union Regiment 1 Circle of the Upper Rhine 1 Hesse Darmstadt 1 Battallions 10

List of the Winter Quarters for the Year, 1695.
GHENDT, The Three Battallions of English Guards, Churchil, Fuziliers,
Collingwood Frederick Hamilton, Nassau, Packmoer, Six Battallions of Danes,
Train of Artillery.

BRVGES, Scots Guards, Royal, Fairfax, Columbine, Bridges, Graham (the Colonel
deprived by the Court Marshal, the King has given this Regiment to Colonel
Walter Collier, Brother to Sir David Collier, and Capt. Commandant of one of
the Dutch Battallions of Guards:) Offerrel (The King has given this Regiment to
Colonel Robert Mackay, Colonel of a Regiment in Scotland, which His Majesty has
bestowed upon Colonel Macgill, that Commanded the first Battallion of Scots
Guards in the Siege of Namur) Ingoldsby, Saunderson, and Buchan.

MALINES, Selwyn, Trelawny, Seymour, and Brewer.

NAMVR, Collier, Ferguson, Marton, one of Danes, Hulsen.

DENDERMOND, Stanley, Earl,

OSTEND, Lauder, Mackay, Tiffeny.

NEWPORT, Colonel George Hamilton.

DAMME, Lesley, (The Colonel deprived by the Court Marshall, His Majesty has
given the Regiment to Colonel How, Captain in the first Regiment of Guards)
Lorne

ANDENARDE, Wolfembu^tel, Hering.

LIER, Hanover- Guards, St Paul.

In the Villages between the Canal of Brussels and Malines, Dutch-Guards.

In the Camerlings Ambacht, Granvill^, Strathnaver, Belcas^el, Cinqvilles.

Along the Canal of Bruges, Tidcomb, Maitland, La Meloniere and one of Danes.

BREDA. Aver. The Colonel has likewise been broke by the Court-Marshal, but I
have not yet heard who has the Regiment.

All the English Cavalry and Danish is at Ghendt.

The English Life-Guards at Breda.

Dutch Life-Guards, and my Lord Portland's Regiment of Horse at the Hague.

Horse-Granadiers at Boisleduc.

Dutch Horse upon English Pay, at Bruges, except Tennagel at St. Gertruydenberg
and Montpouillan in some Villages near Malines.

The Dragoons are quartered in the Villages between Ghendt and Sas Van Ghendt,
except the Dragoons of Ross, in the Villages between Bruges and Damme. The
Queens Dragoons Commanded by Colonel Lloyd upon the Canal of Sluys, and those
of Cunningham upon the Canal of Ostend, in the Pays de Nort.

This is the Repartition of His Majesty's Forces.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. lin. prim. and has, Read, and as he has. Page 11. lin. 7. Arsoil. r.
Arseel. In the List of the French Army, instead of Montmorency, Luxembourg, r.
Montmorency-Luxembourg. p. 31. l. 13. last March. r. last March. 15.
Lieutenant, Colonel r. a Lieutenant Colonel. p. 39. l. 25. St. Hamines, r. St.
Hermines. page 51. l. 14. Wirk, r. Winck. p. 62. l. 9. of the Tower, r. of the
Town. p. 64. l. 34. Amstin, r. Austin. p. 79. l. 18. sent for their Prison, r.
sent, for their Prison, p. 85. l. 4. possible, r. possibly. p. 86. l. antepen.
pisputed, r. disputed. p. 87. l. Antepen. to be he killed, dele he. p. 102,
etc. After we had possession of this Gate, we began to draw off our Batteries,
and the Day following in the Morning the Garrison in the Redoubts of St.
Fiacre, St. Anthony, and Piednoir; The Two first upon, etc. read thus: After we
had possession of the Gate we began to draw off our Batteries; And the day
following, the Garrison of the Redoubts of St. Fiacre, St. Anthony, and
Piednoir marched out to join that of Namur to Retire together into the Castle;
the two first upon the Hill* etc. page 118. l. 36. so far the Bombarding, r. so
far that the Bombarling, p. 128. l. 31. stocked, r. flanked. l. 35. Bale, r.
Bule. p. 136. l. 36. Marquet, r. the Margrave. p 143. l. 33. began to wait, r.
began to want. p 146. l. 16. at the same a time Colonel, r. at the same time, a
Colonel, p. 167. l. 13. nearest, r. nearer.

Omitted, p. 82. l. 1. Commanders, r. Camarades. l. 6. any that, r. any thing
that.

ADVERTISEMENT.
1 MR. Falle's Account of the Isle of JERSEY, Dedicated to the KING, 8vo.

2 MR. Falle's Sermon before the English Garrison in Jersey, April 10. 1692.

3 MR. Fall 's Sermon at Whitehall, December. 30. 1694.

4 MR. Falle's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, April 21. 1695*

5 A Charge given at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County
of Surrey, holden at Darking, on Tuesday the 5th. of April, 1692. and in the
Fourth Year of Their Majesty's Reign By the Honorable H. Hare, Esquire One of
Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for that County. The Second Edition,
Corrected.

6 A Discourse of Natural and Revealed Religion in several Essays, By Mr. T.
Nourse.

7 The Anatomy of the Earth, Dedicated to all Gentlemen Miners. By Tho.
Robinson* Rector of Crosby in Cumberland.

8 A Letter to Dr. South.

All these Printed for John Newton, at the Three Pigeons in Fleet Street.

1 A Guide to the Devout Christian, in Three Parts* Price ^^

2 A Guide to Repentance* Or, The Character and Behavior of the Devout
Christian in Retirement. By John Ine^t, M. A. Chanter of the Cathedral Church
of Lincoln. Price 1 s.

3 Bethel's Interest of Princes. 2 s. 6 d.

4 Worlidge 's Two Treatises. 2 s. 6 d.

5 Sir Francis Moor's Reports

6 Geofrey Palmers Reports.

7 Mr. Flavel 's Englands Duty. 4 s.

8 Mr. Flavel's of Baptism, against Car^y. 1 s.


