THE HISTORY OF THE Campaign IN FLANDERS, For the Year 1697.

Together with a Journal of the Siege of Ath, and a Summary Account of the
Negotiations of the General Peace at Ryswick.

By EDWARD D'AUVERGNE, M. A. Then Chaplain to His Majesty's Regiment of Scots
Guards.

LONDON. Printed for Matt. Wotton at the Three Daggers, and John Newton at the
Three Pigeons in Fleetstreet, School. Where are Sold the Histories for the Years
1692, 1693, 1694, 1695 and 1696. Written by the same Author.

TO His EXCELLENCY THE Earl of Portland, His Majesty's Ambassador
Extraordinary in France, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
My LORD,
I Humbly beg leave to offer the following History to your EXCELLENCY; to
which, among other Considerations, a Principle of Gratitude has determined me,
to express in some measure the Sense I have of the present Blessings we all
enjoy (and which bring my Labors of this kind to a most Happy Conclusion) by a
Glorious Peace, in the Management whereof your EXCELLENCY has been so much
concerned: My LORD, This is a Work which will make your Name Great and Happy in
the Memory of all Succeeding Generations, as it ingrafts it at present in the
Hearts and Affections of all Men in England that value their Religion, Rights
and Liberties which they find established upon a stable and solid Foundation in
the perfection of so Great a Work.

But this, My LORD, is not the only Title you have to our Thanks and Praise;
the great hand you had in bringing about the happy Revolution, and the Share
you have had in almost all the Actions of our great Monarch ever since, are
what ought to make you ever dear to England, and almost all the rest of Europe.

My LORD, I will not pretend to enter upon your EXCELLENCY's Panegyric in this
Epistle, it is indeed more than can be comprised in it, as well as a Subject
above the Power of my Pen: You were dedicated even in your Youth to His
Majesty's Service, at which time you gave such uncommon Demonstrations of Zeal,
Fidelity and Affection, as have justly fixed you in His Royal Favors: And as
might well be expected from such beginnings, you have been ever since engaged
in the Great Achievements of Glory and Renown: In War, you have been a
constant Partaker of all those Dangers to which our Great Monarch has so often
and so wonderfully exposed Himself in the Bloody and Hazardous Fields of Mars,
you have still been with Him in so many Battles and Sieges, you have shared in
all the Fatigues of so many Campagnes, and have been a considerable Actor in
His most Happy and Successful Enterprises.

In Peace, Your EXCELLENCY has had the Ministry of the most Important Affairs
of Europe (...) equal Integrity, Wisdom and Faithfulness, and (...) for His
Majesty's Advantage as your own Honor and Reputation: Such Rare and
Extraordinary Qualities have induced the King to make Choice of Your EXCELLENCY
for his Ambassador Extraordinary in a Court, where especially in the present
Conjuncture of Affairs, they are more than ever requisite; In the discharge of
which most Noble Function you have justified the Choice that has been made of
your Person by answering in all things the Greatness of Your Master, and the
Credit, Wealth and Renown of a Nation, you have always had a particular
Ambition to be a Member of, and whose Welfare, Happiness and Prosperity you aim
at in all your Proceedings.

But, My LORD, all this would be but Vanity, were there not a better Foundation
for the Glory of another World, by a true Sense of Piety, and an uprightness of
Conscience, for which your Life is so Exemplary: And may your EXCELLENCY go on
daily more and more in doing good, especially in this respect, both by your
Authority and good Example; that Vice, Irreligion and Profaneness meeting with
all Discouragements from so eminent a Person, we may see Virtue, Justice and
Godliness (which is like to be our best Security for the continuance of the
present Peace) flourish under so good an Influence: These are the Hearty Wishes
and Prayers of

My LORD, Your EXCELLENCY' s

TO THE READER.
THE only occasion I have for a Preface is to give the Reader some
Satisfaction for the coming out of this History so late; and the Reason in few
words is, that I could not get the several Lines of Battle of the French Armies
in Flanders the last Year soon enough, having received them from France but in
the Christmas Holidays; besides several Memoirs from Holland, particularly
about the Electors Motions the last Campaign, which I got about the same time,
and which were absolutely necessary for the compiling of this Work: And when I
have told the Reader, that I have Composed it since the beginning of January, I
believe he will be satisfied that I have made some dispatch in the Publishing
of it.

I must desire the Reader to observe, that, whereas I have intimated in the
Body of this Account, that Pensionary Heinsius his Journey from the Hague to
the Camp the last Campaign, might have been to open a way for the Conferences
between the Earl of Portland and the Marechal of Bouflers, because they
happened two or three days after; upon good information I find that the first
overture was made by one Monsieur de Gy, Brother or near Relation to Prince
Vaudemont's Master of the Horse, who passing through the Marechal de Boufler's
Camp, the Marechal desired him to make his Compliments to My Lord Portland, and
to let him know that he was very desirous to Embrace him, which Monsieur de He
is since made Town Major of Mons for this Service.
Gy signified to his Lordship at his coming to Brussels; and My Lord having
returned the Compliment, That he would be very glad to meet him half way for
that Purpose, the Marechal sent an Express of it to the French Court, and
having Received an Answer he dispatched a Trumpet in our Camp for the first
Meeting.

I have no more to desire of the Reader but to take Notice that this History,
as well as all the former, goes by the old or Julian Account observed in
England; and to Correct the few Errors of the Press he may meet with, the most
unpardonable being inserted here below.

ERRATA.
PAge 42. Line 17. Vlbray Lege Vibray, p. 48. l. Antopen, and the Dender near
the Denmonde at Wiese, Le, and the Dender between Dendermonde and Wiese. p. 85.
l. 7. ti^ 'twas in the Night, Le. till 'twas late in the Night. p. 86. l. 2.
Major of the Day, Le. Major General of the Day. p. 89. l. 36. Malenbec, Le.
Mulenbeck.

THE HISTORY OF THE Campaign IN FLANDERS, For the Year 1697.
HAving given the Public an Account of several of the former Campagnes, in
which the Reader could find but little pleasure besides the satisfaction of
knowing the Truth of several Matters of Fact in the Tragical Scenes of the most
Tedious, Cruel and Destructive War that has been known for many Ages in
Christendom, if we consider the Universalness of its Extent with the Duration
of it; and wherein his Thoughts could be entertained with nothing but Toilsom
and Fatiguing Marches and Countermarches between Opposite Armies, some to
Execute, others to Frustrate Designs, and others barely to subsist at the Cost
and Charges of the Poor Husbandmen, and of a Miserable Country. (For what else
makes up the Subject of such Histories, can contain little besides the unwelcom
account of the Effusion of but too much Christian Blood in Cruel Battles,
Bloody Sieges, and Barbarous Bombarding, Burning and Destroying of Towns and
Villages, some to satisfy and others to withstand the Ambition of Princes) I
have thought I could do no less than bring those Accounts to that happy Period
we find in the present Blessings of a General Peace; especially, when for this
very reason the History of the last Campaign must yet be the most acceptable
that has been given to the Public concerning the late War.

I must Confess nevertheless that little can be said in this Relation to the
Advantage of the Allies; for the most that could have been expected during the
last Campaign from them, considering how much they were over power'd of the
French by the separate Peace of Savoy and Italy, had been to have stood
effectually upon their Defense; which I believe could yet have been done, if
the Germans had taken the Field as early upon the Rhine as we did in Flanders,
or that the Spanish Government were capable of any manner of Vigor to have
provided by times for the Defense of Barcelona (the only place they had to look
after in Catalonia) by which they could have balked at once the whole designs
of the French for the Campaign on that side: However, this very thing includes
more Real Glory than all the Triumphs and Victories our Great Monarch could
have reaped in the Bloody Fields of War; (besides the great Happiness it is
attended with for all his People) that at the End of it we can see the most
Formidable Power of Christendom, a Power, that for many years had resisted the
Confederate Attempts of most of the Princes and States of Europe, a Power, that
seemed to have tired the Allies more than it self by a long and expensive War;
a Power, that with all these Advantages, designed no less than our Kings Ruin,
with that of our Religion, Laws and Liberties, obliged to seek Peace with us,
and yield to his Majesty the just and quiet possession of the Crown's he wears,
to the great Comfort and Happiness of His People under his Easy and Auspicious
Government, which, with the security of all that can be dear to a Nation, must
promise us all the Blessings, that can be expected from Peace abroad, and a
great and flourishing Trade at home: And that even all the advantages which
this great and formidable power has had over the Allies in the Course of the
last Campaign have only served as a means to procure it a quicker and more
speedy accommodation with them, instead of prolonging a then unsuccessful War
on their side. This is what I am now to Relate, and which must give much more
Satisfaction to the Honest Reader, than if I were to speak of Battles won and
other Warlike Triumph's and Victory's; and therefore a Subject which, without
any farther preface, I shall enter immediately upon.

The Campaign of 1696. had produced nothing extraordinary, besides the
extraordinary, though not new, proceedings of the Court of Savoy in making an
underhand Treaty with France separate from the Allies, expressly contrary to the
Tenor of the Offensive and Defensive Alliance the Duke had entered in with
them, besides other Obligations he had to them. And though the Conditions
offered him by the French were very Advantageous, yet it has so evidently
appeared since, in the whole Course of Affairs, that France wanted Peace, (all
its Successes during the last Campaign having been made use of to no other
purpose than to oblige the Allies to this very thing) that we need not doubt
but the Duke of Savoy would at least have had as good Terms in a general
Treaty, and the Allies certainly much better, when France, by the diversion of
the War of Italy, would have been frustrated of those Successes it has had in
Catalonia and Flanders, which have enabled it in a manner to give the Law in
the General Treaty of Ryswick. But it is not the first time the Court of Savoy
has made use of such Politics; we shall find the same Management in the War
about the Succession of Mantua, and the putting of Pignerol in the hands of the
French, contrary to the Treaty of Quierasque, which place has now been rescued
out of their hands by the very same Methods; when (as the event has showed it)
it is plain enough he could have had the same Condition by sticking to the
Obligations of the Offensive and Defensive Alliance and leaving things to the
fair and just Issue of a General Treaty: And yet notwithstanding this separate
Treaty, it is the Opinion of several people, that France would not have been
much the better for it, but certainly Savoy much the worse, if the Emperor and
King of Spain had continued the War in Italy, as it seems to have been their
Interest, especially at a time when there were Overtures of a General Peace:
The most that France could have done in such a Case would have been the taking
of Valence; whereas the Spaniards would have had the whole Winter before them
in putting the Milane's in a posture of Defense, in getting Forces from the
Empire, and increasing their own Troops by the help of England and Holland,
who, it is to be presumed, would have given the same assistance, upon the account
of Milan as they had done before to the Duke of Savoy: By this means Italy
would have had a greater share in the Burden of the War, and whatever Success
the French could have proposed to themselves the Campaign following on this
side, yet it is evident that Spain would have had this advantage by it, that it
would have saved Barcelona, and warded that great blow it has received at home;
and the Allies would have been able by the diversion of Italy to have acted
offensively both upon the Rbine and Flanders. These were the visible
Consequences of a War in Italy; and therefore because the Emperor and King of
Spain agreed to the Peace on that side contrary to their Interest and that of
the Allies in General, several persons begun to suspect the Popish Princes as
if they had a design to leave the Protestants in the Lurch, and the Bigots of
the Church of Rome fed themselves with hopes of a Religious War in which they
thought of nothing less than the Extirpation of what they are pleased to call
Heresy. But the Emperor and King of Spain could not be imposed upon by this
pretext of Religion, they knew very well, that if England and Holland had been
left engaged in a War with the French King, all the advantages he would have
had by it would only have made more firm and lasting Fetters for themselves;
and it is therefore probable that the Emperor and King of Spain joined in this
Peace of Italy at the Popes most earnest Solicitations, who though his
Mediation signified little on the other side of the Alps, yet was very
desirous of seeing Peace at his own doors, and used consequently all his
Industry and Interest to bring it about. And if such were the vain and
groundless hopes of the Popish Bigots abroad, our Jacobites were no less
elevated at home upon this separate Treaty of Savoy and the consequent Treaty
for the Peace of Italy; they could imagine no less than that the French King
would force every one of the Allies in the Continent of Europe one after
another to make up an accommodation, and thus, that nothing would remain for
him but to deal with England, and bend all his Forces upon it for the
reestablishment of the late King; But they both have been very much deceived in
the event, which does now convince the World, that the French King aimed
particularly at coming by this means the sooner to a General Peace with all the
Allies, and to have so much the better Terms for himself.

And indeed, at that very time that these things were Transacting in Italy so
much to the prejudice of the General Interest of the Allies, the French King
had an Agent in Holland to make overtures of a General Peace; and the Duke of
Savoy made use of this very pretext to excuse the Treaty he had made apart with
France, in his Letter to the Elector of Brandenbourgh; he was jealous, or
rather pretended to be so, of the States having received an Agent from France
to treat with them, and therefore he thought that he might very well treat for
himself.

Monsieur de Callieres (as we have said it in our precedent History) had come
to Holland with a pass from the States at the very opening of the Campaign,
and resided privately at Delft the whole Summer to negotiate Affairs with some
of the States Ministers in order to come to a General Treaty; this occasioned
so many Journeys which Monsieur Dyckvelt made between Holland and the Camp in
Brabant to give an account to the King and receive His Majesty's instructions;
But whether the uncertain state of the King of Spain's Health, who had a most
dangerous fit of sickness the latter end of the Summer, made the French delay
and spin away time in their Offers, or that the Imperialists and Spaniards were
unwilling to hear of reducing things no farther than the Treaty of Nimeguen,
the King of Swedens Mediation was not accepted in due Form by the French King
and the Congress of the Allies at the Hague, till the Campaign was over, or
rather till the beginning of the Winter; upon which the Baron de Lillienroot
the Swedish Minister at the Hague received full powers from Stockholme to
manage the Mediatour's part in the Congress that should be held for the
concluding of a General Peace between France and the Allies. Things being
brought thus far toward a Treaty, the several Princes concerned begun to
appoint Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries for it, of which I shall only
mention the Principal: On the Emperors side were named the Count de Caunitz
his Ambassador and Plenipotentiary at the Congress of the Allies at the Hague,
Count Straatman, and the Baron de Zeilern: On his Majesty of Great Britains,
the Earl of Pembrook, my Lord Viscount Villiers (now E. of Jersey) His
Majesty's Ambassador to the States and Plenipotentiary at the Congress of the
Allies at the Hague, and Sir Jos. Williamson, to whom was joined afterward in
Commission, as third Plenipotentiary Ambassador my L. Lexinton His Majesty's
Ambassador at Vienna, as 'twere provisionally; for during the whole Congress he
did not leave the Imperial Court. On the French Kings behalf were named M. de
Harlay Boneuil, Monsieur de Courtin, who not being able to attend upon this
great employment by reason of his great age and a blindness that seized him
immediately after his Nomination, Count de Crecy Verjus was appointed in his
stead as second, and the third Monsieur de Calliere before hand in Holland as
his Most Christian Majesty's Agent to make the Overtures of a Treaty. On the
behalf of Spain were named Don Barnardo de Quiros, the King of Spain's
Ambassador to the States General and Plenipotentiary at the Congress of the
Allies at the Hague, and the Count de Tirimont, to whom the Elector of Bavaria
joined the Baron de Preylmeyer to take care of his own particular Interest. For
the States General were named Messieurs Boreel, Dyckvelt, and Van Haren; all
these had the Character of Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, as
well as the Mediator. The rest I shall leave to those who write particularly
the Account of the Negotiations of this Peace to account for.

After the accepting the Mediation of Sweden, and the naming of Plenipotentiary
Ambassadors by the Chief Powers concerned, Monsieur de Callieres who hitherto
had kept up very privately in Holland and mostly at Delft, took upon him the
public Character of the French Kings Minister, and had very frequent
Conferences with the Ministers of the States in the presence of the Mediator,
or particularly among themselves to settle the Preliminaries, in order to come
to a place of Treaty. Monsieur d'Avaux the French Ambassador at Stockholm had
made several offers to the Court of Sweden in order to open the way to a
General Treaty by the Mediation of that Crown, not only during the Campaign of
1696. but also, in the Winter 1694. which the Allies pretended to have been
more advantageous, than those given by Monsieur de Callieres at the Hague; This
created some contest about settling the Preliminaries, and therefore retarded
that Business for some time; however the French Court having insisted upon
Monsieur de Callieres offers as the only authentic ones, the Preliminaries
were at last agreed upon and signed by the Mediator in presence of Monsieur de
Callieres and Messieurs Boreel and Dyckvelt, the 31th. of January old Style, of
which this was the Substance.

Monsieur de Callieres, having communicated his full power from the French King
for this purpose to the Mediator, did declare in the French King his Masters
Name, that in order to a General Treaty of Peace, his Most Christian Majesty
Consented and Agreed,

1. That the Treaties of Westphalia and Nimoguen should be the Basis and
Foundation of the Treaty to be made with the Allies. 2. To Restore to the
Empire the Town of Strasbourg in the Condition it was when taken by his
Majesty. 3. To Restore to the King of Spain the Town of Luxembourgh in the
state it is now in. 4. The Towns of Mons and Charloroy as they are at present.
5. All places in Catalonia in the Kings possession which have been taken since
the Treaty of Nimeguen in the state they were when taken. 6. To the Bishop of
Liege the Town and Castle of Dinant in the state they were at the taking of
them. 7. All the Reunions made since the Peace of Nimeguen. 8. Lorrain
according to the Conditions of the said Treaty.
Monsieur de Callieres having made the said declaration to the Mediator in the
presence of Monsieur Dyckvelt, they went afterward to the Sieur Boreels House,
who, because of his indisposition could not come to the Mediators as it had
been agreed, and the Mediator having followed them thither, Messieurs Dyckvelt
and Boreel did: signify to him in Monsieur de Callieres presence that they had
agreed, that upon the Conclusion and Signing of the Peace, the Most Christian
King should Recognize the Prince of Orange for King of Great Britain without
any Difficulty, Restriction, Condition or Reserve; which Monsieur de Callieres
confirmed to the Mediator in the name of his Most Christian Majesty, all which
was accordingly Entered and Signed by the Mediator in his A Signing Book kept
by the Mediator.
Protocol the 31th. January. 10th. February, 1697.

Most people, especially those who are Well-wishers to the Kings Person and
Government, expected that His Majesty should have been acknowledged by the
French for King of Great Britain in the Preliminaries, as a necessary step
without which no General Treaty could be thought of, wherein His Majesty's
Ambassadors should not be received by the French as Ambassadors from the King
of Great Britain; but the French Court would not yield to this Point, because
if the Treaty should break off, yet the King would gain thereby the only
difficulty that was to be regulated between England and France; the other
difficulties being but inconsiderable and easily accommodated, and therefore
offered that it was sufficient (seeing the case was so) that His Majesty should
be acknowledgd for King of Great Britain at the Conclusion and Signing of the
Treaty. His Majesty preferring the Peace and Quiet of Europe to what at the
bottom was but a mere Formality, Consented that the Negotiations should be
managed this way, being satisfied with the Guaranty of Sweden upon this point
in the Preliminaries: And notwithstanding that the French King did not
acknowledge His Majesty till the Signing of the Peace, yet the whole Treaty was
so managed at Ryswick that our Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries met with
nothing that might derogate in the least from the Honor due to Ministers of
that Character from the Crown of England: However his Majesty's Domestic
Enemies had some hopes upon this account, and they thought themselves in no ill
Condition by it. As for the Imperial Minister, the Count de Caunitz, he was not
present at the Signing of the Preliminaries, because the French allowed no
other Conditions in them for the Duke of Lorrain but those of Nimeguen, which
had been protested against in due Form by the last Duke of Lorrain, and which
neither the Emperor nor the present Duke could ever accept of.

Affairs being brought thus far toward a General Treaty as to have the
Preliminaries Signed by the Mediator, no other difficulty remained to hinder
the opening of the Congress but the agreeing upon the Place of Treaty. Breda,
Maestricht or Nimeguen were sometimes proposed by the French, other people
talked of Vtrecht, the Imperialists were for having the Congress in Germany
either at Cologne or Aix la Chappelle, but the Emperor was very backward in
explaining himself upon this Article; his Minister still insisted at the Hague
to have the Business of Lorrain put in a way of accommodation before the Place
of Treaty was named; for, though the French made no other overture in the
Preliminaries for the Duchy of Lorrain but the Treaty of Nimeguen, yet France
gave hopes of better Conditions for that Duke when-once it should come to a
Treaty; the Imperial Court would have had these Conditions explained in the
Preliminaries, but France would not consent to it: These Contestations took up
a great deal of time, and proved a great obstacle to the agreeing upon a Place
to Treat in; In the mean while the French and the Dutch pitched upon a place of
Treaty, which I dare say is the most convenient that can be met with in
Christendom for such a Business, and that was His Majesty's Royal Palace at
Ryswick, so situated that it has the advantage of two large and populous Towns
just by it, being not above an English Mile from the Hague, and two from Delft;
where consequently the Ambassadors on both sides could Lodge themselves
conveniently without being pressed for Scarcity of Lodging, or imposed upon in
the Excessive Rates of Houses, both which inconveniences must have been the
Consequence of having the Treaty in any one Town of Holland besides, or
Germany, and were sufficiently felt in the Congress of Nimeguen: Besides, the
French were to come from Delft to Ryswick one way, and the Allies from the
Hague another directly opposite, so that no unlucky meeting of Coaches, and
wrangling for precedence could ever happen to interrupt the Negotiations.

This Palace is called the House of Newbourgh, built aside of the Village of
Ryswick, about two Bows shot to the West, by Frederick Henry Prince of Orange
His Majesty's Grandfather, and is a Fabric of Modern Architecture, only a
little too low, consisting of three Pavillons or Piles of Buildings upon a
Line, joined together by two Galleries, all of Free Stone and of an equal
Height; the Front of the House looks to the Hague Northwards, and the back with
the Gardens toward Delft Southwards, and therefore it afforded all the
Accommodations that could possibly be desired for a Congress to Negotiate a
Peace; an Apartment in the Center for the Mediator, and one upon the Right and
another upon the Left for the two different Parties, whereby no manner of
Dispute could happen about the going out or coming in, and such other accidents
which it has been very difficult to Regulate in other Places. Most of the
Allies agreed immediately that a Palace so conveniently situated, and having
such Accommodations to prevent any differences about the Ceremonial, should be
the Place of Treaty, and accordingly His Majesty ordered it forthwith to be
Repaired, and the States had it handsomely Furnished for such an occasion; and
certainly it could signify no less than a good Omen to his Majesty's Affairs,
that after so long and cruel a War, wherein the French had done whatever lay in
their power to dispute his possession of the British Throne, yet at last they
very willingly came to Treat of Peace in his own House.

Whilst these advances were making toward a General Treaty, there were no less
preparations in the Frontiers between France and the Allies than if it had been
the very middle of the War; and indeed it is very necessary to be more cautious
than usual in such a Conjuncture, because the Successes of War have then a very
great influence upon the Negotiations of Peace and must give him that is Master
of the Field considerable Advantages in it, to which he could not pretend
before; and therefore it is a certain Maxim, that all Governments concerned,
must during such Treaties, rather increase than slacken their Warlike
preparations, and that the only way to make an Honorable Peace is with the
Sword in one's hand and not in the Scabbard. The French according to this
Principle were resolved to make the best use they could against the Allies of
the advantage they had over them by the separate Peace of Italy, and the Allies
on their side were providing for a vigorous defense, especially in Flanders and
upon the Rhine, in order to frustrate the designs of the French King, who
endeavored to bring down all his Forces that way; and for that reason many
Intreagues and secret Negotiations were carried on at Rome, and between Turin
and Milan to compass a Neutrality in Catalonia, which France was very desirous
of, and therefore offered upon such a Consideration to restore to the King of
Spain all the Towns and Places which had been taken on that side since the
Peace of Nimeguen; but it was at last refused by the King of Spain and his
Council, as a thing which might endanger the whole Loss of Flanders, besides
other more fatal Consequences to the House of Austria and to the Liberties of
Europe in General: But when all is done, I do not know what harm could have
happened to the Allies by this Neutrality, if Spain could have been enabled
thereby to have kept as good an Army for the defense of Flanders as it had in
Catalonia; I am sure the Allies would not have been the weaker for it this way,
and the Frontiers they had to defend would then have been brought within a
mutual Defense and Communication, the want of which has been the reason that
the French have still acted as they pleased both in Piedmont and Catalonia,
especially in the Campaign of 1696, notwithstanding that in the whole they were
not stronger than the Allies. But so much Vigor was not to be expected from
Spain, or else France would not have proposed it, and therefore the Allies had
all the reason in the World to oppose that Neutrality; on the contrary the
Troops it had to spare in Italy, since the Peace on that side, were altogether
sunk to the Allies, and served only to make the Balance fall with so much the
more weight for the French, as the Scale on our side was so much the lighter
without them. But whatever reason there may be to complain of the Weakness of
the Spanish proceedings during the whole War, yet their Fidelity to the Allies
in refusing this Neutrality offered by the French in so necessary a conjuncture
for them, deserves a Commendation; and if their Efforts had but in the least
answered their Honesty in continuing the War on that side, it may be presumed
that the French would not have taken Barcelona.

This obstinacy of Spain in rejecting the Neutrality offered for Catalonia
quite altered the Measures of the French for the operations of the following
Campaign, and whereas they designed to bend all their Forces upon the Rhine and
in Flanders, and to bring for that end all the Troops that had served under
Catinat in Piedmont, upon their Frontier this way, they were now obliged to
send a great Detachment of them to Quarter in Languedoc and Provence for the
making up of their Army in Catalonia the following Campaign; however they
brought as many as possibly they could of the Troops of Italy toward Germany
and Flanders, and Quartered most of them between the Moselle and the Meuse, and
the rest in their Frontier toward Brabant. The Allies withdrew at the same
time their Forces out of Italy, and having passed some through the Country of
the Grisons and others through the County of Tirol, came into Germany and were
all Quartered in the Circles of Suabia and Franconia, except the Imperial
Cavalry which Marched into Bohemia in order to serve in Hungary. But this could
in no wise answer the Number which the French brought by this Peace to act
against the Allies in Flanders and Germany, all the Duke of Savoy's and the
King of Spain's Troops in Italy were wholly lost to us by it, which amounted to
no less than 31 Squadrons and 16 Battallions which the Spaniards had there in
the Field in the year 1696, and 17 Squadrons of Savoy, and 13 Battallions: All
the Reinforcement therefore which the Allies got upon the Rhine consisted of no
more than five or six Battalions of the Emperors, six of His Majesty of Great
Britains being Refugies, four of Brandenbourg, and two of Bavaria being in all
about 20 Battallions, or ten thousand Men: The Circles of Suabia and Franconia
took our Six Battallions of Refugies into their Service for the Campaign
following, besides several new Levy's they made for the defense of those
Circles, having resolved together in an Assembly of their Deputies to have
60000 Men for their defense; because the French threatened Germany with a
powerful Invasion in the Summer, and to enter it with two Armies to be
Commanded by the Mareschals of Choiseul and Catinat, and these Circles, if they
did not provide for their safety, must have been the greatest Sufferers by it.
Thus the Allies became near 20000 Men the weaker by the Peace of Italy, and
consequently the French so much the stronger, and this chiefly is due to Spain
in not bringing over their Troops which they had in Italy, for the defense of
Catalonia, where a Re-inforcement of six or seven Regiments only could have
put it in a posture to have baffled the French Designs; and notwithstanding
that the Winter was the most proper Season for such a Transportation, when the
French Galleys could not keep the Sea, and that they could then have slipped them
over one after another, yet only one or two Regiments got this way into
Catalonia, and when the Summer came it was too late.

But if Spain was so backward in providing for the defense of Catalonia, the
rest of the Allies were more active elsewhere and especially in Flanders, where
all possible care was taken to oppose the designs of the French; and because
their Garrisons were now crowded upon their Frontiers this way, and
consequently that they might have been stirring in the Winter if they could
have surpised us any where, so all our Troops Quartered in Flanders, as
Ghendt, Bruges, Ostend and Newport, and those Quartered behind the Canals upon
the Country had orders to be still in a readiness to March upon the first
Signal; which was so contrived, that in an Flours time the Allarm could be
given in all the Quarters between Ghendt and Newport, by means of several
Beacons, or Fire-pots which they had ready at every Guard upon the Canals of
Bruges, Ostend and Newport to be hoisted up to the Top of a high pole, which
Signal was to be taken upon the right and left from post to post, Cannon being
to be fired at the same time where they had it, or a Volley of small shot from
the Guard, and the Towns of Ghendt, Bruges and Newport were to take or give the
Allarm by having such Lights upon their highest Steeples or Towers, where there
is always a Watch Night and Day, and Firing of so many Guns. This was the
Contrivance of Monsieur Ivoy Quartermaster General of the Dutch Army in
Flanders, and the Experiment of it being made one Night, it was found that the
Allarm was given from Newport to Ghendt, which is fourteen Leagues by the
Canals, in less than an Hours time. The same Method was taken between Ghendt,
Dendermond and Willebrook by Lights and Firing of Cannon, from whence it was to
be carried by the Guards upon the Canal to Brussels, all which could be done in
Two Hours time being the distance of 24 Leagues. This was sufficient to cover
all the Country behind the Canals and the Scheldt during the Winter, and to
hinder our being surpised in any of those Quarters; but the great difficulty
was about Namur, for the Winter was very hard, and the Meuse shut up very early
with a Violent Frost, insomuch that there was no getting of Convoys into the
place from Maestricht and Liege by Water; and the Frosty Weather continuing
very obstinate till the Month of March, all the Wagons between Liege,
Maestricht and St. Tron were summoned to carry a great quantity of Provisions
and Ammunition into this place, which was happily executed accordingly before
the breaking of the Frost under a strong Escorte composed of Detachments from
all the Garrisons thereabouts without any Opposition from the French; but then
as soon as the Rivers were open, (and it is observable that this great and long
Frost went away without a drop of Rain) another great Convoy of all manner of
Stores and Provisions was sent thither by Water from Maestricht, of which Count
de Guiscard Governor of Dinant having Notice he drew out several Detachments
of the Garrisons of the Meuse to endeavor to intercept it, with which he came
into the Condros, but our Generals upon the Meuse were so watchful that Count
de Guiscard missed his design, and Namur was sufficiently provided with all
manner of Stores for the whole Summer.

This is an Abstract of the most material Transactions of the Winter, and
Spring being now coming on, we were resolved if possibly, to be before hand
with the French in the Field, as the only means to hinder them from making any
considerable progress in Flanders with the great and Numerous Armies they were
now like to have against the Allies: His Majesty being desirous to have his own
Forces to act under him in Brabant with Prince Vaudemont, and that the Elector
with the Prince of Nassau Sarbruck should Command in Flanders with the Spanish
and Bavarian Troops and those of the States; whereupon Orders were sent to have
the Quarters changed according to this disposition. The Duke of Wirtemberg had
then been visiting the Winter Quarters, when being returned to his Head-quarter
at Ghendt the last day of February, he met with an Order from the Prince to
meet him at Antwerp the next day, where a great Council of War was held, the
Prince of Vaudemont, the Duke of Wirtemberg, the Prince of Commercy (who had
come from Vienna to Brussels this Winter to Visit the Prince and Princess) the
Marquess de Bedmar and Mr. Hill being present, and the King's pleasure was
signified by the Prince about the disposition of the two Armies we were to have
in the Field the following Campaign, the Exchanging of Quarters accordingly and
the providing of things necessary for the English in Brabant, and the same for
the Dutch in Flanders; After this Conference, the Prince, and the Prince of
Commercy with the Marquess de Bedmar went back to Brussels, and the Duke of
Wirtemberg to Ghendt, where he was no sooner come but he met with another Order
to go to Brussels; being arrived the Second of March in this Town, a great
Council of War was held in the Electors Presence, and the Routes and Quarters
were settled for the exchanging of the Troops between Brabant and Flanders, and
Patents dispatched accordingly, and Monsieur Ivoy, who acted as Quartermaster
General for the Army of Flanders, was sent immediately that very night after
the Resolutions taken in the Council of War, to the Magistrates of Ghendt and
Bruges to provide Bilanders, Wagons and other things necessary for the March
of the Troops. In the mean while the two French Plenipotentiaries, Monsieur de
Harlay and the Count de Crecy, being come from Paris by the way of Lisle and
Courtray, arrived at Ghendt the 3d. in order to prosecute their Voyage for
Holland; Our Guard at Bruges Port took no notice of March.
them, because they had not yet acknowledged His Majesty for King of England,
but obliged them to produce their Pass at the Gate before they came into the
Town, the Magistrates received them on their side with all the Joy and Civility
possible, and seeing that our Forces Quartered there could not give them the
Compliment of a Guard upon their quarter, a Detachment of Spaniards was sent
out of the Citadel with Colors, Commanded by a Captain for this purpose. The
next day they went to the Sas of Ghendt, where they went on Board of the States
Yachts sent thither to carry them by Water to Delft, where their third
Colleague Monsieur de Callieres expected them.

Every thing being ready for the March of the Troops according to the above
mentioned Resolutions, the English Foot began to move toward Brabant on the
6th. of March. The Regiments of Churchill, Seymour, Webb and Frederick Hamilton
Marched from Ghendt to Louvain under the Command of Major General Churchill.
The two Battalions of the Royal Regiment, and the Regiments of Fairfax and
Ingoldesby Marched from Bruges to Brussels, being Commanded by Brigadier
Fairfax, and those of Saunderson, Tiffin and Ferguson from Ostend to Malines,
under the Command of Brigadier Tiffin, and were exchanged by the Regiments of
Weed, Dohna, Sparre and Groningue Guards from Brussels to Ghendt; Fagel,
Carles, la Mothe and Schack (being the Regiment of the late Major General
Holle) from Louvain to Bruges; and from Malines to Ostend came the Hanover
Guards, the Hanover Regiment of Cinqvilles, and that of Willekens. All the
English Regiments, the Guards excepted, were to leave two Companies per
Battallion in the Quarters from whence they removed in Flanders, and all the
Dutch one in their Quarters in Brabant or Frontier of Holland, to have by this
means the Garrisons kept during the Summer by detached Companies, and
consequently more Battallions in the Field though the less strong, but reduced
by this Method as near as could be to the Strength and Complement of those of
the French; this likewise made the Dutch Regiments equal with the English,
which Consisted most of Twelve Companies, but the English leaving two Companies
in Garrison and the Dutch one, they all equally consisted of Eleven Companies
each Battallion, except the Swissers, whose Companies consist of 200 each, and
four in a Battallion. The 13th. the English Guards being two Battallions, the
Fusiliers and the Regiments of Collingwood and Nassau from Ghendt, and the
Scots Guards, How, Sir David Collier, and Sir Matthew Bridges's Regiments from
Bruges, Maitland from the Pays de Nort and Row, (being the Regiment which was
lately Colonel Robert Mackays) from the Camerling, marched toward the Canal of
Brussels, the first Five being Commanded by Count Nassau Lieutenant General to
Cantoon just by Brussels between the Canal and the way to Halle in the Villages
of Berckem, Jette, Ganshoren, Dylbeck, Stroombeck and Beveren, Count Nassau
took his Quarter at the Chasteau de Riviere, within half a League of Brussels;
the last Six by Major General Ramsay and Cantoon'd at Grimberg, Mais,
Londerseel, Wolverthem, Capelle and Ramsdonck. The Regiments of Denhoff (being
that of Brandenbourg in His Majesty's Service) from the Camerling, Fuhnen from
the Pays de Nort and Prince Frederick from the Canal of Bruges being joined the
17th. by Colonel Stanley's Regiment, the Danish Guards, and the Regiment of
Juitland at Ghendt, Marched the same way under the Command of the Marquess de
Mirmont Major General to Cantoon at Asche, Maselle, Bardeghem, Mellem,
Bollenbeeck, Steinhuffel and Merchtem; Major General Ramsay took his Quarter at
Grimberg, and Mirmont at Asche. These Quarters were enlarged in other Villages
on both sides the Canal, and the Battallions of the Fusiliers, Collingwood,
Bridges, Nassan and Denhoff, Cantoon'd between Brussels, Vilvorde and Malines.

Besides the above mentioned Dutch Regiments which came from Brussels and
Louvain to Ghendt and Bruges, (not to mention those that removed from Malines
to Ostend being upon English pay) several Regiments of Foot which had quartered
at Liege and Maestricht were already Cantoon'd about St. Tron and Tirlemont in
Order to March into Flanders as soon as the English should remove into Brabant,
among whom were a Battallion of the Friseland Guards, the Regiments of Arsholt
and Holstein Norburg from Liege; Dedem, a Swiss Battalion of Lochman and two of
Capol from Maestricht: which Regiments got into Flanders immediately after the
March of our Infantry and Quartered in Ghendt and Bruges, besides those of
Lindeboom, Crassau and Ransaw from Tirlemont being followed by two Battallions
of Swerin from Liege, Margrave Lodowick from Huy, the Walloon Regiment of
Nassau Sarbruck from Malines and Tettau from Die: The rest of the Dutch
Infantry being Quartered in Holland or the Frontier toward Brabant and Germany
came by Water to the Ses of Ghendt, among whom were a Battallion of Friseland
Guards from Friseland, Obergen from Zutphen, Marquet from Boisleduc, and young
Holstein from Grave. The Dutch which were to make up part of His Majesty's Army
in Brabant Marched at the same time out of their Quarters toward the Frontier
about Louvain and Tirlemont, except what was necessary for the Guard of Liege
and Maestricht where 'twas thought necessary to leave several Regiments till we
had secured some convenient Camp to cover the Country; these therefore did not
March out till we took the Field, nor the Garrisons of Namur and Brussels, out
of which our Brabant Army was to be furnished with 16 or 17 Battallions.
According to this disposition, the Regiments of Slangenbourg and Beinham
marched from Hasselt, and that of Salisch from Liege to Tirlemont in the Room
of those gone to Flanders; the two Swisse Battallions of Tcharner came from
Bergen op Zoom and the two Battallions of the same Nation of Milune from Breda
to Cantoon about Louvain, Essen from Liege, Torsay from Worcum, Gorcum and
Heusden, and Weldern from Bois le duc near Tirlemont. All these Forces filled
our Frontiers in Brabant and Flanders, and we were now in a Condition to take a
Camp in either of those two Provinces upon the first occasion or motion of the
Enemies in Four and Twenty Hours time: The English Cavalry was likewise to have
removed at this time to come into Brabant from Ghendt, and the Dragoons from
the Country behind the Canal of Bruges, and that part of the Dutch Horse and
Dragoons which was to serve in Flanders under Lieutenant General Opdam was to
come in their places; but there were some great difficulties in exchanging of
Magazines which obliged them on both sides to keep to their Quarters. We had
still 21 Battallions of His Majesty's Troops left in Flanders, being all
Strangers, French, Danes and Hanovers, except the Regiments of Brewer, Lauder,
Walter Collier, Lorne, Buchan, George Hamilton and Strathnaver, which were to
remain there to act under the Elector till he could be joined by the Forces of
Brandenbourg, (who upon these Motions on our side in Brabant and Flanders, had
orders to march out of their Quarters in the Dutchies of Juliers and Cleves and
the Electorat of Cologne, toward the Meuse) these 21 Battallions were to be
Commanded by Lieutenant General Bellasis, with Major General La Meloniere and
Count d' Alfeldt, and Brigadiers, Selwyn, Haxhausen, Trelauny and Belcastel,
and the English Horse and Dragoons had orders to march when the Elector should
have occasion for them.

This was not yet all the Care that was taken for the Safety and Preservation
of this Country, it was found that the Line made at Marykirk the last Year did
not sufficiently cover Ghendt with the inundation of the Meadows of Drongen,
that there was still a passage for the French between the Lys and the Scheld to
come and Attack this place, or Bombard it from before the Gates of Courtray and
St. Pierre, that it was therefore necessary to make a Line between the Lys and
the Scheld to render this part of the Town inaccessible: And to find the
shortest cut that could be between these two Rivers, where a Line might be made
with the least Expense and the greater Strength, it was necessary to stop up
the Lys and the Scheld to make an Inundation, and see how near they could be
brought together by it; and thereupon the design was to have made a Line just
between the Inundation of the two Rivers, which would then have been short
enough to be defended by a few Forces. The Sluyces were stopped at Ghendt both
upon the Lys and the Scheld in pursuance of this Design, and their Effect
answered fully our Expectation; for by this means not only the Land between
the Lys and the Scheld was very near overflowed, and left but a very short
space in the highest Ground for a Line, but all the flat Country between the
upper and the lower Scheld before the Gate of St. Lievens Houthem and the
Meadows and bleaching Yards within the Ramparts on this side were laid under
Water. This makes the situation of Ghendt very advantageous for a good Defense,
and yet the French took it in the Year 1678. with a great deal of Ease, just in
the very midst of the Negotiations for the Peace at Nimeguen, to save the
Restoring of Ipres (which the Spaniards insisted very much upon) by the taking
of this Place. It is said that the French King had then promised King Charles,
who was Mediator of that Peace, (the English being very jealous of the French
Progresses so near them, and the Parliament pressing the King to declare War
against France) that he would not push his Conquests any farther on that side;
and when the Spanish Ambassador acquainted the King with the Siege of Ghendt,
his Majesty relied so much upon this Promise that he could not at first believe
it; however the Allies were surpised by this Siege, may be, relying too much
upon the Considerations which the French should have had for England in such a
Conjuncture, and thus neglected to provide for the Defense of the Country
hereabouts more than they would otherwise have done, to have a better Army in
Brabant. But to return from this short Digression, Ghendt, with this Inundation
and Line before St. Peter's and the Courtray Ports, and the Line of Marykirk,
would have been covered on all sides from either Siege or Bombarding, except
between the Canal of Bruges and the Seheld, where there was no great danger:
But this Design went no farther than the Inundation, and the project of the
Line was laid aside: And may be 'twas undertaken only to give the Elector a
plausible pretext to come to Ghendt in order to Execute our Designs upon the
Camp of Deinse without giving any Jealousy to the French, as I am now going to
relate it.

The First of April the Elector of Bavaria lest Brussels and came April.
to Ghendt, in order, as 'twas given out to see the Inundation made about it,
and to visit the other Frontiers of Flanders. The Second, his Highness took a
view of the Waters which now overflowed the flat Country all about Ghendt; and
the Third, Major General Dopst Quartermaster General of the States came there
to confer with his Electoral Highness about the taking of the Field, and
dispositions were made for the securing of the Camp of Deinse the 10th, in the
mean while the Elector designed to go to Bruges and Newport; but on the 4th.
being informed that a great Patrouille of the French had been hovering about
Deinse as if they had a design upon that Camp, it was resolved immediately to
secure it without any further delay, and a Council of War being held thereupon,
orders were sent that very Night to all the Infantry in Quarters in Ghendt,
Bruges, Ostend, Damme, and behind the Canals to March the next day; Monsieur de
Ribeaucourt was commanded out at the shutting of the Gates, with 200 Spanish
Horse to post himself at Petegem on the other side of the Lys opposite to
Deinse, at Midnight Major General la Meloniere with a Detachment of 3800 Foot
of the Garrison of Ghendt marched out of post himself in the Town of Deinse and
secure that place; a Bridge of Boats was likewise ordered to be made at
Marykirk and another at Bellem for the passage of the Troops behind the Canal.
On the 5th. the Electors Baggage marched by times toward Bruges, as if His
Highness would follow soon after; because the day before he had given out his
Journey for Newport upon this day, which, if it had been Countermanded upon the
marching out of the Spanish Detachement of Horse and of Major General la
Meloniere with that of the Foot, would have discovered the Design upon Deinse,
whereas now it passed only for an Escorte to cover the Canal and hinder the
French from coming near it during the Elector's Journey; His Highness having
notice very early in the Morning that the Posts about Deinse and Nevel were
secured, ordered his Baggage to go no farther than Marykirk only for a Blind
and so to come back again, and got on Horseback himself about Seven not to go
Bruges but Deinse and Nevel, where his Baggage followed; and all the English
Cavalry had orders to march that way immediately without Baggage under the
Command of Monsieur Auerquerque, only with two or three days Forage. The 16
Battallions in Ghendt marched the same day and encamped about half a League of
the Town behind the Canal within the Retrenchment of Marykirk, and the 12
Battallions of Bruges with that of Damme, according to the Orders they had over
Night, came this Day and encamped at Bellem being joined by the Battallions of
the Queen of Denmark, Zeland and young Holstein, which had Quartered upon the
Country behind the Canal of Bruges. The same day the Three Battallions in
Garrison at Ostend, and the Three Quartered in the Pays de Nort, came to incamp
between Bruges and Steinbrughe upon the Canal. The 6th. the Infantry encamped
at Marykirk and Bellem, passed the Canal upon the Bridges made at these two
Places and came to form the Camp between Deinse and Nevel, being in all 32
Battallions; and the Six encamped at Steinbrughe marched to Bellem, and came to
the Camp the 7th, which was now formed of 38 Battallions with the Right at
Nevel, where the Elector had his Quarter, and the Left upon the Lys at the
Church of Bachtem, between Deinse in the Front and the Castle of Oydonck in the
Rear: And because the Cavalry could not yet incamp in this Season, all the
Battallions, to fill up the Ground between Nevel and the Lys, encamped with the
Companies in half depths, by which means every Battallion took up the space of
two from Right to Left, and this Method was observed in the Elector's Army most
part of the Campaign following. The English Cavalry having marched out of
Ghendt the 5th. to secure this Camp till the coming up of the Foot, went back
on the 7th. into the Town, but all the Foreign Horse upon English pay Quartered
at Bruges, the Dutch Cavalry Quartered upon the Canal, and the English Dragoons
Quartered between Ghendt and the Sas, and about Bruges, had orders to come and
Cantoon in the Villages in the Rear of the Electors Army, between Deinse,
Nevel, Ghendt and the Canal, from whence they were to furnish 500 Horse and
Dragoons daily for the Out Guards of the Army. The 8th. the Prince of Nassau
Sarbruck Velt Marshall General of the States Army arrived at Ghendt being to
Command the Army under the Elector, and came the 10th. to the Camp, where he
took his Quarter at the Castle of Oydonck. The 12th. the Elector with a
detachment of 1200 Horse and Dragoons went to view all the Approaches to his
Camp from the Pays Conquis as far as Denterghem, Wouterghem, Gothem, Arseel,
Canneghem and Thilt. The 11th. all the Horse and Dragoons Quartered upon the
Canal of Bruges being come to Cantoon behind the Electors Army, the Battallions
of Fagel and Reinardt had orders to post themselves upon this Canal between
Ansbeck and Bruges; and the Elector had now 40 Battallions in his Army, 18
Squadrons of Horse and 33 of Dragoons Cantoon'd just in his Rear, besides 24
Squadrons of English Horse in Garrison at Ghendt, ready to join him upon
occasion, being according to this disposition 22000 Foot, 6300 Horse, and 3300
Dragoons strong, in all 31600 Men for the defense of Flanders, which by the
Securing of this Camp put us now in a Condition to subsist on the French side
of the Canal, without being penned up behind it as we were the last year and
subsisting upon dry Forage at the Charges of the Pays de Waes and Free of
Bruges by the Enemies being beforehand with us at this Camp of Deinse.

Flanders being thus very well secured by the Elector's having the Camp of
Deinse, it was necessary to take the same Care for the Country between the
Scheldt and the Meuse, where we were resolved to be before hand with the French
as well as in Flanders, but which could not be so effectually put in a posture
of defense; the last being covered by a good Canal from Ghendt to Newport, but
this very weak; because Ath and Audenarde were now too far advanced, and in a
manner within the very Barriere of the French, since they had Mons, Charleroy
and Courtray. The most that could be proposed to be done on this side was to
secure Namur and Brussels, which, by our taking the Field first, we could very
well pretend to; and therefore in order to it the Count de Noyelles Lieutenant
General had orders from the Prince to march out of Brussels on the 12th. with
the four Battallions commanded by Brigadier Fairfax and 8 Dutch from the same
Garrison, to post himself at Waterlo just without the Bois de Sogne toward the
plain of Brain la Leu and Bois Seigneur Isaac, and to entrench himself there
with the Wood upon the Right Left and Rear, a little space being left here,
where was the Village of Waterlo, as 'twere on purpose for such a design. The
same day Count Nassau, Lieutenant General, and Major General Ramsay with the
Troops Cantoon'd under their Command, had orders to come and incamp at the
Fauxbourg of Ixelles between the Namur-porte at Brussels and the Bois de Sogne,
where they were followed the next day by the Six Regiments commanded by the
Marquess de Mirmont, making in all 17 Battallions; the Prince left Brussels at
the same time, and took his Quarter in the Fauxbourg of Ixelles in order to
command them: All the Infantry of Brandenbourg and most of the Horse being now
come to the Meuse from Winter Quarters, passed it about this time at Maestricht
and went to Cantoon about Arschot and Die in the Villages along the River
Rupelle; the Garrisons of Malines and Louvain, and all the Dutch Foot Cantoon'd
upon the Frontier hereabouts continued in their Quarters in order to take the
Field upon the first Command: By this disposition we were in a readiness to
secure either the Camps of Masy or Bois Seigneur Isaac as there should be
occasion for our own Affairs; or as it should be necessary, according to the
Motions of the French, to take the Field on this side; and although 'twas yet
very early for the Cavalry to move out of Winter Quarters by reason there was
yet no manner of Forage upon the Ground, yet all the Cavalry of the States
Quartered in Holland had Orders to march, part to Cantoon toward Flanders, and
part about Hasselt, Tongres and St. Tron toward Brabant, according as it was
designed to serve the Campaign following; The rest being in Quarters upon the
very Frontier, was near enough at hand to be in a readiness upon occasion. But
the Foot upon English pay did suffer something in the Camps of Waterlo and
Ixelles in being so early in the field, because the Clothing was not yet come
from England, which several Regiments wanted extremely; neither was this the
only Misfortune, but they also came to want pay, occasioned by an obstinate
Easterly Wind which lasted about five Weeks till the King came over, and
hindered any Pacquets from coming from England, whereby Mr. Hill was reduced to
the last week at our taking of the Field, which he was forced to divide into
half pay for a Fortnight. This was but a bad beginning of the Campaign for the
Soldiers, which caused some Desertion amongst them; but nothing answerable to
that mighty noise made about it in the Paris Gazette to Counterpoize the
advantage we had gained in taking the Field first; and Care was taken in
England to dispatch the Centurion to Ostend with Bills for the Army, where he
got time enough (notwithstanding the contrary Winds) to set every thing to
rights, and prevent any farther want of pay in the Army.

During these Transactions in Brabant the Elector was taking all the care
possible to put his Camp in a posture of defense in Flanders; the Foot at the
first taking of this Camp had been employed in Fortifying of it with good
Retrenchments between Nevel and the Lys, but this not being thought sufficient,
it was proposed to Fortify Deinse, for which reason a Council of War was held
the 13th. and the day following the Ingeniers were sent to trace an Exagone
about it in order to maintain this Post, being designed only for this purpose
and not for a standing Fortification, according to the Agreement made when the
French demolished this place and Dixmuyde in the Year 1695. The 17th the
Elector dispatched Patents for the forming of the Detached Companies left in
Quarters into Battallions, and disposing of them into the Frontier Garrisons of
Flanders. Twelve Scots Companies were sent to Newport under the Command of
Lieutenant Colonel Davison, another Battallion of ten Companies of the same
Nation under Lieutenant Colonel Murray of Walter Collier's Regiment, four
Companies of Hanover cmmanded by Lieutenant Colonel Vittingehoffe of Hulsen,
and a Dutch Battallion of eight Companies commanded by Lieutenant Colonel
Maurenault of Zoutland's Regiment, in all four Battallions in Newport; at
Oslende ten English Companies commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Fox of
Collingwood, eight Companies of the same at Bruges under the Command of
Lieutenant Colonel Lucy; eight Companies at Ghendt, and seventeen in Audenarde
divided in two Battallions, besides the Dutch Regiment of Losecoct left here
with several Italian and Walloon Regiments for the Security of this place. Of
the Detached Companies in these two last places, those in Ghendt were all
English, and those in Audenarde all Foreigners but two Companies of the
Fusiliers and two of Colonel Frederick Hamilton's Regiment; all the Detached
Companies of the Dutch were posted at Louvain, Brussels, Maestricht, Liege, Huy
and Namur, in the last of which places a special care was taken to have a
strong Garrison, The 19th Major General Dopft came again from Brussels to the
Elector's Camp to concert the Methods that should be taken in case the French
should bend the chief of their Forces upon Flanders, either to attack Newport,
or to come to Torhout and Rousselar and endeavor to cut the way to Bruges, or
force the Canals: For hitherto they had not appeared in the Field, having (as
'twas said) no Magazines of dry Forage for the subsistence of an Army; but
whatever reason there was for it they did not yet stir out of their Garrisons,
and consequently we could not know which way they would bring their chief
strength: And that the Elector's Army might effectually be secured against any
attack from them in this Camp, the little River which comes from Poucke (and
branches it self in two at Nevel, one part going to the Lys near Deinse and the
other toward the Canal of Bruges) was stopped at Nevel to bring the whole
Current to make an Inundation before the Retrenchments of the Camp: But because
the Army being thus secured from any attack in this place, the French might
march either toward Newport or Bruges, Quartermaster General Dopft went on
the 21th to view the Country between Nevel and Ansbeck upon the Canal of
Bruges, and ways were ordered to be made for the March of the Army toward this
Post upon the Canal, in case it should be obliged to come this way for the
Defense either of Bruges or Newport, which ways were finished and made fit for
the March of the Army by the 23d. In the mean while Quartermaster General
Dopft went back to Brussels, and the Hanover Regiments of Hering and
Wolsembuttel Guards came to the Camp from Audenarde, which brought the
Elector's Army to the Number of 42 Battallions, besides the four Bavarian
Regiments of Foot which by this time were come to incamp at Marykirk.

The Allies had now been near three Weeks in the Field in this Camp of Nevel
and about eleven Days at Waterlo and Ixelles, when the French began to repair
to their several Rendezvous appointed for the Forming of their Armies in
Flanders and upon the Meuse; and may be 'twas not so much want of Forage as
made them appear so late after us as our having taken the Field before them,
which quite broke and altered their Measures; for the Marechal of Catinat had
been appointed to serve with an Army between the Moselle, the lower Rhine and
the Meuse, and his Generals named; and the Germans were so alarmed at it, that
besides the new Levies resolved upon by the Circles of Suabia and Franconia,
they were working very hard to make Lines and Redoubts to cover those Circles
from any Irruption by the French in passing the Upper Rhine between the Neckre
and the Black Forest; and upon the Lower Rhine they were very busy in
Fortifying Bonne and the Passages of this River in the Electorate of Cologne
and the Duchy of Berg against the Attempts of the Marechal of Catinat; but
seeing that our taking the Field first in Flanders brought the Marechal of
Catinat upon the Lys instead of going upon the Moselle, it is more probable
that the true Design of the French was to have besieged Namur if they could
have appeared before us in the Campaign; for then Bousters could have invested
Namur from the Sambre, where his Army had its Rendezvous and then he could have
been joined by Catinat from the Moselle, by which Method they would have had
two Armies with that of Villeroy to cover the Siege and observe our Motions
either in Brabant or Flanders: From whence we may very well infer, That our
taking first the Field on this side saved the Siege of Namur; and there being
at present no place left open to the French, by the present Disposition of our
Camps, besides Ath and Audenarde, which it was impossible for us to cover with
the Troops we had, they were therefore obliged to frame the Rendezvous of their
Armies accordingly, and order the Troops designed for Catinat's Army on the
Moselle toward Flanders; which alteration of their Designs (as it may be
supposed) hindered them from appearing in the Field so soon as they would
otherwise have done: But now being come upon the Frontier on this side, they
had three Rendezvous appointed for the meeting of their Armies to be commanded
by the Marechals of Villeroy, Bouflers and Catinat; Villeroy's Army began to
assemble together in a Body about Tournay, Bouflers to Cantoon along the
Sambre, except that part of his Army that was to consist of Troops of the
King's House which gathered about Mons, and Catinat's upon the Lys about
Courtray.

This Disposition of the Enemies obliged the Allies at Nevel to look about
them, and therefore to countermand the English Cavalry which had received
Orders to march toward Brussels, because all the Dutch Horse and Dragoons
which were to serve in the Army were not yet come up; a Disposition was
likewise made for the extending of this Camp from Bachtem upon the Lys clear to
Ansbeck upon the Canal of Bruges, in case both Villeroy and Catinat should come
into Flanders, by this means to slip Regiments (the Foot by Water, and the
Horse and Dragoons by Land) to Bruges and Newport with greater Expedition,
where Major General Fagel had now a Body of ten Battallions ready to Incamp,
besides four Battallions of Detached Companies and the Dutch Battallion of Prot
in Garrison, without mentioning Spanish and Italian Foot in this place which
has no relation to the Affairs of the Field: In the interim, till it was known
which way the Enemies would march from their places of Rendezvous, the ten
Battallions commanded by Major General Fagel had Orders to post themselves in
this manner, three Battallions at Lombarzide to cover the Bar of Newport, and
the other seven behind the Canals between Newport and Bruges, and Reinardt and
Fagel remained as before between Bruges and Ansbeck; and thus it was contrived
to have sent the best part of the Army toward Newport, if Villeroy and Catinat
had marched that way, or to have received Re-inforcements from thence in case
they had marched to attack the Elector in his Camp, and in both these cases
Prince Vaudemont was to make considerable Detachments from Brabant to Flanders:
This was the Result of a Council of War held upon the gathering together of the
French at Tournay and Courtray, which was communicated to the Elector at
Ghendt, where he was obliged to go some days since for a Fluxion and Soreness
in his Eyes which took him in the Camp.

The Marechal of Bouflers Army beginning to Rendezvous about Bussiere on the
Sambre, Prince Vaudemont thought it was high time to secure the Camp of Brain
la Leu and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac, where, if the Marechals of Villeroy and Catinat
had marched into Flanders, he would be the nearer to send Re-inforcements to
the Elector and at the same time in a convenient place to secure the Camp of
Masy if Bouflers had marched toward Namur. Wherefore Orders were sent once
more to the English Horse Quartered in Ghendt to march, which they actually did
on the 27th toward Alost in order to go to Brussels. The Dutch Horse cantoon'd
(as we have said it before) along the Demer about Hasselt had Orders to come to
Louvain the 26th and incamp between this place and Corbeck upon the Dyle, and
being joined the 27th by the Regiments of Horse of Tilly, Erbach, Prince
Philip, Nassau-Friezland, Flodorf, Huybert, Saxen-Heylbourg, Saxon-Gotha, and
Arco from the neighboring Quarters, they came to Tombeck and Rassiere, the
Brook of Lahn before them, being all under the Command of Count Tilly: The
Dutch Infantry cantoon'd hereabouts, encamped at Eygenhoven, and the
Brandenbourg Troops Quartered about Die and Arfcht and Villages along the
Rupelle came to incamp the 27th between Terhulpen and Gerival near the Bois de
Sogne toward Wavre commanded by General Heyden consisting then of 18
Battallions of Foot and 17 Squadrons of Horse, where they were joined by the
Garrison of Louvain commanded by Major General Churchill and the Dutch Foot
encamped at Eygenhoven. The Dutch Guards from Liere, and the Garrison of
Malines commanded by Brigadier Tiffin came the same day to the Camp at Ixelles,
and at the Orders the Quarter Masters were commanded to be this Evening at the
Retrenchment of Waterlo: The Dutch Cavalry in Quarters at Brussels marched the
28th by two in the Morning by the Grande Chaussee through the Bois de Sogne
toward Brain la Leu, the Infantry encamped near the Fauxbourg of Ivelles
followed, and then our Artillery which had been brought from Ghendt to Brussels
by Water for this purpose, (as that of Holland had been sent from Malines to
Ghendt,) and all was closed up by the Dutch Horse Cantoned about Brussels and
Malines but the heavy Baggage was to be left behind till the next day. The
Vanguard of Horse as soon as it came into the Plain beyond the Bois de Sogne,
sent detachments to Genap, Wavre, and Nivelle to cover the March of the Army,
at the same time Count de Noyelles sent detachments of Foot from Waterlo to the
Church of Ophain, the Abbey of Bois-Seigneur-Isaac and the Village of Bas Istre
toward Brain le Chasteau to cover the March for this Camp on all sides. If
Bouflers had been passed the Sambre, instead of these detachments, a great Body
of Horse was to have been ordered toward Genap and Nivelle commanded by a
General Officer, but Bouflers was still on the other side and saved us this
Care. At the same time that the Prince's Troops encamped at Ixelles were
marching through the Bois de Sogne for Brain le Leu, the Troops encamped at
Terhulpen and Gerival under General Heyden, and the Dutch Horse under Count
Tilly from Tombeeck marched about between the Dyle and the Wood to this Camp,
and thus joined altogether the 28th, being encamped with an Elbow upon the
right between the Abbey of Bois Seigneur-Isaac and the Village of Bas Istre
toward Brain le Chasteau; this was the Post of the right Wing of Horse and
Right of the Body of Foot, the rest of the Camp went in a strait Line from the
Abbey of Bois-Seigneur-Isaac upon the Right as far as the Brook of Leu upon the
Left toward the Wood of Sogne and Waterlo, having the Village or rather small
Town of Brain la Leu before it, as the Village of Ophain was before the
Center, and the forementioned Abbey upon the Right, all three in a Line. The
Abbey of Bois-Seigneur-Isaac was marked for the King's Quarter which
consequently gave the Name to the Camp, and the Prince and most of the Generals
Quartered at Brain la Leu, the Prince, in his own Castle which he has here and
where he was born of the Princess of Cantecroix. Count de Noyelles continued in
the Retrenchments of Waterlo till the 29th, to see all the Baggage come up safe
through the Wood, which was ordered to follow the Army, and then marched from
thence with the Body under his Command and took his Post in the Line, as it had
been assigned to the several Regiments, where all the Battallions encamped
double, as the Elector's Army did at Deinse; because the distance was too great
for the Foot to fill, if the Company's had encamped in their full depth, and
therefore 'twas thought convenient to incamp so as that every Battallion might
be divided into two and take up the ground between the Right and Left: This
Army at the first joining consisted of 75 Squadrons of Horse, 26 of Dragoons
and 64 Battallions, making in all 46490 Men. A detachment of 400 Men was sent
to Nivelle under the Command of a Field Officer to keep Garrison there and
secure a Post that was very necessary for the cover of our Army, or from whence
the Enemies could very much annoy us if they got once to be Masters of it; and
therefore this could not be construed an infraction of the agreement made on
both sides with the Lady Abbess of Nivelle; because 'twas only for the present
security of the Army, which would have been done by the French themselves upon
such an occasion, or if they gained an opportunity by it of attaquing our Army
with more advantage. As for the English Horse and Dragoons, which had marched
out of Ghendt toward Alost under the command of General Auerquerque in order
to come to this Camp, they were ordered to march back again for their quarters
to be at hand near the Electors Army, whilst he had two of the Armies of France
which were now about Tournay and Courtray, for dangerous Neighbors, for all
the Brandenbourg Cavalry designed to serve in Flanders was not yet come to
Brabant: But the Dutch Horse upon English pay, Lloyds Dragoons, and the Dutch
Regiments of Montigny, Turck, Zuylen now Schulembourg, and Noyelles marched on
toward the General Rendezvous at Bois-Seigneur-Isaac to make room for the same
number, being 18 Squadrons of Dutch Horse and four of Dragoons, designed to
serve in Flanders under Lieutenant General Opdam, which being now come into
this Country cantoon'd on both sides of the Canal in the Quarters left by
chose that had marched into Brabant. The Spanish and Bavarian Horse came up
about the same time and quartered along the Scheld between Ghendt and
Dendermond, so that the Elector had all the Horse of his Army now ready to join
him. As for the Horse belonging to the Princes Army at Bois-Seigneur-Isaac it
was actually encamped in the Line, and the Magazines of Hay and Oats that were
at Brussels were transported in Wagons to Waterlo, where we had them at hand
to subsist the Army with dry Forage.

Whilst our Forces in Brabant were marching up to join together at this Camp,
His Majesty, who could not let his Armies be in the Field without him, arrived
at Oranje-Polder in the Maes from England the 27th, and came the same Evening
to the Hague where he was Complimented by the Deputies of the States and
Foreign Ministers. My Lord of Pembrook His Majesty's first Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary for the Treaty of Peace came over at the same
time, but an indisposition hindered Sir Joseph Williamson from coming to
Holland till the next Convoy; and as if all the Ministers concerned in this
great Congress had only waired for His Majesty's coming to begin their
Conferences, the first was held at Ryswick the 29th, being the I hursday
following, the Emperor having at last consented to Treat in this place without
insisting any longer to have the Business of Lorrain agreed upon in the
Preliminaries, and the Palace of Ryswick made up very Commodious for the
Congress: There was before but one Gate upon the Center of the Court toward
the Hague, which was appointed for the Mediator leading up to the great Stairs
of the House in the middle Pavillon or Apartment; but to prevent disputes in
the going out or coming in, there was a Gate made at each end; That at the West
being appointed for the French and that the East for the Allies, which is the
Right according to the facing of the Palace North toward the Hague. The States
appointed a Guard to be kept here upon Congress days with an equal number of
Sentinels upon each Apartment, where the Allies were received and introduced in
this first Congress by a Gentleman Commissioned thereto from the States and the
French by another, having cast Lots for their Post to prevent any manner of
distinction in this matter: The Conferences were contrived by the Mediator and
not Personally, there being large Antichambers on each side of the Mediators
Room, where the Plenipotentiaries came, the Allies on one side and the French
on the other, and the Mediator communicated the Writings and Memorials from
one side to another. In this first Conference the Ambassadors produced their
full Powers which were reciprocally communicated, and authentic Copies
delivered: The full Powers of the French directed them to Treat with the
Emperor and Empire, the King of Spain and the States of Holland and their
Allies, which caused some Contestation, because the Elector of Brandenbourg's
Ministers alleged that the Elector their Master had declared War personally
against the French King, and therefore that it was necessary the French
Plenipotentiaries should be directed in their full Powers to Treat with his
Electoral Highness by Name: The English Plenipotentiaries made no Objection
against it, because the King not being to be acknowledged by the French till
the Concluding and Signing of the Peace, it was not necessary they should
produce full Powers to Treat with England till then, which they accordingly did
before the Ratification. This Affair took up some of the first Conferences, and
afterward the Congress proceeded to regulate the Ceremonial; which I shall not
meddle withal, resolving to say nothing more of those Negociations than what
relates to the Operations of War or the Forwarding of the Peace.

The King having assisted at the Assembly of the States General and Council of
State at the Hague to conferr upon the present State of May.
Affairs, intended to have gone the first of May for Loo, but His Majesty
having met with an Indisposition the overnight was obliged to deferr it and to
be Let-blood the next Morning, which had so good an effect that the King rid
that very Evening in his Coach about the Voorhout; the third, His Majesty being
recovered set out from the Hague for Loo and came this day to Zuylenstein
beyond Vtrecht, it proved an extraordinary hot day (and for about nine or ten
days together about this time the Weather was as hot and settled as it has been
the whole Summer) this made the King hot and restless in the Night but was
again pretry well the next Day, however His Majesty thought it convenient to
tarry some Days in this place where the Herons afforded very good Divertisement
in this set of fine Weather: But in the mean time the French began to be very
busy upon our Frontier and were like to allow His Majesty but a short stay
here, the French and Swiss Guards had been come to Tournay ever since the 22d
of April where the Marechal of Bouflers (being Colonel of the French Guards)
came from Lisle to re-view them; all the other Troops were come by the
beginning of May to their general Rendezvous upon the Sambre, Tournay and about
Courtray, and wanted only the Presence of the Marechals of Villeroy and Catinat
(who were expected at this time from Paris with the last Resolutions of the
Court concerning the Operations of the Campaign) to march and take the Field;
as for the Marechal of Bouflers his Government of the French Flanders kept him
upon the Frontier. We have showed above, that our being in the Field before the
French quite broke their Measures which, as we have given very good
Presumptions for, were laid against Namur; else, why must our being first in
the Field bring the Marechal of Catinat from his Department assigned upon the
Moselle and the Lower Rhine clear to the Lys; as for the Germans, they were
still in their Winter Quarters and not likely yet to take the Field, and
therefore there was as good a Prospect on that side for the Marechal of
Catinat, as when the French King appointed him to command an Army there; But
the Marechal of Catinat was thought necessary for Flanders whatever reason
there was for this Change, though France had only Ath and Audenarde left open
to feel the Efforts of its Arms; and indeed they have been so most part of the
War, since the French have broke in upon the Barriere given to the Spanish
Territories on this side in the Treaty of Nimeguen, by the taking of Mons and
Charleroy, their having secured and fortified Courtray and made a Line from
thence to the Scheld, which has brought these two Towns, especially the first,
in the very Line of their Conquests; for this reason we have been forced to
leave them exposed almost every Campaign without being able to cover them, and
yet the French themselves have seemd to neglect them, having encamped, and
marched backward and forwards about Ath several Campagnes; for in Truth the
taking of Ath or Audenaerde could not extend their Contributions an inch
farther, which, since the taking of Mons, they have raised every where between
the Scheld and the Canal of Brussels; and by their having Courtray, all the
Country between the Scheld and the Lys, and Ghend and Bruges has been brought
under Contribution, and therefore Audenarde could not give them a farther
advantage upon this account: Neither could Ath and Audenarde do much mischief
in raising Contribution upon them, because only a small and inconsiderable
dependence of Tournay, Conde and Mons remained exposed on this side of the
Scheld and the Haisne, and all the rest was covered by these two Rivers; as for
the Country between the Scheld and the Lys, it was covered with a strong Line
from the one River to the other: From whence it appears that in relation to
Contributions and advantage of the Country, neither Ath nor Audenarde could do
them much harm whilst in the Hands of the Allies, nor much good by their taking
of them: However the French having no other places left exposed to their
Attempts thought it better to form a Siege hereabouts than to do nothing; and
yet we should not have left them even this to do, if the Hesse and Lunenbourg
Troops could have been brought soon enough from Germany and our Re-inforcement
of eight Battallions from England, to have formed an Army about Namur and
observe the Marechal of Bouflers on the Sambre; for then, the Prince could have
marched from Bois-Seigneur-Isaac toward Ath, which, with the Communication of
the Electors Army at Deinse and Nevel, would have saved it and secured
Audenarde at the same time; this shows that notwithstanding the great Armies
the French had here in the Field, yet we had a competent number of Forces to
have acted defensively, if we could have brought them all in this Country time
enough; but what gives Vigor to the operations of War is Money. The French, I
say, having only these two places exposed to them, resolved upon the Siege of
Ath, more to give a Reputation to their Armies during the Negotiations at
Ryswick than for any great advantage they could get by it; for he that is
Master of the Field at such a time gains very much by it in the Treaty.
Audenarde was much stronger than Ath, and could only be attacked without the
Courtray port, all the rest being easily laid under Water by the stopping up
of the Scheld; the Hill that commands it on the South side of the Scheld may
indeed do a great deal of damage to the Houses of the Town, but signifies
nothing against the Fortifications, on the contrary it makes them so much the
stronger that it helps very much to keep in the Inundation; and therefore
seeing that there was no more advantage to be got by Audenarde than by Ath, and
that it must cost them a great deal more pains and bloodshed to besiege it, the
Siege of Ath was reckoned the most convenient in the present Conjuncture.

In pursuance of these Resolutions of the French Court, Catinat came to Tournay
on the last day of April, whence having visited the Fortifications of the Town
and Citadel, he went to Helchin on the Scheld to cause Bridges of Boats to be
laid over this River for the passage of his Army which was now formed within
the Lines and encamped at the Moulin de Clare, and the Count Montrevel, with a
small Body designed for the Guard of the Lines after the march of Catinat, was
posted in the mean while at Wevelghem without 'em near Courtray: This
Neighborhood of the French with two great Armies upon the Lys and the Scheld,
obliged the Elector to take all the precautions we have spoken of before, for
the safety of Bruges and Newport and the fortifying of his Camp at Nevel,
where, upon the news of the Marechal of Catinats being come to head his Army,
it was farther thought necessary to fortify the Churchyard of Maighem before
the Camp and make a good Work to cover the Bridge of Deinse upon the Lys;
Messieurs Geldernalsen Deputy of the States General at the Army and Ivoix
Quartermaster General, went to see Newport and Ostend, and in what Condition
every thing was for the defense of Newport and the Canals on this side, and the
Margrave Lodowick's Regiment of Foot was sent to throw it self into Audenarde:
But very few day's discovered what the French aimed at, and dissipated our
apprehensions for Flanders, the Army commanded by the Marechal of Catinat had
orders to march to Helchin upon the Scheld, and Montrevel with his Body of
about 8000 Men encamped at Wevelghem, went and posted himself within the Lines
of Courtray, his Head-quarter being in this Town. In the mean while the
Marechal de Villeroy was come to Tournay from Court the beginning of May, and
had met the Marechal of Catinat at Calandre a Village on the Scheld between
Tournay and Pont d' Espierre, there to confer upon the motions of the two
Armies to execute the design they had in hand; but Bouflers was now at the head
of his Army encamped about Bussiere on the other side of the Sambre. The 5th. a
vast many Wagons and Pioniers came to Tournay from the Pays Conquis, there
being no less than 5000 of the latter from Artois only; the same day the
Marechal of Villeroy ordered all the Gates of Tournay without the Scheld
toward Brabant to be shut up in the Afternoon, and at the beginning of the
Night Prince Camille of Lorrain with a strong Detachment of 20 Horse per Troop
was commanded to go and invest Ath from Lignes and Leuze on the Tournay side;
Another Detachment marched the same Night from the Army at Helchin, being
commanded by the Marechal of Catinat in Person, to invest it toward Audenarde
and Lessines upon the Dender; the Chevalier de Gassion Lieutenant General
marched at the same time from Mons with a Body of Horse and invested it between
the little River of Irchonwelz (which comes from Leuse and falls into the
Dender at Ath) and the lower Dender, taking up by this means all the Posts
toward Mons and Brabant, and thus Ath found it self invested on all sides very
early the next Morning being the 6th. of May.

Whilst these several Detachements were investing of this place, Villeroy gave
Orders for the march of his Army toward Leuse, from Tournay; about Ten that
same Night 60 pieces of Cannon that were drawn out upon the Glacis of the 7
Fountain's Gate and the Troops encamped before it, marched through the Town to
pass the Scheld taking their way toward Ath; at three the next Morning being
the 6th. the Marechal of Villeroy followed in person at the head of the main
Body of his Army, which consisted of the Troops quartered in the Town, and the
rest encamped without between the Carthusians Gate and that of Valenciennes,
the last of which crossed the Scheld at a Bridge of Boats laid over this River
over against the Village of Vaulx; all these Forces joined together this day,
and encamped at Leuse making the Marechal of Villeroy's Army, of which I shall
insert the Line of Battle by and by, only I must first bring the Marechal of
Catinat's Army about Ath being appointed to carry on this Siege; for which
16000 Pioniers followed Villeroy's Army the 6th from Tournay and 1800 Wagons,
besides those appointed to supply the Army with Bread, of which 400000 Rations
were ordered in this Town. The Marechal of Villeroy's Army being come to the
Camp of Leuse this day, it was ordered to be upon the Bywacht all Night, that
is, the Soldiers to have all their Accoutrements on, and the Horse to be ready
Booted and Saddled; because the Marechal of Catinat's Army was not yet come up
from the Scheld to take the Posts about Ath, being only secured by the
Detachments above mentioned, and therefore 'twas Villeroy's Business to make
good the said Posts and hinder any Succor from getting into the place; This
obliged him to have his Troops in a readiness till the coming up of the other
Army, which passed the Scheld, the same day that Villeroy came to Leuse, upon
the Bridges made between Pottes and Canaffe and encamped between Fresnes and
Brussenal within two Leagues of Ath: The Marquis de Crequi was left with a
flying Camp at Celles upon the little River Lay which falls in the Scheld
about Canaffe to keep in the Garrison of Audenarde from molesting the Convoys
between the Scheld and the French Army, and likewise to be in a readiness to
reinforce Montrevel in case the Elector should attempt any thing to make a
diversion either upon the Lines or Courtray. The 7th. Catinat's Army marched
from Fresnes and Brussenal and encamped about Ath in order to form the Siege of
that Place; where, at his first coming, he allowed all the Women of Quality and
Nuns the liberty to come out and retire somewhere else during the Siege; the
Count de Roeux Governor of Ath's Lady and several other Ladies retired to
Brussels where they were conducted in their Coaches by a Trumpet of the
Marechal of Catinat's. In order to this undertaking, the Marechal of Bouflers
had already passed the Sambre with his Army since the 4th and encamped at
Fontaine l' Eveque, whence he marched on the 6th, (at the same time as the two
other Marechals did toward Ath) and came nearer this place to cover the Siege
toward Brabant and observe the Motions of Prince Vaudemont (as the Marechal of
Villeroy was to do toward Flanders and watch the Elector of Bavaria) and
encamped along River Haine near Binch between St. Vaast and Haine St. Pierre,
but Count Tallard with the Troops that had Rendezvouz'd about Mons, encamped at
Thieux between Mons and Soignies, as an advanced body of Bouflers Army to
secure the Camp of Cambron, and hinder the Princes Army from coming to
Soignies, in order to march that way: And thus having brought all the French
Forces in the Field in this Country, making up three large Armies commanded by
three Marechals of France, it will not be amiss to insert their several Lines
of Battle here as the most proper place.

The Line of Battle for the Marechal of Villeroy's Army for the Year 1697.
RIGHT WING.
First LINE. Second LINE. Monsieur de Rozen Lieutenant General. Monsieur de
Busca Lieutenant General. Messieurs de Vandeuil and Bezons Major Generals. Duc
de Luxembourg Major General. Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Davaray La Reine
Drag.
Davaray 3 3
Romery Grenadiers a Cheval Noailles Duras Lorge Villeroy Gens d'Armes. Chevaux
Legers Mousquetaires
Life-Guards. 1 3 3 3 3 1 1 2
Prince Camille. Villeroy Camille Anjou Cuirassiers
2 3 2 3
Squadrons 33 Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Berteuil Berteuil Hautefort
Drag. 3 3
Manderscheid Manderscheid Belporte Sully
3 3 2
Bissy Quadt La Tournelle Bissy
3 3 3
Squadrons 23 In all in the Right Wing Squadrons 56

Body of FOOT
First LINE. Second LINE. Monsieur de Feuquieres and the D. of Berwick
Lieutenant-Generals. Messieurs d' Artagnan and Crequi Lieutenant Generals.
Messieurs d' Albergoti, Renold, and de Surville and the D. of Villeroy Major
Generals. Monsieur de Greder and Duc de Charrost Major Generals. Brigades,
Regiments, Battallions. Blainville Champagne Greder Allemand
3 2 Puysegur Le Roy Lorraine
4 1 La Chatre Lionnois La Chatre Royal Italion
2 2 1 Saillant Guardes Francoises Guardes Suisses
4 3 Bligny Maulevrier Xaintonge Angoumois Santerre
2 1 1 1 Vibray Anjou Boulonois Hautefort Mouchy
1 1 1 1 Liancourt La Fere Bourbon Angoulesine Orleans La Mothe
1 1 1 1 1 Rochefort St. Second Couaquin Bourbonnois
2 2 1 Battallions 41 Brigades, Regiments, Battallions. Dorrington Guards
Ireland Vidame d' Amiens Montauban Auxerrois Artagnan
2 1 1 1 1 Mouroux Mouroux Lanoy Renel Choisinet De Sensay Destouches
1 1 1 1 1 1 Salisch Stouppa Surbeck Slaisch
4 4 4 Berry 1 Guebriant Royal Savoy L'Aigle La Landre Brocq Le Chev. de Ponts
1 1 1 1 1 Kercadot Damas Tresseson Thoui Bresse Provence
1 1 1 1 1 Battallions 35 In all 76

LEFT WING.
First LINE. Second LINE. Monsieur de Montrevel Lieutenant General. The Marquis
de Gassion Lieutenant General. Monsieur d'Allegre Major General. Monsieur de
Rottenbourg Major General. Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Montfort Le Roy
Berry D' Auvergne
3 2 3 Roquespine Roquespine Villequier Tournesort
3 2 2 Rohan Cosse Rohan Orleans Mestre de Camp Genesis
2 2 2 3 St Hermine St. Hermine Drag.
Fimarcon
3 3 Squadrons 30 Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Dourches Dourches Barantin
Fountain
3 3 3 Vivans La Feronay Souatre Vivans
3 3 2 Dragoons. Gouffier 3 Squadrons 20 In the Left Wing Reserve. 50 Royal
Artillery 1 Bombardiers 1 Battallions 2

According to this Line of Battle the Marechal of Villeroy had 56 Squadrons of
Horse and Dragoons in his Right Wing, and 50 in his Left, in all 106; which at
120 per Squadron one with another, makes 12720 Horse and Dragoons. In the Body
of Foot 76 Battallions and two in Reserve, in all 78; which, at 550 Men per
Battallion, amounts to 42900 Foot, from whence the Sum Total of this Army
arises to 55620 Men, Horse, Foot and Dragoons. Next follows the Line of Battle
for the Marechal of Bouflers Army.

The Line of Battle for the Marechal of Boufler's Army.
RIGHT WING.
First LINE. Second LINE. Count Tallard Lieutenant General. Monsieur de Gasse
Lieutenant General. Messieurs de Lanion and Phelipeaux Major Generals. The Duke
de Grammont Major General. Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Dragoons. Mestre
d'Camp. Genesis Peizac Senneterre
3 3 3 Rassant Commissary General Rassant Chartres
3 3 2 Du Rozel Carabiniers 16 Squadrons 33 Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Du
Plessis Du Plessis Rennepont St. Pouange
3 3 2 Grignan Egmond Chatillon Grignan
3 3 2 Squadrons 16 In all 49

Body of FOOT.
First LINE. Second LINE. The Duke d' Elboeuf Lieutenant General. Monsieur de
Bresse Lieutenant General. Messieurs de Solre and Dantin Major Generals.
Messieurs de Zurlaube and Surbec Major Generals. Brigades, Regiments,
Battallions. Prince d' Epinoy Picardy Royal Comtois Cambresis
3 2 1 Brigades, Regiments, Battallions. Montalan Royal La Force Lignieres
Tulles
3 1 1 1 Chamilly Grancey Soissonnois Bourgogne Brie
1 2 1 1 Thury Du Maine Charolois De Lux Aunis
2 1 1 1 Cadrieux Beauvoisis Thoulouse Guiscard Bellisle
1 2 1 1 Thiange Languedoc Thiange Ponthieu
2 2 1 Boutigneux Limosin Tesse Montjoy d'Alsace Bernold d'Alsace
2 1 1 1 Belsenner Crussol Clare Ireland Nivernois
1 3 1 Chatillon Blaisois Foix Chartres Piemont
1 1 1 2 Battallions 41 Blecourt La Couronne Villefort Tournon Beuil
3 1 1 1 Labadie Conde Furstemburg Montenay d'Alanson
1 3 1 Courten Courten Monen
2 2 Parat Royal Roussillon Miromesnil Gournay
2 2 1 Graveson Royal Marine Steinville Serville Sejousac
2 1 1 1 Prince Buzeville Barville Noailles Dauphin
1 1 1 2 Battallions 36 In all 77

LEFT WING.
First LINE. Second LINE. Monsieur de Ximenes and the Count de Toulouse
Lieutenant Generals. The Duke de Roquelaure Lieutenant General. Monsieurs de
Pracontal and Crenan, Major Generals. Monsieur de Courtebonne Major General.
Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Duras. Royal Piemont Fiennes Dauphin Estranger
Duras
3 3 2 3 Cheladet. Noailles Toulouse Du Maine Bourbon Royal Estranger
3 2 2 2 3 Dragoons. Frontenay Dauphin
3 3 Hussars 2 Squadrons 31 Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Jeoffreville
Jeoffreville Champlain Mornay
3 3 3 Chatelet. Breuil Imecourt Chatelet
3 3 3 Reserve. Dragoons. Du Heron Vateville Languedoc
3 3 3 Squadrons 27 In all 58 Royal Artillery 1 Battallion.

By this List it appears that the Marechal of Bouflers had 49 Squadrons of
Horse and Dragoons in his Right Wing, and 58 in his Left and Reserve, in all
107; which at 120 per Squadron, makes 12840 Horse and Dragoons in his Army: In
the Body of Foot 77 Battallions, and one of Artillery in the Reserve, in all
78, which at 550 per Battallion, amount to 42900 Foot; all this joined together
makes the Total of the Marechal of Boufler's Army to consist of 55740 Men. None
of the Princes of the Blood served this Campaign except the Count de Toulouse;
the Prince of Conti stood Candidate for the Crown of Poland, and therefore
could not appear in the Field but at the Head of an Army. The Dukes of
Chartres, Bourbon and Du Maine, kept with the Court the whole Summer.

The Troops which composed the Army of the Lys consisted of the Regiments
following, which I could not get Marshaled into a Line of Battle, because this
Army divided immediately after the General Rendezvous; the main going with the
Marechal of Catinat for the Siege of Ath, and the rest dividing part for the
Guard of the Lines under the Count de Montrevel at Courtray, and part with the
Marquis de la Mothe Houdancourt about Ipres and Furnes.

A LIST of the Troops which did compose the Army of the Lys under the Command
of the Marechal of Catinat.
Nota, That the Regiments marked with an Asterism, are those which marched with
Catinat and encamped within the Line of Circumvallation before Ath, the rest
making up the Flying Camps under the Count de Montrevel and the Marquis de la
Mothe.

FOOT. FOOT. HORSE. * Navarre 3 Lostange 1 * Cravattes 3 * Poitou 2 Du Biez 1 *
Royal Alemand 3 * Humieres 2 Valonze 1 La Reine 3 * Artois 1 * Denonville 1 *
Conde 2 Orleans 2 Cherigny 1 * Molae 3 * Vermandois 2 Puy Normand 1 * Vaillac 3
* Royal Artillery 1 * Surlauben 2 * Furstemberg 3 * Tournesis 1 * Nice 1
Clermont 3 * La March 1 Monferrat 1 * Monroy 3 * Vexin 1 * Pery 1 * La Valiere
3 Luxembourg 1 Pezeu 1 * Rozen 3 * Catinat 1 Swissers Renold Greder

4 Dragoons. Limoges 1 4 * Colonel General 3 Agenois 1 * Lee Ireland 3 * Le Roy
3 * Bugey 1 Militia Arbouville Brulon

1 * Catinat 3 Leslandes 1 1 * Silly 3 Ximenes 1 * Marsan 3 * Fusiliers de
Tesse 2 Battallions 25 Verue 3 Battallions 25 In all 50 Squadrons 49

The Marechal of Catinat's Army as it was upon the Lys before the Siege of Ath,
consisted (according to this account) of 50 Battallions, which, at 550 per
Battallion, makes 27550 Foot; and 49 Squadrons, at 120 per Squadron, amount to
5880 Horse and Dragoons, which together makes the Sum of this Army to be 33430
Men; from whence it appears, that the three Armies of France designed to act
against His Majesty and the Allies in Flanders made no less than 144790
effective Men, besides the flying Camp commanded by the Marquis de Harcourt
with which he marched from the Moselle to the Meuse and the Sambre, which I
could not get a List of, but if computed at 6000 Men, will make the French to
have been at least 150000 strong this Campaign in Flanders; I have seen a
Letter from Paris wherein their Forces on this side were given out for no less
than 168000 Men; but I will charge them no higher than can fairly appear by
their several Lines of Battle.

But now to return to Catinat's Army and the Siege of Ath; whereas this
Marechal had marched over the Scheld (as it appears by the List now mentioned)
only with 25 Battallions and 40 Squadrons, he was reinforced from the Marechal
of Villeroy's Army, with the three entire Brigades of Salisch, Bligny and
Vlbray, and the Regiments of Lorrain and Choisinet making together 24
Battallions; the two Regiments of Horse of La Tournelle and Bissy, and the
Dragoons of Berteuil, Hautefort and Gouffier, consisting together of 15
Squadrons. These being joined with the Forces the Marechal of Catinat brought
over the Scheld, formed the Siege of Ath and took up the compass of the Line of
Circumvallation according to the disposition following, being divided into
three General Quarters by three Bridges of Communication, one upon the River of
Irchonwelz, the Second upon the Upper Dender and the Third upon the Lower
Dender.

Between the River of Irchonwelz, and the upper Dender was the Marechal of
Catinat's quarter at Villers-St. Amand; of this repartition were the Count de
Tesse, the Chevalier de Tesse, and the Marquis de Gassion Lieutenant Generals;
the Count de Marsin and Monsieur de Vilpion Major Generals, with the Regiments
of Horse of Bissy and La Tournelle; Dragoons, Marsan and Gouffier; Foot,
Navarre, Lee, Artois, Tournesis, Vexin, Pery, Vermandois, La March and Bugey.

Between the Upper and the Lower Dender were Posted the Marquis de Larrey and
Monsieur de Bachevilliers Lieutenant Generals; the Marquis de Clerambault and
Monsieur de Greder Major Generals, with the Regiments, of Dragoons, of the
King's and Hautefort; Of Horse, Royal Allemand, Vaillao, Furstemberg and Rozen;
Foot, Poitou, Surlauben, Catinat, Humieres, Fuziliers of Tesse, D'Enonville,
Maulevrier, Xaintonge, Angoumois and Santerre.

Between the Lower Dender and the River of Irchonwels being the Quarter toward
Audenarde and Tournay were Posted the Marquis, de Vins and Monsieur de Vauban
Lieutenant Generals, and Messieurs de Grancey, Hautefort and Salisch, Major
Generals, with the Regiments of Dragoons of the Colonel General, Catinat and
Berteuil; Horse, Cravates, Molac, Conde and La Valiere; Foot, Anjou, Lorrain,
Boulonois, Hautefort, Mouchy, Choisinet, Surbeck, Stouppa and Salisch: a
Battallion of Royal Artillery, encamped with the Artillery.

The Marechal of Catinat having disposed his Troops thus in the Line of
Circumvallation (which they worked with all diligence upon to finish them in
five or six days) 'twas now the Marechals of Villeroy's and Bouflers Business
to observe our two Armies, and hinder them from pretending to raise this Siege;
Villeroy's Army therefore marched on the 8th, only to come nearer Ath and
bring the Head-quarter at Lignes; the Marechal of Boufler marched the same day
from St. Vaast and Haine St. Pierre, and came to incamp between Roeux and Mons,
his Right at Thieux and Left at Thieusies: In the mean while several Battering
Pieces, Mortars and abundance of Powder came daily from Doway (which is the
Arsenal of Flanders) by Tournay to the Camp before Ath; the rest came from Mons
and Conde, and about 2000 Wagons of Bombs, Balls and other Ammunitions to
carry on this Siege; where they had now 20000 Pioniers on work upon the Lines
of Circumvallation, and to prepare every thing for the opening of the Trenches.
The 10th the Marechal of Villeroy's Army marched upon the Left to cover this
Siege by Posting himself upon the Lower Dender toward Audenarde and the
Spanish Flanders, where he encamped with his Right at Papigny upon the Dender
between Ath and Lessines and his Left at Hamede toward the Scheld, and the
Head-quarter at Ostiche to hinder the Elector's Army from attempting the Relief
of Ath on this side, this being a Camp by which our Army must pass from
Flanders to go to Ath, and therefore fit to be secured first by the French upon
the undertaking of this Siege. The 11th the Marechal of Bousters marched
likewise with his Army to come nearer the Dender on this side, and came to Post
himself at the Camp of Soignies: For the Town of Ath could not be relieved at
present by us, but by one side of the Dender toward the Scheld or the other
toward Brabant whilst the French were Masters of Mons and Tournay, which
hindered any Relief on the side of Leuse and Lignes: In the first Case our Army
must have marched by the Camps of Ninove, Grammont, and Lessines and endeavor
to gain the Height of Rebay, which was now covered by Villeroy's Posting
himself at Ostiche between Papigny and Hamede: In the Second our Army must have
marched to Enghien in order to attack the Line of Circumvallation between the
Upper and Lower Dender; but the Marechal of Bouflers being at Soignies, he was
now at hand to Seize this Post before us and hinder any attempt for a Relief on
that side: For the Prince could not stir from Bois-Seigneur-Isaac without
leaving Namur and Brussels exposed to the Marechal of Bouflers, if he had
offered to get before the French to the Camps of Enghien or Ghislenghien, and
'twas better run the risk of Ath than of either of these places.

It is not necessary to give a description of the Town Ath, before I run into
the particulars of this Siege, having already given an Account of it in some of
the precedent Histories; I shall only say at present, that Ath is a
Fortification of Eight Bastion upon seven sides of a Polygone, that, toward
Tournay and Leuse, being much longer than any of the other sides (which are
almost equal) has a flat Bastion upon the Center of it; all the Bastions and
Half-moons are faced with good Stone, and it is enough to set forth the goodness
and fineness of all these Works to say that they were the Contrivance of
Monsieur de Vauban; but, notwithstanding all the pains which the French took in
fortifying of this place whilst it was in their Possession for 20 years
together between the Treaties of Aix la Chapelle and Nimeguen, yet the
situation of it is very weak and disadvantagious, being commanded on one side
of it toward the Scheld and Flanders, by a high and rising ground which comes
to the very Palissades, from whence you may look into the Streets of the Town;
and besides this disadvantage, all the Ground hereabouts is of a very easy
Mould and Commodious for the making of Trenches, and cannot give much Pain and
Labor to the Pioniers in digging. The Garrison of it was not very strong,
consisting of the Regiments of Anhalt, Slabendorf and Schellinga, three
Regiments of the States, which only could be called Regiments; the rest being
Italians and Walloons in the Spanish service, and every one that has been in
Flanders knows the strength and condition of those Regiments; but such as they
are it is not their fault if they are not better, and their service has
generally been very good upon occasion and not at all answerable to the state
they are in: Of these Regiments in the Spanish servive there was the Italian
Regiment of Aquaviva, the three Walloon Regiments of Grobendonck, d'Odrignies
and Maucron, being Foot; the Regiment of Horse of the Prince of Chimay, and the
Dragoons of Rysbourg, neither of which must be reckoned a Squadron, as any one
may see by the List of Spanish Horse and Dragoons in our Lines of Battle. The
three Regiments of Foot in the States service being commanded by the Prince of
Anhalt Brigadier, may be computed at 600 Effective Men one with another, which
(I am sure) was the most; as for the rest, I dare say, they did not make
upwards of 700 Men together; which makes the Garrison to consist at the
beginning of this Siege of about 2500 Effective Men under the Command of the
Count de Roeux Governor of the place, a Gentleman of the House of Croye. The
Prince of Chimay, the Marquis of Rysbourg and the Count d'Aquaviva were at the
Electors Court when Ath was invested, but upon the News of it, went immediately
to endeavor to throw themselves into the place and serve at the head of their
Regiments; the Prince of Chimay luckily got in disguised like a Boor following
of a Cart, Load of Beer to sell in the French Camp, but the Marquis of Rysbourg
and Count Aquaviva were made Prisoners in endeavoring to get in.

Upon the first News of this Siege there was a project formed in the Electors
Army of endeavoring to make a diversion by the Attack of the Lines, or
Courtray; and a disposition was made thereupon for the Army to have marched
that way; in which Case it was to be joined by all the English Horse in
Quarters at Ghendt, and the Dragoons cantoon'd between Nevel and Marykirk, the
four Battallions of Bavaria, and the Bavarian Cuirassiers and Dragoons now
encamped at Marykirk under the Count d'Arco, and the Dutch Cavalry, which was
still cantoon'd hereabouts: The design was to have passed the Lys at Deinse
upon several Bridges of Boats laid between this place and Bachtem, from whence
the Army was to have marched with all diligence and secrecy by Mackelen, Zult,
Vive St. Eloy and Harlebeck toward Courtray; but Montrevel having already a
pretty good Body at Courtray for the defense of the Lines, besides the Marquis
de la Mothe, who upon such an occasion could have detached several Battallions
from his Camp between Ipres and Furnes, and the Marquis de Crequi at Celles,
near the Scheld where he was at hand to get within the Lines, and that Succors
could be sent thither very easily from the Marechal of Villeroy's Army; this
design was therefore thought impracticable, and so laid aside, and the French
could not be hindered from carrying on this Siege, for which no other expedient
was left but the junction of our two Armies; but before I bring them together
it is necessary to enter into the Siege of Ath.

The Marechal of Catinat having spent some days in making up the Line of
Circumvallation, laying of Bridges for the communication of Quarters, and the
bringing in of great quantities of Fascines; and several Battering pieces and
Morters with great quantities of Ammunitions being come into the Camp the 11th,
every thing was ready on the 12th for the opening of the Trenches, which the
Besiegers resolved to do before the Brussels port in two places, one upon the
right (according to the facing of the works) against the Bastion of Namur, and
the other upon the Left against that of Limbourg; and that a Lieutenant General
and a Brigadier should mount upon the Right with three Battallions, a Marechal
de Camp or Major General with as many Battallions upon the Left, and that a
Brigade of Ingeniers should be every Night in the Trenches at each of those two
Attacks. According to these Resolutions the Trenches were opened the 12th in
the Night by Count Tesse Lieute^^ant General on the Right and Brigadier
Salisch, with three Battallions of the Regiment of Navarre; on the Left, by
Count de Marsin Major General with two Battallions of Poitou and one of La
March; they worked this first Night no less than 500 Fathoms of Trenches upon
the Right and Left, which they joined the next Morning by a Parallel, which
embraced the whole Attack before Brussels port from the Bastion of Namur on
the Right to that of Limbourg on the left: The Besiegers thought it convenient
to make their Attack this way, because the Batardeau or Damme, which keeps up
the Water in the Fosse was near this Gate, and therefore they could not propose
to drain the Ditch in order to a General Assault till they had ruined the the
Damme; some people thought that Monsieur de Vauban got the Attack to be made
this way (though not the weakest) for the Honor of his own work which he would
have to hold out for some time and not be forced to Surrender over soon, after
such vast Sums of Money laid out by the French King for the Fortification of
it. The 13th, a Convoy of 10 pieces of Cannon and 400 Wagons of Ammunitions
and Officers Baggage came into the Camp, having been Attacked at the Village of
Maude coming from Tournay by a Walloon Captain of an independent Company of
Fusiliers of the Garrison of Ghendt with 100 Men, joined by 24 Horse of the
Garrison of Audenarde; and though the Convoy had a very strong Escorte, yet the
Party was so lucky as to bring off 62 Horses and 30 Prisoners which they had
safe into Ghendt after having fought very hard to preserve their Booty, and
killed and wounded several of the French. In the Evening the Marquis de Vins
Lieutenant General and the Marquis de Vibray Brigadier, mounted the Trenches
upon the right with two Battallions of Anjou and one of Tournesis; Count de
Grancey Major General upon the Left with the two Battallions of Humieres and
one of Vexin. The Trenches were brought this Night within 200 Fathoms of the
Glacis of the Place, and joined the 14th in the Morning by a Parallel; The same
day the Marquis de Conflans was taken Prisoner in the French Camp as he was
endeavoring to get into the Place: In the Evening the Marquis de Larrey
Lieutenant General had the Trenches upon the Right with Brigadier Lee and the
Battallions of Artois, Catinat and Pery; the Marquis de Clerambaut Major
General on the Left with two Battallions of Vermandois and one of Bugey: The
Trenches were advanced this Night very near the Foot of the Glacis, but the
Besiegers had several Soldiers killed and wounded, a Lieutenant of Bugey being
among the latter.

I must now leave this Siege for a while to speak of the Motions made by the
Allies in such a Conjuncture. Prince Vaudemont was still in his Camp of
Bois-siegneur-Isaac where little extraordinary happened to relate at present,
but that, upon the Marechal of Bouflers coming with his Army between Mons and
Soignie, the Prince detached Bannier's Brigade of Foot to Post it self at
Brain le Chateau and secure thereby our March to the Camp of Halle, which we
could not have done if this pass had once been in the hands of the French: And
that there might be an exact Correspondence in the Motions of the two Armies
whilst the French were engaged in the Siege of Ath, the Prince dispatched
Quarter-master-General Dopft to the Elector of Bavaria at Nevel; where, upon
his Arrival a great Council of War was held to settle the Marches of the two
Armies, which (may be) put a stop to the Project abovementioned of attempting
a diversion upon the Lines or Courtray; from hence Quater-Master-General Dopft
went the same day Post to Breda, where the King was now expected from
Zuylenstein: for the French undertaking the Siege of Ath at this time, had
prevented His Majesty's going to Loo. On the 11th Messieurs Ivoy and Verboom,
the first Quarter-Master-Ceneral under the Prince of Nassau-Sarbruck and the
second of the Electors Troops, were sent to Antwerp to meet
Quarter-Master-General Dopft, who returned this Evening from Breda with His
Majesty's Resolutions about the march of the two Armies, which were, that they
should both join together and attempt the Relief of Ath; and accordingly they
drew up a Scheme of the Marches which both the Armies should make in order to a
junction, and then went back each to their respective Camps to Communicate them
to the Generals.

The 13th the Electors Army begun first to march from the Camp at Nevel, upon
the Left; the first Line with the Artillery and Baggage marched through the
Town of Ghendt toward Dendermond, and the second passed the Canal of Bruges at
Marykirk, and that of the Sas of Ghendt at Mulestien, and so on toward the
Scheld, but all the heavy Baggage was ordered to remain at Dislelberg near
Ghendt till further orders: The English Horse in Quarters at Ghendt, and
Dragoons cantoon'd thereabouts, together with the Bavarians encamped at
Marykirk, marched in the Van by break of day, directing their march to pass the
Scheld the next day; the whole encamped by Brigades here and there, as
convenience could be found without doing any damage to the Country; the
Elector's Quarter was this Night at Overmeer, the English under the Command of
General Auerquerque at Grimberg Opsandt, and the Prince of Nassau Sarbruck at
Calcken; the Horse had express Orders to meddle with no Forage but Clover, and
the Foot not to molest any Boors House, nor to cut down any Wood upon pain of
Death; Major General Fagel had the Care left to him of covering the Country
behind the Canals from Bellem to Newport, whilst the Electors Army should be on
the other side of the Sheld. The 14th the Electors Army passed the Scheld, the
English Horse and Dragoons at Dendermond, being followed by the Bavarian Troops
and the Dutch Horse; the Infantry passed the Scheld at Appels and the Dender
near the Dermonde at Wiese, and so went on by Maseel toward Asche, followed by
the Baggage of the Generals and light Baggage of the Army; as for the
Artillery, which the day before had got no further than the other side of
Ghendt and encamped between the Castle and the Scheld, it came this day to
Grimberg-Opsandt: All the Electors forces having passed the Scheld (as we have
now said it) encamped regularly with the Right at Merchtem which was the
Electors Quarters, and the Left toward Asche within two Leagues and a half of
Brussels. It Is true there was a shorter Cut for the Electors Army to join that
of the Prince, viz. by Gavre, Ninove and St Quintin Linneck, but Villeroy being
encamped near Lessines who upon such an occasion might have had Reinforcements
out of the Line of Circumvallation to Attack the Elector, this last way, which
the Army took, was preferred before it. The Electors Army halted at Merchtem
and Asche the next day being 15th, and the Artillery came up to the Camp from
Grimberg Opsandt with the Dragoons of Holstein-Ploen.

Having brought the Elector thus far in order to the joining of the two Armies,
I shall proceed to speak of our Motions in Brabant, where the King was
hastening to Command the Army on that side in Person, and was now come up as
far as Breda. The 12th Lieutenant General Heyden came from the Meuse to the
Neighborhood of Brussels with the Brandenbourg Gens d'Armes, Carrabiniers,
Light Horse, etc. in all 21 Squadrons being the remainder of the Brandenbourg
Troops that were to pass the Campaign in Flanders. The 13th Prince Cerclas of
Tilly General of the Liege and Cologne Troops came near the same place with the
Horse and Dragoons of these two Countries, but the Foot did not come up; though
four Battallions of them were reckoned into the Elector's Line of Battle at his
first taking of the Field, whether it was that they were left for the security
of the Garrisons on the Meuse upon Harcourt's marching that way from the
Moselle, or that they were not yet in a readiness and so we were deprived of
that Reinforcement for the present. The same day the Prince's Army encamped at
Bois-Seigneur-Isaac and Brain la Leu had orders to be in a readiness to march,
and the King came from Breda to Malines in the evening in order to join the
Army the next day at Halle; The Artillery and heavy Baggage was sent away this
Evening, by Waterlo and the Bois-de-Sogne, to Brussels under the Escorte of
Prince Charles's Regiment of Danes (which was commanded this way for the Guard
of the Town) the pass of Brain le Chateau being too difficult for wheel
Baggage; a Body of Horse was commandded out at the same time to pass Nostredame
de Halle and post it self upon the Height of Vlieringon from whence it was to
make detachments as far as Tubise and St. Arnelle, and toward Hautecroix, to
get intelligence of the Motions of the Marechal of Bouflers and cover the March
of our Army. The 14th the Princes Army began to file off very early upon the
Right from the Camp of Bois-Seigneur-Isaac, the Right Wing of Horse first upon
one Column, and the Left upon another, followed by the Body of Foot; and having
passed the little River Brain at Brain la Chateau, the Foot upon the Bridges
laid over the River upon the Right, and the Horse over the Wooden Bridge by the
Village, they come to pass the Senne, the first Line at Halle and the second
below at a Bridge of Boats laid at the Village of Busingen; Bannier's Brigade,
that had encamped at Brain la Chateau for the Guard of that pass, joined the
Body of Foot in its proper Post upon the march, and so the Army encamped this
day with the Right at the Chateau of Pepinghen toward St. Quintin-Linnecke and
the Left beyond Halle upon the way to Brussels and Anderlecht, in the Figure of
a Half Moon, the Town of Halle remaining before the Unequal of the Camp; His
Majesty's Quarter was in the Town, as also that of Prince Vaudemont, which, to
cover on the other side toward Brain le Chateau, the Brigade of Guards and
the first Battallion of the Royal Regiment of Foot were ordered to incamp just
on the other side of the Town. The Artillery and heavy Baggage which had
encamped the overnight at the Fauxbourg of Ixelles near Brussels joined us
this day, the Cologne and Liege Troops under Prince Cerclas of Tilly and those
of Brandenbourg under Lieutenant General Heyden having marched at the same time
from Brussels to St. Pieters Leuwe near St. Martin Linneck; And the Army was
reinforced with several Battallions from the Garrison of Namur under the
Command of Lieutenant General Cohorne, which (upon Bouflers passing the Sambre
and marching toward Ath) could now be drawn out of that Garrison: But the best
Reinforcement was that of His Majesty's Person, who having come from Malines
this day by the way of Vilvorde, arrived betimes in the Camp, upon which
occasion all our Artillery was fired thrice round, in the Evening.

The 15th His Majesty's Army halted in this Camp, because the Electors
Artillery came up to him from Dendermond but this day, and therefore he could
not march on his part in order to the joining together, which therefore was
deferred till the next day, and the Elector took hold of this occasion to come
and pay a Visit to His Majesty at Halle, and went back to his Camp that
Evening. The 16th both Armies marched at the same time, the Kings upon the
Right and the Electors upon the Left, to join together at the Camp of St.
Quintin Linneck; all the Brandenbourg Forces marched first clear out of the
Camp of Halle to enter that day in the Electors Line of Battle, as did all the
Troops upon English Pay, out of the Electors Army to come into His Majesty's,
except the Wolfembuttle Guards, the Regiments of Hering and Willekens, and the
Dragoons of Jedborough, which remained with the Elector. The Brandenbourgs
having cleared the Camp, the rest of the Army followed, the Right marching in
one Line upon the Right by the Defile of St. Pierre and Elingen, the Left
likewise in one Line by the Village of Breet-hout and the Panebrugghe, to the
Camp having the Right at Iseringhen where was the King's Quarter, and the Left
beyond St. Quintin Linneck near the defile of St. Pierre extending it self
toward Halle; the Chapel of Savelberg was in the Front of the Body of Foot,
where the Left made an obtuse Angle upon the Right: The Artillery came to the
Camp by St. Pieters Leuwe, from whence Prince Cerclas of Tilly and Lieutenant
General Heyden had marched to join the Elector: The King's Quarter being at
Iseringhen, became, upon the coming up of the Elector's Army, the Center of the
whole, and the Brigade of Guards encamped before this place, as the Life-Guards
were to do at their coming up to the Camp; the Princes Quarter was at St.
Quintin Linneck.

The same day that the King's Army marched from the Camp of Halle to Iseringhen
and St. Quintin Linneck, the Elector's Army marched upon the Left and came to
incamp with the Right beyond Ternath extending it self something toward Asche,
and the Left just upon the King's Quarter and the Right of his Army, at
Iseringhen; The Elector's Quarter was at Ternath, where he was joined, at his
coming, by all the Troops of Brandenbourg commanded by General Heyden, and
those of Cologne and Liege under the Command of Prince Cerclas of Tilly: His
Majesty in the Evening went to Visit the Elector at his Quarter and to see that
Camp. Both our Armies being formed now as they were designed to act for all the
Campaign following, this is the most proper place for me to insert their
several Lines of Battle.

The Line of Battle of His Majesty of Great Britain's Army for the Campaign
1697.
RIGHT WING.
First LINE. Second LINE. Monsieur d'Auerquerque and the Earl of Portland
Generals of Horse. Monsieur de la Forest Lieutenant General. The Duke of Ormond
and Earl of Rivers Lieutenant Generals. Major Generals Eppinger and Monsieur de
Boncourt. Major Generals, Lord Tiviot, Leueson, L'Etang and Lumley. Brigades,
Regiments, Squadrons. Matthew' s Dragoons Matthew' s Tiviot Eppinger
4 4 5 Chomley Horse Grenadiers Scarborough Ormond Life Guar.
Rivers Auerquerqu Portland
1 1 1 1 1 2 Langston Leueson Carabiniers Gallway Langston
2 2 3 2 Windham Wood Schomberg Coy Lumley
2 2 2 3 Squadrons Horse Dragoons

25 13 In all 38 Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons Dragoons Lloyd Rosse Miremont
Essex
4 4 4 4 Wirtemb. La Forest Prince Wirtemberg Van Zee Boncourt
2 2 2 2 Montigny Montigny Turck Schulembourg Noyelles
2 2 2 2 Schack Schack Vittinghoff Tennagel Rochford
2 2 2 2 Squadrons Horse Dragoons

25 16 In all 40 In the whole Wing 78

Body of FOOT
First LINE. Second LINE. The Duke of Wirtemberg General of Foot. Lieutenant
Generals Bellasis and Cohorne. Count Nassau and Count Noyelles Lieutenant
Generals. Major Generals La Meloniere, Mirmont, Collier and Bernsdorf. Major
Generals, Churchill, Ramsay, Alfeldt, Lord Cutts and Heukelom. Brigades,
Regiments, Battallions. Weck English Guards Dutch Guards Scotch Guards
1 1 1 Haro Royal Churchill Seymour Webb Fusiliers
1 1 1 1 1 Ingoldesby Wall. Collier Stanley Royal Ireland Fr. Hamilton Row
Ingoldesby
1 1 1 1 1 Maitland Maitland La Meloniere Marton Ferguson Nassau
1 1 1 1 1 Haxhausen Queen of Denmark Prince George Prince Frederick Danish
Guards
1 1 1 1 Oxensterne Slagenbourg Du Theil Oxenstern Essen Ameliswert
1 1 1 1 1 Brigades, Regiments, Battallions. Weck English Guards Dutch Guards
1 1 Orkney Royal Fairfax Brewer Lauder Dav. Collier
1 1 1 1 1 Tiffin How Bridges Collingwood Saunderson Tiffin
1 1 1 1 1 Belcastel Belcastel Strathnaver Geo. Hamilton Brandenbourg
1 1 1 1 Haxhausen Zeeland Fuhnen Jutland Prince Charles
1 1 1 1 Holstein-Beck Noyelles Salisch Holstein-Beck Gohr Beynam (Wymberg)
1 1 1 1 1 Lucq Lucq Bernsdorf Weldern Schratenbach
1 1 1 1 Heyden Arents Heyden Heukelom Cohorne Hostein-Ploen
1 1 1 1 1 Battallions 36 Tcharner Milunes Tcharner
2 2 Bannier Bannier Else (Heckren) Bernsdorf-Zell Torsay Birkenfelt
1 1 1 1 1 Battallions 34 In all 70

LEFT WING.
First LINE. Second LINE. The Earl of Athlone General of Horse.
Lieutenant General Count de Tilly. The Marquis de Montpouillan and the Earl of
Rochford Lieutenant Generals. Major Generals du Bay and Hubert. Major Generals
Dopft and the Earl of Albemarle. Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Chauvire
Athlone Boisdavid Aghrim Grisper Chauvire
2 2 2 2 2 Roo Flodorf Wolfembuttel Erpacht Voght
2 2 2 2 Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Dompre Hubert Dompre Saxen Heilbourg
Nassau Friseland
2 2 2 3 Oost Frise Lippe-Brunsw. Horenberg Montslin Oost Frise
2 2 2 1 Lip Lip Arco Saxen Gotha Heyden Tilly
2 1 2 2 2 Squadrons 25 Iselstein Prince Philip Vrichappel Wirtemberg Ploen
Carabiniers
2 2 2 2 2 Boinenbourg Dragoons. Boinenbourg Schulembourg Dopft
4 3 4 Squadrons Horse Dragoons

28 11 In all 39 Villiers Dragoons Mattha Schlipenbach Villiers
4 4 3 Squadrons Horse Dragoons

25 11 In all 36 Squadrons in the Left Wing 75

The King's Army (as it appears by this Line of Battle) consisted of 102
Squadrons of Horse, which at 150 per Squadron makes 15300 Horse, and 51
Squadrons of Dragoons, at 100 each Squadron, amounts to 5100 Dragoons, from
whence the Sum of Horse and Dragoons arises to 20400; and 70 Battallions,
which (deducting the Companies left in Garrison) cannot be reckoned more than
550 in each Battallion one with another, this amounts to 38000 Foot: All which
joined together made the Total of His Majesty's Army to be 58400 Men.

The Line of Battle for the Elector of Bavaria's Army as it was in the Campaign
1697.
Nota, That Count d'Arco commanded the Troops of Bavaria as Velt-Marechal,
General Heyden those of Brandenbourg, and Prince Cerclas of Tilly those of
Liege in the same Quality.

RIGHT WING.
First LINE. Second LINE. The Duke of Holstein-Ploen General of the Spanish
Horse, etc. Lieutenant General Du Puy etc. Squadrons Squadrons Spanish Horse
Bavarian Life-Gu. Walloon Life-Gu. Tr. Gen Brancaccio Tr. Horse Grenad. and
Fusiliers
2 1 1 1 Bavarians Arco Dragoons Arco Cuirassiers
3 5 Liege Jamar Dragoons Life Regiment Prince Cerclas's Gu. Pahau
2 2 1 1 Spanish Horse Valensar Drag.
Ribeaucourt Cropani Horse
Hartman
1 1 Bavarians Monasterol Drag. Weickel Cuirassiers
3 5 Liege Roast Dragoons Castro Pahau
2 2 1 Lieutenant General Opdam. Major General Warsuse. Brigades, Regiments,
Squadrons. Ryswick Warsuse Bunau Rebolt
2 2 2 Squadrons Horse Dragoons

19 5 In all 24 Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons Ryswick Ryswick Saxen Meiningen
Bernicau
2 1 2 Squadrons Horse Dragoons

14 6 In all 20 Squardrons in the Right Wing 44

Body of FOOT.
First LINE. Second LINE. Lieutenant General Tettau of Holland. Major Generals,
Salisch of Holland; Arnhem and La Cave of Brandenbourg. Lieutenant General
Brandt of Brandenbourg. Major Generals, Lindeboom of Holland; Prince Christ.
Lodwick, Prince of Anhalt-Dessau and Heyden of Brandenbourg. Brigades,
Regiments, Battallions. Bavarian Guards 2 Holstein-Norbourg. Nassau Walloon
Lindeboom Young Holstein La Mothe Holstein-Norbourg Cappol
1 1 1 1 1 2 Rantsaw Crassau Dona Sparre Rantsaw Obergen Schack Young Weed
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Brandenbourg Foot Denhoff Horn Anhalt-Dessau Young Heiden.
Slabendorf Brandt Old Heyden Prince Philip Brandenbourg Gua.
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 on English Pay. Willekens Wolfembuttle Guar.
1 1 Battallions 28 Brigades, Regiments, Battallions. Electoral Prince 2 Dedem
Tettau Swerin Harsolt Dedem Reinardt Tenham
1 2 1 1 1 1 Onkel Lochman Carles Marquet Nassau-Friseland Fagel
1 1 1 2 1 Brandenbourg Foot. Marwits La Cave Houlth Dona Lottum Barfus
Electoral Prince Brandenbourg Gua.
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 on English Pay Hering. 1 Battallions 24 In all 52

LEFT WING.
First LINE. Second LINE. Lieutenant General Heyden. Major General Vrey. Major
General -- of Bradenbough. Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Brandenb. Horse.
Drag. of his E. H. Horse Grenadiers Grand Musketeers Gens d'Armes Prince
Electoral Du Hammel Du Haine
4 1 2 1 3 3 3 Pyper Nassau-Sarbruck Opdam Jedborough Dr.
(Cunningham)
2 2 4 Squadrons Horse Dragoons

17 8 In all 25 Brigades, Regiments, Squadrons. Brandenb. Horse Marwits
Dragoons Life Regiment Fleming Schlipenbacht Thin
4 3 3 3 2 Pyper. Montpouillan Holst. Ploen, Drag.
2 4 Squadrons Horse Dragoons

13 8 In all 22 Squadrons in the Left Wing 46

This Army commanded by the Elector of Bavaria (according to their Line of
Battle) consisted of 63 Squadrons of Horse which at 150 per Squadron makes
9456, and 27 Squadrons of Dragoons amounting to 2700, which added together
produces 12156 Horse and Dragoons; and 52 Battallions at 550 each Battallion
one with another, comes to 28600 Foot. Besides these Troops mentioned in the
Line of Battle Major General Fagel commanded a Body of Ten Battallions behind
the Canal of Newport, being the Regiments of Buchan, Lorne, Hanover-Guards,
Hulsen, St. Paul, Cinqvilles, St. Amand, Soutlandt, Beima of Groningen, and
Swansbeck, which were to receive the Electors orders as much as if they had
actually encamped in his Line of Battle, and therefore may properly be reckoned
a part of his Army: These Ten Battallions at 550 per Battallion made 5500 Foot,
and all these Troops being joined together in one Sum made the Elector 46256
Effective Men strong

Having now given an account of the strength of the several Armies in the Field
in this Country for the Campaign 1697, we must compare them together to find
the Balance. The Sum of the King's and the Elector's Armies, which were all
the Troops we could command at present during the Siege of Ath, amounts to
104756 Effective Men including the Ten Battallions under Major General Fagel,
but the French had at this time, besides the Body commanded by the Marquis de
Harcourt, 144790 Men; from whence it appears that they were now during the
Siege of Ath no less than 40034 Men stronger than the Allies, which (if duly
considered) it must then be no wonder if the French besieged Ath and we could
not relieve it; but it must be a wonder that with little more than half this
difference by which we out-number'd the French in the Year 1695. His Majesty
besieged and took Namur the strongest Town in the Low Countries, and one of the
most impregnable Places of Europe.

These Motions of our Armies, which were now joined together at Iseringhen and
Ternath between Brussels and Ath, showed plainly a design to endeavor the
Relief of this last place if possible; But the French, having notice of our
Motions to bring our Armies together, took the same Method with their Armies
for the covering the Siege, and to prevent our Relieving of it: The Marechal of
Villeroy was already posted at Ostiche near Lessines to hinder the raising of
the Siege on that side of the Dender, but the Marquis de Crequi, who was
encamped at Celles near the Scheld, to be ready to reinforce Montrevel at
Courtray if the Elector had a mind to try a diversion that way, had now orders,
upon the Electors march toward Brabant and joining the Kings Army, to come and
reinforce that of Villeroy, Montrevel left Courtray at the same time and passed
the Scheld at Pottes to come and incamp at Celles in the place of Crequi, where
he was ready to march up to Villeroy's Assistance if it had come to a Battle
for the Succor of Ath: The Marechal of Bouflers on his side, being joined with
the Body commanded by Count Tallard, marched from the Camp of Thieux and
Thieusies, to secure the Camp of Silly and Ghislenghien as His Majesty came to
that of Iseringhen and St. Quintin-Linneck, and encamped with his right upon
the Height of Silly before the Wood of Touricourt and left toward Villeroy's
Army and the lower Dender, his head Quarter being at Silly. Bridges were laid
at the same time over the lower Dender for a Communication between the two
Armies; and the Marechal of Villeroy fell on Fortifying the Castle of Hamede
upon his left for the security of his Camp on that side; And ever since the
Siege, the French had Six Battallions and a Regiment of Dragoons posted in the
Abbey of Crambron where they had orders to entrench themselves, and another
Body at Lens upon the upper Dender to defend this passage into the Plain of
Cambron, and shut up any relief from coming to the besieged on that side.

During these Motions on both sides, to cover the Siege of Ath and to attempt
the Relief of it, the Marechal of Catinat was carrying on this Siege very
quietly; for hitherto the French had not fired one piece of Cannon against it,
and no firing was heard amongst us but that of some single Cannon Shots from
time to time by the Besieged, which did the Besiers no considerable damage
only at first in bringing up of their Fascines to have them ready for the
making of the Trenches, in which Work the French lost several Men. The 15th at
Night the Chevalier de Tesse Lieutenant General and Monsieur de Bligny
Brigadier mounted the Trenches on the Right with three Battallions of Stouppa,
and the Marquis de Villepion with one Battallion of Stouppa and two of Salisch
mounted upon the Left; the Besiegers worked this Night at a parallel between
the two Attacks near the foot of the Glacis from the Bastion of Namur on the
Right to that of Limbeurg on the Left, and the Chevalier de Tesse received this
Night a small Wound or Contusion on his side; but hitherto the Besiegers,
according to their accounts, had lost but fifteen or sixteen Soldiers, among
whom two Officers were included. The Trenches being advanced to the foot of the
Glacis, this Parallel was made to cover the Batteries which the Besiegers
designed to make close to the Glacis, in order to Batter the place effectually
at the very first service of their Cannon; And if the account which the French
have given of their Losses to this day be true, I believe that Trenches were
never carried on so quietly, with so little Loss, and without firing of Cannon
to the very Glacis of such Fortifications as those of Ath before; and indeed
the Besiegers made so little a Noise that all the Discourse in our Camp was of
a General Cessation of Arms (and that the French had thereupon suspended their
proceedings in this Siege) which had been proposed by the Plenipotentiaries of
that Nation at Ryswick, both By Land and Sea, and to open at the same time the
Ports and Harbors on all sides for a free Trade and Commerce as before the
War. These are the Terms (according to public Reports) upon which the French
proposed a Truce during the Treaty, which the Allies would willingly consent to
in relation to the suspension of Arms, but not to the opening of an immediate
Trade thereupon; because the French Ports would soon have filled with the
Allies Ships, whereas few of theirs would have come for Trade in the Allies
Ports, the French Commerce being very small in proportion to England and
Holland; and therefore if the Treaty had broke off, the French King could then
have Seized all the Allies Ships in his Harbors for his own use, or having so
many of them in his power, he might for that very reason have stood upon so
much the higher Terms in the Treaty; this obliged the Allies not to consent to
a Cessation of Arms as it was proposed by the French, and the French on their
side would not consent to it without this last Condition, when they had all the
advantages of the Campaign: These were the public Discourses about a Truce,
and I do not pretend to say anything about this matter of any farther
Authority; however these Discourses, grounded upon the silence of the French
before Ath, soon ceased in our Camp, when we heard the Batteries of the
Besiegers Cannon, which they worked upon, as soon as they had finished the
parallel we have now spoken of.

The 16th in the Evening, the Marquis de Gassion Lieutenant General, and the
Marquis of Biron Brigadier had the Trenches on the Right with two Battallions
of Maulevrier and one of Nice, and the Marquis de Hautesort Major General on
the Left with three Battallions of Surbeck; the Besiegers worked very hard this
Night to finish five Batteries of Cannon they had begun just before the
parallel now mentioned, in order to have them ready the next Morning; and
accordingly the 17th in the Morning the French Cannon began to Roar against
Ath, and fired the whole day without intermission and so much to the purpose
that before Night they dismounted all the Cannon, but two pieces, upon the
attacqu'd Bastions: And may be, the reason why the French deferred to fire their
Cannon till this time was, because Ath, being commanded by the Height of the
Ground on this side of the Dender to the very Palissades, and the Bastions
being consequently sunk, their Battaries could not be brought to bear against
them, unless they made them so near as this to the Body of the place.

The Noise of the Besiegers Artillery pressed the Allies so much the more to
endeavor the Relief of Ath, and it was concluded by the King and the Elector,
that both Armies should march in the same order as they were now, the Electors
upon the Right and the Kings upon the Left, to come up close to the French and
see what could be done for the succor of the place: In pursuance of this
Resolution Major General Dopft Quartermaster General of the States Armies was
ordered by the King to go and view the ways from our Camp to Enghien, under an
Ecorte of 600 Horse and Dragoons and 200 Foot, commanded by Brigadier Lumley,
and make them ready for our March: Brigadier Lumley met early in the Morning
near Enghien with a Detachment of the French commanded by the Colonel of the
Hussars, consisting of 100 Carabiniers, 50 Dragoons and 50 Hussars, which he
defeated, the French being decoyed into the Body of our Party that lay in
Ambuscade, by the Vanguard, where commanded Sir William Russel of Colonel Coy's
Regiment, according to the orders he had received upon this occasion; and the
Colonel of the Hussars with two Lieutenants, a Cornet and 40 Troopers were made
Prisoners, about as many Horses taken, and ten or twelve of the French killed
upon the spot and the rest fled as well as they could, without any loss on our
side worth mentioning: The Colonel of the Hussars, Monsieur de Mortagne by
Name, and the three Officers were treated very civilly and sent prisoners to
Brussels in General Auerquerque's Coach. At the same time that Major General
Dopst was commanded from our Army to view the Country and repair the ways
toward Enghien, Monsieur Ivoy, Quartermaster General to the Prince of Nassau
Sarbruck, was sent upon the same design for the Electros Army toward the Wood
of Lessines; and a great Council of War being held, a disposition was made for
the two Armies to march the next day, the Kings, to the Camp of Enghien with
the Right at the Village of Marck and the Left behind this place where the
Kings Quarter was appointed; and the Elector's, between the Wood of Lessines
upon the Right and the Village of Marck upon the Left, and orders were given to
march the next day; But that very Night it began to Rain in such abundance,
that our workmen for the repairing of the ways had much ado to get home, and
the Rain continuing all the dayfollowing, which by that time had spoiled all
the ways in this deep Country, the Order was countermanded and the Armies were
forced to continue where they were.

The 17th in the Evening Monsieur de Vauban Lieutenant General and the Count de
Mornay Brigadier relieved the Trenches upon the Right with two Battallions of
Surlanbe and the Regiment of Hautefort; Major General Greder upon the Left,
with a Battallion of Lorrain and two of Tesse; the Besiegers worked this Night
upon three Batteries of Mortars, one upon the Right and a second upon the Left
of Twelve Mortars, each carrying Bombs of 150 weight, to fire them into the
attacqu'd Works (for the Marechal of Catinat had given orders to do as little
damage to the Town as was possible) and the third in the Center which consisted
of 3 large Mortars carrying Bombs of 500 weight to throw them upon the
Batardeau or Damme, that held up the Water in the Ditch, in order to destroy
it, being a very good and strong Stone Work; for the Besieged had so stopped up
the Water by the help of this Damme, that they had Eight Foot of Water in the
Fosse, and the Meadows on both sides the upper Dender near the Town were all
overflowed. The 15th, all these Mortars began to fire very violently, which
with the Batteries of Cannon augmented very much the Noise and Thunder of the
Besiegers; at Night Monsieur de Bachevilliers Lieutenant General had the
Trenches on the Right with the Duke de Humieres Brigadier and the Regiments of
Boulenois, Xaintonge and Mouchy; Monsieur de Sailly Major General on the left
with the Regiments of Angoumois, d'Enonville and Choisinet, the Besiegers fired
their Bombs without intermission this night, and the day following their Cannon
played very hard to ruin the Defenses of the Besieged and silence their Cannon,
which by this time were almost all dismounted, so that they fired very seldom
but in the Night, and that with small Shot; The French brought their Trenches
this Night within 12 fathoms of the Points of the Salliant Angles of the
covered way and made every thing ready for the Attack of the Counterscarp the
next Evening.

The 19th Count Tesse Lieutenant General mounted the Trenches for the second
time on the Right, and Brigadier d'Orgemant, with the first Battallion of
Surbeck and the first and last of Salisch; Count Marsin Major General mounted
likewise for the second time on the Left with the three Irish Battallions of
Lee: The Besiegers made an Assault this Evening upon the Counterscarp, which
they carried after a short Resistance (the Besieged retiring along the covered
way upon the Right and Left) and made three Lodgments upon the Salliant Angles
of the covered way, before the Bastion of Namur, the Half Moon of Barbanson
that covers the Brusselles Port, and the Bastion of Limbourg; the French
according to their Accounts received but very little Damage in this Business,
having had only three Soldiers killed and eight wounded, Messieurs de Joinville
an Ingenier and d'Emonin Captain of the Artillery Wagons were dangerously
wounded, the Chevalier de Pizy was shot through the Arm, and Monsieur Vialis
(both Ingeniers) had his right Thumb shot off. Monsieur de Vauban whose
presence was necessary in such an occasion received a slight Contusion on his
left Shoulder, which, however did not oblige him to leave the Trenches, but
continued the whole Night to give his orders about the making and finishing of
the Lodgments upon the Counterscarp, and the Marechal of Catinat himself was in
the Trenches till four the next Morning. The French were now obliged to
exchange all their Batteries and bring them upon the very covered way to Batter
more effectually the attacked Bastions and Half-Moons and make a Breach, which
hitherto they could not do, but had only dismounted the Cannon of the Besieged
with their former Batteries, for the reason we have before given of the Height
of the ground round the Ramparts of Ath on this side of the Dender.

The great silence of the French Artillery on the 20th after the Noise it had
made for the three precedent days, occasioned a Discourse in our Camp that Ath
was already Surrendered; and our Generals themselves were not a little
surpised at it till they had advice of the meaning of it, that the Cannon had
ceased to play upon the carrying of the Counterscarp, which now obliged the
Besiegers to advance their Batteries upon the very covered way. The day before
having been tolerably fair, the Earl of Athlone took hold on that occasion to
review all the Dutch Horse both in the King's and the Elector's Armies; and as
if the design had still continued to attempt the Raising of the Siege, our
Pioniers were again set on work to repair the ways for the March of the Armies
toward Enghten and the Bois de Lessines, and the King declared several General
Officers; Monsieur d Auerquerque was declared General of the English Horse, the
Earl of Rivers Lieutenant General, Brigadier Lumley Major General, and the Earl
of Albemarle Major General of the Dutch Army: My Lord Portland being very much
troubled with the Gravel was forced to leave the Camp and go to Brussels, but
the thoughts of Relieving the Town of Ath were at last altogether laid aside:
For the French out-number'd us so much, and the Match consequently so unequal;
and Bridges of Communication being laid over the Dender between the Marechals
of Boufler s and Villeroy's Armies, so that we could not attack Boufler's in
his Camp at Silly and Ghislenghien without having Villeroy's Army upon our
hands besides reinforcements from the Line of Circumvallation, which
(considering the weakness of the Garrison) could have been safely made from
thence; and the ways grown very difficult by the bad Weather we had for two or
three days together; and a Treaty of Peace being now on foot at Ryswick, which
(if affairs had gone amiss in this great Attempt) must have turned vastly to
the Prejudice of the Allies: These were certainly very strong Reasons for
abandoning the thoughts of attacking the French in so dangerous a conjuncture
and so unlikely to promise any good Success for us, and yet this was the only
expedient that could be thought on now: For the French having two such Armies
as those of Boufler's and Villeroy, besides Catinat to carry on the Siege, it
was impossible for us to attempt a diversion either toward Flanders by the
Elector of Bavaria, or toward the Sambre by his Majesty; neither could we
remain in this Camp, and hinder the French of the advantage they otherwise
gained by the taking of Ath, of subsisting afterward in the Country of Alost;
because then, after the taking of Ath, they could have taken the Camp of Nevel
before the Elector, which would have been of a far worse Consequence for the
safety of Bruges and Newport.

The King and the Elector resolved upon such weighty reasons to separate, and
that the Elector should March back with all diligence to his former camp at
Nevel. On the 21th by break of day the Electors Army began to march toward the
Scheld, dividing for the more expedition on this manner; all the Cavalry and
Dragoons, except two Regiments of Horse and the Dragoons of Holstein-Ploen,
marched directly by Alost for Ghendt, in order to secure the Post of Nevel the
very next day; and came this day to incamp at Mellem upon the Scheld within a
League of Ghendt, being commanded by the Prince of Tilly and Lieutenant
Generals Dupuy and Opdam: As for the Foot of the Elector's Army and the two
Regiments of Horse and one of Dragoons, they came to incamp at Bardeghem, in
order to march by Dendermond, and the Artillery and Baggage at Maseel, near the
Windmill of Bardeghem. The 22th the Cavalry and Dragoons of the Electors Army
marched by the Brusselles port through the Town of Ghendt and got into the
Camp of Nevel, where they posted themselves upon the Right and Left according
to the disposition of the Line of Battle; but the Infantry passed the Scheld at
Appels upon a Bridge of Boats and encamped at Calcken and Berleer, the first
being the Electors Quarter, and the second that of the Prince of
Nassau-Sarbrack, the Artillery passed the Scheld at Dendermond and encamped at
Grimberg Opsandt; and Crassau's Regiment was order d; upon the march, to this
place to reinforce the Garrison, because there was some reason to expect that
the French, as soon as they had taken Ath, would march to subsist their Armies
in the Pays d'Alost, and therefore 'twas necessary to have a good Garrison in
this place, where the Prince of Nassau took occasion, upon the march, to go and
see the Fortifications. The 23th the Infantry march d from Calcken and Berleer
by Distelberg, being followed by the Artillery from Grimbourg Opsandt, and
having passed the Canal of the Sas at Mulenstein came to incamp within the
Retrenchments of Marykirk behind the Canal of Bruges; Brigadler Sparre was
detached upon this march with the Battallions of Wolfembuttle-Guards Hering,
Sparre and Tenham to put himself into Audenarde (taking his way through the
Town of Ghendt) in order to have a very strong Garrison there, such as might
make a vigorous defense in case the French had a fancy to Besiege it after the
taking of Ath: And indeed Audenarde was at present reckoned in some danger,
that there was but a weak Garrison in it if Villeroy had marched toward the
Scheld at the same time that our Armies separated from Iseringhem and Ternath,
but Villeroy still remained in his old Camp of Ostiche, and so gave us the
opportunity to put this strong reinforcement into Audenarde; which could not be
sent thither till the Elector had passed the Scheld, because it had been
otherwise in danger of being cut off, if sent directly thither upon the
breaking up of our two Armies from the Neighborhood of St. Quintin-Linneck.
The 24th the Foot (having received Straw from Ghendt for their Tents in a Camp
where they were now like to continue again for a while) passed the Canal at
Marykirk upon Bridges laid there the overnight, and came to incamp as before
with the Right at Nevel and left at Bachtem upon the Lys, where all the Cavalry
and Dragoons was already encamped upon the Right and Left since the 22th. All
the Cavalry and Dragoons incamping at present in the Line extended the
Elector's Army more to the Right, than it was before, and the Brigades of
Holstein-Norbourg and Ransaw were for this reason ordered to incamp upon the
Right of all between Landeghem and Ansbeck upon the Canal of Bruges, where they
made not only room for the Horse in the Camp of Nevel but were likewise in a
readiness to pass the Canal upon any motion of the French toward Bruges: All
the Posts were taken for the security of this Camp as before, and a Command of
1000 Men put into Garrison at Deinse. And here I shall leave the Elector
foraging at first between the Lys and the Scheld, to come and speak of the
Motions of His Majesty's Army in Brabant, which was to march back at the same
time upon the Left toward Halle, as the Electors did upon the Right toward
Dendermond and the Scheld.

Accordingly on the 20th in the Evening, all the Artillery and heavy Baggage
was commanded away for Brussels, and the Army had orders to march the next day:
A French Lieutenant was brought Prisoner this Night in our Camp with his Party,
and proved one that had been a Lieutenant in Brigadier Belcastel's Regiment,
which he had left after the Siege of Namur; and it appearing that he had fairly
laid down his Commission, he had all the advantages of the Cartel, and was set
at Liberty upon the paying of his Ransom or Exchange. The 21th the Brigade of
Life-Guards and that of Foot Guards marched by break of day from the Right of
all at Iseringhen to get at the Head of the Army, being to incamp this day at
the King's Quarter which was to be upon the Left at Brain la Chateau; the Army
march d upon the same hand in two Columns being joined by my Lord Jedboroughs
Dragoons from the Electors Army, and having passed the Senne upon the Bridges
of Boats laid between Halle and Businguen, it came to incamp with the Right at
Halle and the Left at Brain la Chateau, the Kings Quarter being in the Castle
of Brain and the Prince's in the Village; the Horse and Foot Guards and the
first Battallion of the Royal Regiment were posted here to cover the King's
Quarter. This is one of the strongest Camps in all Flanders having the River
Senne to cover the right and part of the Front, the Left upon the difficult
passage of Brain le Chateau; and both Front and Rear being nothing but Woods
and close Desiles; but if this be a good Camp for strength, it is a very
inconvenient one another way upon the account of Forage and Convoy's, for
which it is very ill situated. The Artillery and heavy Baggage passed this
evening through the Town of Brussels and came to incamp without Halie port in
the Retrenchments before the Fort of Montercy. The 22th the King's Army
continued to march upon the Left, the Left Wing of Horse passed the River
Brain at the ordinary Bridge in the Village, and the Foot upon the Bridges
laid below the Village for this occasion, and the Right Wing followed the march
of the Foot; and so having gained the plain of Bois-Seigneur Isaac, the whole
came to incamp with the Right at the Cense d'Elincourt and so to Promelles
(being the Kings and the Princes Quarter) facing toward Nivelle and the Wood of
the Commandery of Maltha, and from thence the rest of the Army made almost a
right Angle with the Right Wing, turning down along the Dyle which was before
the Camp, and extending it self above an English Mile below Genap. The Life and
Foot Guards and first Battallion of the Royal Regiment encamped before
Promelles to cover the Kings and Princes Quarter (which was now in the Front)
toward the Wood before mentioned. Most of the Generals were Quartered in
Genap, which was now just before the Left of the Foot; the Artillery and heavy
Baggage joined us here this day, being come by the Bois-de-Sogne and Waterlo
from Brussells: And as the Elector of Bavaria was conveniently posted at Nevel
for the Defense of Ghendt, Bruges and Newport, so was the King in this Camp, to
cover equally Brussells and Namur, in this conjuncture that France had such
powerful and numerous Armies to Act against us.

Upon this separation of our two Armies, the Electors to go back to his former
Camp of Deinse and Nevel, and the Kings to come to Genap and Promelles, the
Count de Montrevel and the Marquis de Crequi repaired to their former Posts to
observe the Elector of Bavaria, the first coming into the Lines of Courtray
(after he had repassed the Scheld) from Celles, and the second leaving
Villeroy's Army to post himself at Celles as before: The Marechal of Bouslers
marched with his Army from Silly and Chistenghien upon the right, toward the
Sambre, at the same time that His Majesty's marched upon the Left from
Iseringhen toward Genap; but finding that the King stopped at Promelles and
Genap (as indeed we were not in a Condition to think of any diversion toward
the Sambre without leaving Brussells naked, or the Elector Exposed to the two
Armies of Villeroy and Catinat after the taking of Ath) so he (the Marechal of
Bouflers) pitched his Camp in the same ground he had taken before at Thieusies,
which was still his Head Quarter, between Mesnil St. Jean and St. Denis, having
Soignies in his Front and Mons in his Rear almost at an equal distance. But as
for the Marechal of Villeroy he continued encamped at Ostiche between Papigny
and Hamede to cover the Siege of Ath, where he had great detachments under
Catinat in the Line of Circumvallation; and this brings me to pursue the
Relation of this Siege, where we had left the French Masters of the
Counterscarp, which they carried the 19th in the Evening, as we have had it
before.

The 20th at Night, the Marquis de Vins Lieutenant General relieved the
Trenches on the Right with Monsieur de Maisoncelle Brigadier and the three
Battallions of Navarre; and Count de Grancey Major General on the Left at the
head of the two Battallions of Pottou and that of la March: The Besiegers
worked this Night at a new Battery of Cannon upon the Counterscarp to begin to
play against the Half Moon of Barbanson, and endeavor to break the Bridge of
Communication it had with the Town; and brought great quantities of Fascines in
order to make a descent in the Fosse, as soon as they could break the Damme and
let some of the Water out; for which purpose their Bombs played upon it
continually, and one fell so luckily this Night as to break the Vault that
covered the Sluy's and the Water fell three Foot the next day in the Ditch. The
21th in the Evening the Marquis de Larrey Lieutenant General, Brigadier
Salisch, and two Battallions of Anjou with that of Tournesis had the Trenches
on the Right; the Marquis de Clerambault Major General, and two Battallions of
Humieres, and one of Vexin on the Left: The Besiegers having finished the
Battery now mentioned, begun this day to play with their Cannon against the
Half Moon of Barbanson where they made a considerable Breach; and in the Night
they flung Fascines in the Fosse before the Half Moon to fill it, the Bombs
having at last so shattered and ruined the Batardean that there remained but
three Foot Water in the Ditch the next Morning: Monsieur de Salmon an Iugenier
was dangerously wounded this Night, having been shot in the Thigh, and six or
seven Soldiers killed and wounded. The 22th in the Evening the Marquis de
Gassion Leiutenant General and Monsieur de Vibray Brigadier mounted the
Trenches upon the Right, with the Regiments of Artois, Catinat and Fery; and
Monsieur de Vilpion Major General on the Left with two Battallions of
Vermandois and the Regiment of Bugey: The Bridge of Fascines being finished and
the Water low enough in the Ditch, it was resolved to attack the Half Moon of
Barbanson this Evening, the Breach being now large enough for it: The
Grenadiers of Vermandois had this command, which they executed with such
Vigor, that they lodged themselves upon the point of this Work, and forced a
Captain and 60 Men of the Besieged to abandon it and retire in a Brick Reduit
environed with Water behind the Gorge; after which they lodged themselves upon
the Half Moon and remained Masters of it, having had only two Grenadiers
killed upon this occasion, and a Captain of Vermandois and five Soldiers
wounded; The Marechal of Catinat himself and Monsieur de Vauban repaired to
this work, as soon as it was carried, to give necessary orders for a good
Lodgment: About two hours after in the Night the Besieged endeavored to regain
this Post, for which purpose, they lined all the opposite Courtin and Flanks of
the two Bastions of Namur and Limbourg with small shot, which fired very hard
upon the Half Moon for an hour and a half together, notwithstanding the noise
of all the Besiegers Cannon and Bombs playing at the same time very quick about
them; but it was too late, the Besiegers were lodged and all this fire from the
Rampart could do them no harm; the remainder of the Night was employed, after
the finishing of this Lodgement, in bringing Fascines ready upon the
Counterscarp to fill the Fosse of the Body of the place before the attacked
Bastions, and this Night Monsieur de Courtin an Ingenier was killed, and
Monsieur Mercier, likewise an Ingenier, Wounded.

The 23 the Trenches were relieved in the Evening by Monsieur de Vauban
Lieutenant General on the Right with Brigadier Lee and three Battallions of
Stouppa; and Monsieur de Hautefort Major General on the Left with a Battallion
of Stouppa and two of Salisch; the Besiegers worked this Night at two Batteries
of 20 pieces of Cannon each, upon the covered way, one upon the Right against
the the Bastion of Namur and the other upon the Left against the Bastion of
Limbourg, in order to make a Breach and ruin the opposite Faces and Flanks of
the said Bastions, being the only defense that was left to the Town, but the
Mortars still continued to fire upon the Stone Damme and the attacked Works,
and especially the Reduit (where the Captain and 60 Men before mentioned had
retired upon the taking of the Half Moon of Barbanson) in order to ruin it and
break the Bridge between them and the Town; and the Besiegers had two Ingeniers
wounded in the Work of this Night. The 24th the Battery's made the overnight
began to open very furiously against the Bastions of Namur and Limbourg, and
with such Success that before Night, the left Face of the first fell to the
waste the length of about 20 Fathoms; and the Bridge of Communication being now
broke down between the Reduit and the Courtin, the Captain and 53 Men that were
in it were forced to surrender themselves Prisoners. In the Evening Monsieur de
Bachevilliers Lieutenant General and Monsieur de Bligny Brigadier mounted the
Trenches upon the Right, with two Battallions of Maulevrier and one of Nice;
and Monsieur de Greder Major General on the Left with three Battallions of
Surbeck; the Besiegers worked very hard this Night, in making of a descent in
the Fosse of the Body of the Place before the attacked Bastions, which they had
almost finished before morning. The 25th the Batteries continued to play very
hard against the foresaid Bastions, and the Right face of that of Limbourg fell
the length of 14 or 15 fathoms; this made the Besiegers so much the more eager
in firing their Batteries to widen and level the Breaches for a General
assault; but especially the Morters, which played without ceasing upon the
attacked Bastions, to hinder the Besieged from working at any retrenchment
within the Ruins of them; for all the Bastions of Ath are very large and
capacious: In the Night the Besiegers worked to finish the descent in the
Ditch, and the 26th in the Morning the Breaches being found wide enough, for 30
Men abrest to march up upon the Bastion of Namur, and 25 upon that of Limbourg,
and the Ditch being filled with Fascines and the Ruins of the faces of these
Bastions, it was concluded by the Besiegers to give this day a General assault,
Monsieur de Tesse Lieutenant General and the Count de Marsin Major General
having then the Trenches which they had relieved the overnight; for which end
a disposition was made for twenty Companies of Grenadiers, commanded by the
Count de Marsin, to make an assault upon the Breaches in the Afternoon, and
carry the Town in it: But the Besieged did not think fit to run the Risk of a
General Assault, and as they could expect no relief from without, so about two
of the Clock this Afternoon they Beat the Chamade, and Hostages being
exchanged, they entered upon the Capitulation which was signed that very
Evening, of which this was the substance.

1. That the Besieged should deliver up by Six of the Clock the next Morning
one of the Gates of the Town to the Besiegers. 2. That the Garrison should
march out of the place the 28th at Ten in the Morning to be conducted in three
days to Dendermond, the first to Grammont, the second to Alost, and the third
to that place. 3. That they should March out of the Breach with their Arms,
Drums beating, Colors flying, and all other marks of Honor; except Cannon and
Mortars, which were denied them. 4. That they should have fifty Wagons allowed
them for the transporting of their Sick and Wounded and their Baggage. 5. That
they should have Six Wagons covered but liable to be visited, and that they
should deliver up all the deserters they had amongst them. Lastly, That all
Prisoners made on both sides during the Siege should be set at Liberty. This
Capitulation was Signed the 5th of June New Style by the Marechal of Catinat,
and Count de Roeux Governor of the Place.
Immediately after the Signing of the Capitulation, the Marechal of Catinat
dispatched Monsieur d'Orgemont, a Brigadier of the Army and his Nephew, Express
to Court to give an Account of it to the French King; and the day after the
French took Possession of one of the Gates according to Agreement, being Corpus
Christi Day, upon which (as it was reported) Monsieur de Vauban had promised
the Marechal of Catinat, that he should hear Mass and assist at the great
Procession of the Sacrament in Ath; and he did not fall very short of his
Calculation, the Town having been evacuated and delivered up into the
Possession of the French the day following, when in pursuance of the
Capitulation the Garrison marched out of the Breach, the Count de Roeux
Governor and the Prince of Anhalt Brigadier and Commander in Chief of the
States Forces in this Siege, being at the head of it, who at their going out
saluted the Marechal of Catinat and the Count de Toulouse. The French retained
five of the Chief Officers of the Spanish Troops for Hostages, under pretext of
Reprisal for as many Hostages of the French that were still detained in the
Citadel of Antwerp ever since the taking of Namur, for the payment of the Debts
which the French had contracted among the Burghers of this place whilst they
were Masters of it: These Hostages were the Prince of Chimay Knight of the
Golden Fleece and Colonel of a Walloon Regiment of Horse, Monsieur de la
Catoire his Lieutenant Colonel, a Major and two Captains, which were that very
day sent Prisoners to Valenciennes. A great many Italian Soldiers of the Terce
of Aquaviva deserted over to the French in the marching out, and the Garrison
was sent with an Escorte to Dendermond, according to the Route specified in the
Capitulation: The Besieged had at first demanded to go to Brussels or
Audenarde, but the French would not grant it, especially for Audonarde, which
(if they undertook any more Sieges this Campaign) was the only Town they could
attack, and therefore would not put, by this means, a reinforcement into it.

After the French had taken possession of Ath, the Magistrates went in a Body
to Compliment the Marechal of Catinat for his goodness in sparing the Buildings
of the Town, and doing as little damage as was possible during the Siege, he
having given express orders not to fire Bombs into the Place; The Government of
which was given to the Chevalier de Tesse Lieutenant General by the Marechal of
Catinat, and was confirmed to him afterward by the French King. Thus (to use
the Terms of the Paris Gazettier) Ath, one of the strongest and the most
murdering places of Europe has been taken in thirteen days Siege from the
opening of the Trenches, with the Loss of only about 50 Soldiers killed, the
Sieurs Courtin Ingenier, du Frene Master of the Horse to the Marechal of
Villeroy, and Emonin Captain of the Artillery Wagons dead of their wounds; and
150 wounded, among whom were a Captain of Grenadiers of the Regiment of
Vermandois, a Lieutenant and seven Ingeniers: The loss of the Besieged was as
inconsiderable, and the whole on both sides did not exceed 400 Men killed and
wounded, which is but very little for one of the strongest and most murdering
Places of Europe.

Immediately after the taking of Ath the Marechal of Catinat gave orders for
the Levelling of the Line of Circumvallation, and repairing of the Breaches,
which obliged him to continue still some day's in the Camp before the Town; but
the Marechal of Villeroy passed the Dender with his Army between Ath and
Lessines and came to incamp with his right upon the Wood of Lessines toward
Ghislenghien and his Left upon the Dender toward Papignies, where, the Troops
that had been detached from his Army to carry on the Siege of Ath under the
Marechal of Catinat joined him and came again into his Line of Battle. The
Second of June 650 Wagons of the Province of Flanders came to Ath (of which
about 200 were laden with Nine Sacks of Meal a piece for the use of the
Garrison and the Army) for to carry back all the Ammunitions and Stores which
the French had provided for this Siege, having spent only 4000 Balls of 15000
they had ready, and 400 Bombs of 5000 or thereabouts: The Marechal of Catinat
sent likewise all the Pontoons or Tinboats that had been made use of in the
Siege for the Communication of Quarters upon the upper and lower Dender and
River of Irchenwebz, to the Marechal of Villeroy, and others were sent from
Doway by Water to Pottes and Canaffe for the use of his Army, being now
designed to march into Flanders as I shall tell it by and by. After the taking
of Ath the three Marechals of France had a Feu de joye in each of their Camps
for this Conquest, all their Artillery and small Shot having fired thrice round
in their several Armies; in Bouflers the First of June, in Villeroy's the
Second, and the Fourth in Catinat's; And the Lines of Circumvallation being
levelled, the Breaches sufficiently repaired and all the Ammunitions and
Stores, remaining after the Siege, sent away, the Marechal of Catinat marched
from Ath the 9th. of June and encamped at Lignes; his right near the River of
Irchonwelz, and left toward Fresne and the Scheld. In this posture I shall now
leave the French to speak of the affairs of the Allies.

The King was encamped at Promellos since the 23th where I shall not concern my
self with the journal of that Camp to speak of Forrages and such other daily
business of Armies, but only of what relates to the main drift of the
Campaign. The 27th of May His Majesty had an account of the Capitulating of
Ath, whereupon Major General de Bay was commanded out the next day toward
Binch and Herlaymont-Capelle with seven Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons to get
intelligence of the Marechal of Bouflers Motions, who upon the taking of Ath
might have marched toward Pieton or the Sambre; Colonel Lloyd of the Queens
Dragoons commanded the Vanguard of this Detachment with which he defeated a
party of Carabiniers of Boufler's Army, took Seventeen Prisoners, several
Horses, and one or two Subaltern Officers, the rest were put to flight. The
29th Brigadier Maitland was commanded to go to Brussels with his Regiment and
that of Denhoff, where he was joined with the Danish Battallion of Prince
Charles (that had been there since the march from Bois-Seigneur-Isaac to
Iseringhen) to post himself between this place and Vilvorde for the defense of
the Canal and especially the Fort des trois Trous. The same day Captain Hunter
Major of the first Brigade of Dragoons lost his Horses by the Perfidy of his
Servants, who brought a French Party to take them whilst they were grazing, but
Prince Vaudemont having informed the Marechal of Bouflers of the Truth of the
Matter, he very freely sent them back again although some of them were already
Sold, adding, That he hoped the same Justice would be observed on our side to
prevent the Villainy of Servants. The 31th the Army having Forag'd upon the Left
along the Dyle toward Wavre and the King being present, His Majesty at his
return to the Camp gave the Royal Regiment of Dragoons (vacant by the Death of
Brigadier Matthews) to my Lord Raby, and the Regiment of Foot (vacant by the
Death of Colonel Aeneas Mackay) to Colonel Robert Murray Lieutenant Colonel of
the Regiment of Scotch Guards, Brigadier Matthew's and Colonel Mackay being
dead some days before in London. That Evening the Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst came
to the Camp at Promelles where he gave His Majesty an account of the Siege of
Ath, having Commanded the Dutch Forces in Garrison in this place during the
Siege.

June the 2d. Prince Cerclas of Tilly came to Brussels from the Electors June.
Army with the Liege Horse and Dragoons, the four Battallions of Foot that were
designed to have acted in the Electors Army being still in the Liege Garrisons
upon the Meuse; for the Marquis de Harcourt was now upon his March toward this
Country, having left Montroyal the 31th of May (after he had detached the
Marquis de Lomaria Major General with ten Battallions and nine Squadrons to
reinforce the Marechal of Choiseul upon the Rhine) to march himself with six
Battallions and eight Squadrons through the Country of Luxembourg toward the
Meuse and the Sambre. The French being now Masters of Ath, we did seem to
design a third Army about Brussels to put our selves in a condition to cover
the Country between this place and the Scheld, where, if our Troops appointed
to form it had come sooner, we could have kept the Field between Brussels and
Alost, and secured the Forage of that Country to our selves which the French
have all consumed in the sequel of the Campaign; or if the Marechal of Bouflers
had marched toward Namur, the King's Army could have taken the Camp of Fleury
to cover it without hazarding of Brussels: But now as our affairs were, the
Kings Army could not stir from the Camp of Promelles and Genap neither one way
nor the other; not toward the Plain of Fleury or Corbais, for fear of leaving
Brussels open, nor back toward Halle and St. Quintin for fear of leaving Namur
exposed to a Siege; and thus we were obliged to continue in this Camp and wait
for the motions of the French after the reduction of Ath, and to guide ours
accordingly, either for the cover of Brussels or Namur. But to return to the
Prince of Tilly, he had been detached from the Elector's Army after the News of
the taking of Ath; because now both Villeroy and Bouflers could join their
Forces together and march toward Brussels, and therefore a reinforcement was
necessary here for our Brabant Army; Prince Cerclas of Tilly being come to this
place, posted himself upon the height within the retrenchment made, when the
French Bombarded Brussels, before the Fort of Monterey. The 3d, Lieutenant
General Cohorne was sent to Brussels with several Ingeniers to trace out a Line
before the Flanders Port to cover Brussels from Anderlecht to the Canal: Eight
Battallions were expected hourly at this time from England, and the Lunenbourg,
Munster and Hesse Troops from the Rhine; but not having as yet any competent
number of Forces about this Town, nothing was made of this Line at present more
than the Plan, for want of Men to work about it; which if it had been put
forthwith in any tolerable posture of defense, would have given the King's Army
a great deal more liberty of marching for the convenience of Camps and Forage:
And indeed we have had about the middle of the Campaign a sufficient number of
Troops to have put not only Namur and Brussels, but the whole Country in a
posture of defense, if they could have been brought into the Country at the
beginning. We have had 17 Battallions from the Rhine, Eight from England, and
Three from Bavaria, and these, if they had been ready in the Country at the
beginning to take the Camp of Mazy near Namur, could have then been reinforced
by seven or eight Battallions of this Garrison which could have been spared
over and above those that came to the King's Army from thence; and four
Battallions of the Elector of Cologne's Forces, which (the Meuse being secured
by this Army) could have marched out of the Liege Garrisons: By which
Computation this Army would have consisted of about 40 Battallions, besides all
the German Horse and what could have been detached from the Brabant Army, where
we were stronger in Horse than the French: In this case Prince Vaudemont could
then have marched from Bois-Seigneur-Isaac to Ghislenghien and covered both Ath
and Audenarde too; but it is to be presumed that the Necessity of our Affairs in
relation to Money was not only the cause of the late coming of our
Reinforcement from England, but likewise in some measure of that of the
Lunenbourg, Munster and Hesse Troops; and the French had the time both to take
Ath and to pen us up under the Walls of Brussels, whilst they had the whole
Country between the Canal and the Scheld to range freely in and Forage at
their pleasure, as it shall appear in the Sequel of this History.

The Third, a French Ingenier deserted over to us that had served in the Siege
of Ath, pretending to have fought a Duel which obliged him to fly for his Life;
he gave an account of the little loss there had been in this Siege, the whole
on both sides of killed and wounded not exceeding 400 Men: The same Evening my
Lord Portland, being recovered of his late Indisposition that had made him go
for Brussels, came back to the Camp in good Health, and His Majesty was pleased
to declare him General of Horse in his Armies. The Fifth, Colonels Cholmley,
Langston and Windham were declared Brigadiers of Horse at the Orders, the first
being made Brigadier of the Brigade of Life-Guards; Colonel Coy disposed
afterward of his Regiment to my Lord of Arran Brother to His Grace the Duke of
Ormond, and Colonel Harvey Lieutenant of one of the Troops of Life-Guards, got
the Earl of Arran's Regiment of Horse in England: This day five Battallions
landed at Willemstadt from England being the second Battallion of Scots Guards,
Colonel Columbine's, Sir Bevil Granville's, Colonel Murray's and the Marquis of
Puizars, where they met with a Route to march forthwith to Brussels by Liere
and Malines. The Sixth, The Troops of Brunswick and Lunenbourg under the
Command of Lieutenant General Ohr consisting of eight Battallions and twelve
Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons passed the Meuse, coming from the Rhine, the
Foot at Maestricht and the Horse and Dragoons at Maseick and encamped this day
near Tongres, and came the Eighth to Tirlemont where they had Orders to halt,
the French having made yet no manner of Motion since the taking of Ath, and
therefore 'twas not yet resolved where to dispose of this Reinforcement; as for
the Hesse and Munster Troops, they followed, but did not come up till the
French had brought us under the Walls of Brussels for the Safety of that place,
as I am now going to give an account of it; only I must see first what was
transacting in the Elector of Bavaria's Camp in Flanders after the loss of Ath.

The greatest Advantage the French had by the taking of this place was, that
now they could march with their Armies in the Pays d'Alost, and Forage all the
Country to the very Walls of Dendermond and the Banks of the Scheld, the
Rupelle and the Canal of Brussels; and that in having their Armies here, they
made the Communication between Brabant and Flanders very difficult for the
Allies, who in such a case could not march any Troops from the one to the other
but by the Canal of Brussels, Rupelmonde and so by the Pays-de Waes behind the
Scheld; and if the War had lasted another Campaign we should have felt the
Inconveniency of a French Army in the Pays-d'Alost yet more than we did this,
unless we had been much stronger in the Field than we were this Year to secure
this Camp before them. This Consideration, that the French were now Masters of
the Country to incamp where they pleased about Alost, obliged the Elector to
provide betimes for the Safety of Dendermond and Pays-de-Waes, thereupon after
the News of the Surrender of Ath, he commanded the Regiment of Horse of Bunau
and the Liege Dragoons of Roast and Jamar with the two Battallions of the
Electoral Prince of Bavaria to march toward that place for its defense, and to
hinder the French Parties from passing the Scheld to raise Contributions in
that Country; but the Allies having a design to make up a third Army about
Brussels at this time if it could be brought together time enough to prevent
the French on this side; and besides, Brussels being exposed, without any
considerable Troops about it since the loss of Ath, Prince Cerclas of Tilly was
ordered away for Brussels from the Elector's Army that same night, being the
29th of May, with the Liege Cavalry and Dragoons, and took the two Regiments of
Dragoons of Jamar and Roast, sent to Dendermond; in his way; and so the Regiment
of Horse of Bunau and the two Battallions of the Electoral Prince remained
about Dendermond, but Prince Cerclas of Tilly came to Brussels the beginning of
June, where he encamped before the Fort of Montery as we have said it above.

The Elector's Army had been in this Camp ever since our early taking of the
Field (except the little time it was with the King's Army at Ternath and
Iseringhen) which made Forage very scarce about his Army; several great
Detachments were therefore made to look for Forage between the Lys and the
Scheld some toward Warreghem and Vive St. Eloy up along the Lys, and others
toward Nassaret and Gavre upon the Scheld, one of which Detachments beat a
Party of the Enemies at Cruyshoutem. The third of June, it was proposed to have
marched with the Army between the Lys and the Scheld and a Camp was marked at
Nassaret, but Forage was very scarce and the Army could subsist but very few
days in this place, and therefore 'twas thought necessary to oblige the Country
of Flanders behind the Canals to have dry Forage ready at this time for the
Subsistence of the Army. The Seventh, the Elector's Army made one general
Forage more about Wacken on both sides of the River Mandel, which falls into
the Scheld at this place; the Marquis de Montrevel, being encamped with the
Body under his command within the Lines near Courtray, having intelligence of
it, marched with a Body of Horse from this place to interrupt our Forage
between the Lys and the Mandel: We had on our side three Fieldpieces at the
Mills of Wacken upon the River and Detachments all along as far as the Bridge
of Colberg and from thence between the Mandel and the Lys all along the way to
Bassevive upon this last River; Montrevel had about 3 or 400 Horse, and having
advanced pretty far between these two Rivers he met with an Out-guard of ours
of 30 Horse commanded by a Spanish Lieutenant, which were soon obliged to fly
for their main Body, being under the Command of a Colonel; these were likewise
driven from their Post and forced to retire, being pursued by the French as far
as an Inn called the Hive, where Major General Salisch (who commanded the
Forage this day) was posted, with about 1300 Men; The French did not think it
safe to venture any farther, but went back to Courtray having about 40
Prisoners and 30 of our Horses along with them. The Tenth, the Country of
Flanders began to furnish the Army with dry Forage according to the Elector's
orders, which could not subsist any longer at Nevel without it: And the
Marechal of Catinat having levelled the Lines and repaired the Breaches of Ath,
and being now upon his March toward the Scheld, and it being uncertain as yet
which way the Marechal of Villeroy would turn, whither toward Brabant or
Flanders; a Council of War was called the 12th at the Elector's Camp to concert
what was to be done if both the Marechals of Villeroy and Catinat should bring
their Armies into Flanders, either at Thilt or Rousselar; it was proposed in
that case to bring the Elector's Army behind the Canal of Bruges, to march, in
order to that, upon the Right and pass the Canal at Ansbeck, and observe the
same Method that was followed last Year by the Prince of Vaudemont; three
Battallions were commanded from Major General Fagel's Body at Newport to come
and post themselves about Bruges to be in a readiness to reinforce the
Elector, that of Lorne, upon the Canal of Ostend near Schipstal, Buchan at
Steinbrugghe upon the Canal of Bruges, and St. Amand at Moorbrugghe; Colonel
Reinard's Regiment of the Elector's Army had been upon the Canal ever since the
coming back of the Elector to this Camp of Nevel and a Regiment of the
Brandenbourg Troops, which upon this Disposition were ordered to post
themselves the first at Rostein, and the second at St. George upon the same
Canal something nearer to Bruges, thus to give or receive Reinforcements to and
from Major General Fagel according to the Motions of the French.

These were the Precautions taken by our Army in Flanders during the
Uncertainty of the Enemies Designs after their taking of Ath; for then, either
Villeroy and Catinat could have marched into Flanders and endeavor to attack
Newport, or pass the Canals, or oblige the Elector, by their coming to Thilt or
Rousselar, to get behind them himself and subsist his Army with dry Forage at
the Expense of the Country; or else the Marechals of Villeroy and Bouflers
could join together and subsist their Armies in the Country about Alost and
between Brussels and the Scheld, which since they were Masters of Ath was now
at their Devotion; or else the Marechal of Villeroy could have marched himself
about Alost and the Marechal of Bouflers toward the Camp of Pieton, which
would have obliged His Majesty equally to provide for the Defense of Brussels
and Namur; or lastly the Marechal of Villeroy could have besieged Audenarde,
whilst Bouflers should observe our Brabant Army, and Catinat that of Flanders.
In the first of these cases, we were too watchful for Newport, and the letting
out of the Waters could hinder the French from coming near it; and this
Advantage, with the Troops we had on this side, seemed sufficient to cover the
Country between Bruges and Newport and behind the Canal of Bruges, so that it
would be too much Hazard to attempt any thing on this side; where, besides, in
such an occasion the King could have sent good Reinforcements directly to
Ghendt, especially now that our German Forces were on their March and
Lieutenant General Ohr actually come into Brabant: As for the Subsisting of
their Armies about Thilt, Rousselar and Torhout, and the driving of the Elector
behind the Canals, this Country had been so Harrass'd and Plundered in the two
preceding Campagnes, that no Forage could be expected here for the Maintenance
of such Armies, and therefore if both marched that way one at least would be
obliged to march back again in a little time. The second Proposition of
Villeroy's and Boufler's joining to march into the Pays d'Alost seemed to be
the most advantageous and safe, because this Country, especially the bottom of
it, between the Rupelle and the (Scheld from Willebrook upon the Canal of
Brussels to Dendermond) had hardly been molested by any Armies all this War,
and therefore their two Armies could live here a long time very conveniently in
the midst of plenty in relation to Forage of all sorts: As for the third, the
Seige of Namur could be but a Dream, now that we were going to have such a
reinforcement from England and the Rhine: It Is true that we could not hinder
them from besieging of Audenarde, but the situation of it is naturally very
strong upon the account of the Scheld, which, with the keeping up of the Sluices
in the Town, overflows all the Meadows about it, leaving no access for Trenches
but before the Gate that leads to Courtray and Deinse, and there was a very
great Garrison in it, so that they could not think of having it at so cheap a
rate as Ath, but must expect to loose a great many Men in the taking of it;
which they did not think convenient to do at a time, when the Negotiations of a
General Peace seemed to be in a very hopeful forwardness; and besides, the
Communications upon the River, which is very large, are very difficult, and
easily broken upon the lower Scheld by the letting out of the Sluices; and
therefore it would not be very difficult to raise the Siege, by attacking them
in one Quarter or other; these Considerations made the French prefer to march
into the Country of Alost, with the Armies of Bouflers and Villeroy joined
together, to any other design they could propose to themselves; and the rather,
because His Majesty's Army had a very long and difficult march, and a close
defile for near 3 Leagues through the Bois de Sogne to come to Brussels, and
therefore if the Marechal of Bouflers could but gain one march upon the King,
he might have pretended to the Camp of Anderlecht before our Army in Brabant,
and then Brussels would have been once more exposed to the Fury of the French
Bombs, after all the Charges that had been spent to raise it out of its ruins
much more stately and magnificent than it was before; and if the French in such
a Case would have been inclined to accept a Sum of Money to spare the Town,
either of them would have made a very great noise in the World, when done in
the presence of such an Army as we had then encamped at Promelles and Genap
commanded by the King in Person, and it would have been as inglorious for the
Allies and especially His Majesty, as a great and happy undertaking for the
French; and therefore we find that their first motions seemed to be levelled at
this place, as I am now going to tell it.

The Marechal of Bouflers Army having taken Bread for six Days, marched on the
12th upon the Left from the Camp of Thieusies toward Halle and came this day
to incamp with the Right at Steinkirk and the Left extending it self toward
the Village of Marck beyond Enghien: The same day the Marechal of Villeroy
(having been reinforced the day before with the Body commanded by the Marquis
de Crequi at Celles) marched with the Army under his Command, and having passed
the Wood of Lessines came to incamp with his Right at Castergat toward Haute
Croix and Enghien and his Left at Gamerage toward Grammont. It was about
Twelve of the Clock this day before the King had an account of these motions of
the French, upon notice of which, the Chief Generals were immediately sent for
to Court and a Council of War being held it was resolved that the Army should
march that very Evening for Brussels, though it was then very rainy Weather,
and had been so the day before: If the march had been delayed till the next
day, the Marechal of Bouflers might have gained the Camp of Anderlecht, as soon
as we, and therefore there was a necessity of marching forthwith; and
accordingly the two Brigades of Foot of Belcastel and Oxenstern were ordered to
march about Five this Afternoon for Waterlo to cover the Artillery and heavy
Baggage that was sent before to Brussels by the Grand-chaussee through the
Wood, which was the only way we had for the Artillery and Baggage, and both
the Columns of our Army, to march by, and therefore made it very difficult and
tedious; and indeed, had it not been for the great Rains that had fallen both
this and the day before, which rendered the ways almost unpassable for the
French Artillery and Army (whereas, though we had a long defile to pass through
the Wood, yet it was a very good stone Caussey, without which it had been
impossible to have marched the whole Army and Artillery quick enough to get on
the other side of Brussels in such Weather) I do not know but the French might
have come up time enough to have disputed us the Camp of Anderlecht with much
Superior Forces, but the Rain, which happily Clogged the march of the French at
this time, did not very much retard ours, because we had, for the most part of
the way, a very good Stone Caussey for the Army and especially the Artillery to
march upon.

About Ten at Night, the whole Army began to follow the march of the Artillery
and heavy Baggage according to this disposition, it being then a very dark
night and bad Weather; the Infantry marched first in two Columns upon the
Right toward the Koning's Huys there to gain the Great Caussey for Waterlo and
so through the Bois-de-Sogne to Brussels, the Right Wing of Horse was to follow
the same way and then the Left Wing; all the Cavalry being ordered to march in
the Rear, not only for a Rear-Guard to see the Body of Foot safe into the
Wood, but also because of the great darkness of the Night whereby several
People might have been otherwise trodden under Foot by the Horse: About Midnight
the King left his Quarters at Promelles attended by Prince Vaudemont to go to
Brussels, the King and Prince were in their Coaches having a great many
Flambeaus to light them, without which it had been almost impossible to see the
way; the Brigade of Guards marched about break of day, from the King's Quarter
and got in the Rear of the Body of Foot, the Front of which was by this time
advanced almost as far as Waterlo; it was full day before the Horse began to
march, having orders to make several detachments, from Height to Height in the
Plain, to cover our march till the whole Army was got into the Wood, where
Colonel Gohr's Regiment of Foot was ordered to post it self for the Rear Guard
of the Artillery and Baggage, and to bring up all the straggling or wearied
Soldiers that could not keep up with the Army in so long and tedious a March.
The King and Prince got very early on the 13th through Brussells, with
Quartermaster General Dopft along with them, to visit the ground between
Anderlecht and the Canal of Brussells and choose the strongest and the most
defensible Camp; the Prince of Tilly had orders the over night from the King to
get on the other side of Brussells with the Horse and Dragoons under his
Command, and accordingly had marched that same Night from the Fort of Monterey
without Halle-porte through the Town, and encamped on the other side between
the Flanders port and that of Anderlecht; from whence he sent several
detachments toward Hall, St. Quintin-Linneck and Asche, both to get
Intelligence of the French motions, and cover the Country hereabouts (till the
coming up of the Army) for an Escorte to His Majesty, who was now visiting all
the posts hereabouts and the Avenues and Approaches to Brussells, for the
taking up of a good Camp and frustrating the Designs of the Enemies: The Van of
the Body of Foot got to the Height of the Fauxbourg of Ixelles without Namur
port the 13th by Ten in the morning, where it was ordered to halt till the
Camp should be marked; for all the Quarter Masters were still here with their
Field Colors waiting for Quartermaster General Dopft's Orders, who was with
the King, as we have now said it, on the other side; but as soon as the Body of
Foot was come up so near Brussells they were sent for to come and mark the
Camp; and about one the Army had orders to march by the Namur port, the right
of the Body of Foot through the Town by the Laacken port and so to gain the
Height between Ganshoren and the Canal, and the Left round the Rampart by the
Gate of Anderlecht to that of Flanders, and so to incamp with the Right at
Berchom, and Left close upon the Town, between the Flanders-porte and that of
Anderlecht facing toward this place and Dilbeck, as the Right did (from
Berchom to Laacken upon the Canal) toward Asche, Wemmel and Grimberg. We were
to incamp, according no this disposition, in the figure of an acute Angle,
fixed with one Leg at the Village of Laacken upon the Canal of Brussells where
was the Right, and to'ther between the Flanders and Anderlecht-portes being the
Left, and the Vertex or point at Berchom, to have by this means the advantage
of the Brook of Zellich to cover our Right, which runs through a bottom before
the Villages of Ganshoren and Jette and the Chasteau de Riviere, and so falls
near Laacken into a branch of the Senne (that goes all along the Canal on this
side as far as the Fort-des-trois-Trous) forming several Fish Ponds from the
Chasteau de Riviere to the Village of Jette, and so to that of Laacken; This
made the right of our Camp very strong, the Brook of Zellich being stopped up
upon this occasion to make an inundation in the bottom before our Right between
Jette and Laacken; and in General all the approaches to our Camp on this side
were through strong defile's caused by the Woods about the Abbey of Dillighem,
the passages over this Rivulet, and the several Villages before us. Our Left,
which turned down from Berchom to the Town of Brussells, facing toward
Anderlecht and Dilbeck, was covered by a bottom which began near the Village of
Berchom and so continued to the very Ramparts of the Town, having several
Fishponds in it, with deep and hollow ways, which made it very difficult to
attack us on that side; we left indeed the Height between Anderlecht and
Dilbeck open, from whence the French Bombarded Brussells in the Year 1695,
because of the weakness of the Ground to defend it; but as we were encamped, we
could hinder them from coming near enough to do any damage to the Town.

All the Foot being got through Brussells about five or six in the Evening, it
began to incamp according as we have now described it, and the King and Prince
took their Quarters in the Fauxbourg of Cockelbergh just without the
Flanders-porte; But the Cavalry did not come into their ground till 'twas in
the Night, all the Dutch Horse incamping upon the right near the Village of
Laacken, except the Brigades of Dompre and Chauvire under the Command of
Major General Hubert, which interlin'd with the Body of Foot upon the Left of
Ingoldesby's and Belcastel's Brigades behind the Village of Ganshoren, the most
open passage to our Camp upon the Right being hereabouts; Prince Cerclas of
Tilly encamped upon the left with the Liege Horse and Dragoons, but all the
English Cavalry marched through Brussells by the Scarbeck-porte and encamped on
the other side of the Canal, with the Right at Ever, where General Auerquerque
was Quartered, and the Left at Diegom upon the way to Louvain, except the
Dragoons of Tiviot, Rosse and Jedborough which were posted between Vilvorde and
the Burnt-bridge upon the Canal of Brussells, and those of Eppinger and Lloyd
which were mixed with the Foot at the Camp of Cockelbergh: Anhalt's Brigade
being composed of the three Battallions of Anhalt, Scheltinga and Slabendorf
lately come to Brussells from the Siege of Ath, and the two Battallions of Else
and Essen detached from our Army, encamped on the other side of Brussells
before the Fort of Monterey: This was the state of our Army about the Town at
our first coming to this Camp, where we were very conveniently posted to expect
the French, if they would have attacked us, and no stronger camp could have
been found out to cover the Town and secure our selves at once; but because we
were likely to have to do with two powerful Armies joined together, and that
too much care could not be taken for our Safety, especially at our first
coming, that we had not as yet those considerable reinforcements, which joined
us soon after from England and the Rhine, therefore as soon as the Army began
to incamp, fifty men out of each Battallion were commanded to work that very
Night, being about 3400 men, at a Retrenchment upon the Left of the Village of
Berchom where was an open ground about a quarter of an English Mile over, that
joined to the Height of Dilbeck and commanded this part of our Camp, and was
the weakest post we had to defend, and the most dangerous inlet into our Camp
in case of an attack, and therefore special care was taken to Fortisie
immediately this Avenue; My Lord Cutts was then Major of the day, and was, by
the King's order, upon the work all Night to forward it by his Care and
Presence; and by the next Morning it was considerably advanced and in a state
not to be easily carried by an Enemy. This Retrenchment was a Redan or work of
Salliant Angles with a large Fosse and covered way, the Glacis of which was
senc'd with an outer Ditch, being stuck all over at the bottom with short
Palissades, or sharp wooden Spikes, having their points upwards to hinder the
Enemy from getting into it.

As His Majesty's Army came to this Camp the 13th, that of the Marechal of
Bouflers was at the same time upon the march from Steinkirk toward Nostredame
de Halle, where he encamped this Evening with his Right at Lembeck upon the
Senne, and his Left at the Brook of Pepinghen toward St. Quintin-Linneck, the
Head-quarter being at St. Arnelle in the Rear, upon the way that goes from
Halle to Enghien; as soon as the Marshall of Bouflers was come up to this Camp
he immediately detached the Chevalier de Nesle with 150 Horse toward
Anderlecht to get intelligence of our motions, and whether our Army was yet got
to this side of Brussells; the Chevalier de Nesle advanced with his Party
almost as far as Dilbeck this Night, and met hereabouts, upon the way to Halle,
with a Party of 30 Liege Horse commanded by a Cornet, which Monsieur de
Sainfal, a reformed Captain in the French Life Guards, attacked with a Squadron
of 50 and defeated him, killing four upon the spot, and took eleven Prisoners
with fifteen Horses: 'Twas by the meeting and defeat of this Party that the
Chevalier de Nesle was informed of all our Armies being encamped on this side
of Brussels between the Flanders-porte and the Canal: But the Marechal of
Villeroy who had marched through the Wood of Lessines on the 12th to incamp
between Castergat and Gamerage, was forced to halt the next day, the Weather
having been so very bad the 11th and 12th, and the ways grown so difficult,
that his Artillery and Wheel Baggage could not come up to march the 13th, being
to pass through the desiles of the Wood of Lessines; but on the 14th this Army
marched and came to incamp with the Right beyond Goick toward St.
Quintin-Linneck within three Quarters of a League of Bouflers Left, and the
Left toward the Dender beyond Strithem, the Head-quarter being at this last
place: And if the French had at first any design upon Brussells and our Army,
it was this halting of Villeroy's Army that prevented it, and gave us time to
Fortify our Camp before the Town, and receive considerable reinforcements; for
the Marechal of Bouflers was not strong enough to pretend to attack us himself,
and therefore could not march up to us on the 14th before we had sufficiently
Fortified our Camp; and Villeroy coming but this day to the Neighborhood of
St. Quintin-Linneck, the two Marechals could not join together till the 15th,
and consequently could not attack us well till the 16th in the morning, when we
could not be in a condition to apprehend their coming; therefore the French
were obliged to think of nothing else at present but the subsisting of these
two great Armies in the Country between the Senne and the Dender, where they
reached almost from the one River to the other, being upwards of three Leagues
distance; and here I shall leave them to return to His Majesty's Camp near
Brussells.

The 14th the King and Prince went out very early to see the Retrenchment we
had worked upon in the Night, and the avenues to the Height of Dillebeck,
where, having heard of the defeat of our Party of Liege Horse the overnight so
near our Camp, all the out-posts were thereupon ordered to be reinforced, in
all the Villages before the Camp, as in the Villages of Berchom, Ganshoren,
Jette and Laacken, and the Abbey of Dilleghem and Castle of Riviere; these two
last places commanding a pass in the bottom over the Rivulet of Zellich, the
first on one side toward Wemmel, and the last on the other toward Brussells;
a Field Officer with two or 300 men was posted in the Abbey before our Right,
and in the Villages of Dilbeck and Anderlecht before our Left; and that the
Retrenchment, we were working upon since the overnight to stop up the passage
into our Camp from the Height of Dillebeck, might be finished with all
Expedition, 30 Men more were commanded out of every Battallion (being now
between five and 6000 persons) to work upon it, and His Majesty, in his Riding
out this morning, saw the Marechal of Boufler's Army encamped at Halle. In the
Evening Lieutenant General Ohr (having received an Express from His Majesty at
Tirlemont the 12th at Night to come and join him here) passed through the Town
of Brussells, and encamped in the first Line upon the Left of all (without the
Flanders-porte, his Left being upon the way that goes from the Fauxbourg of
Cockelberg to Anderlecht) with 8 Battallions, being those of Ohr, Witgenstein,
Wey, Dedem, and Heydemale of the Troops of Hanover, and those of Tozen, Ransaw,
and La Motthe of Zell, and 12 Field Pieces; His Horse, being the Regiments of
the Electoral Prince of Hanouer, Appel, Bottmer and Bulaw, and the Dragoons of
Zell Guards and Lieutenant General Ohr, in all twelve Squadrons, encamped
before the Fort of Monterey near Anhalt's Brigade under the command of Major
General Bulaw; and at the same time the second Battallion of Scots Guards, and
the Battallions of Columbine, Granville, and Puizar lately arrived from England
at Willemstadt, came to incamp in the covered way before the Scarbeck-porte,
but Colonel Murray's Regiment was ordered upon the Canal near Vilvorde. The
same Evening all our General Officers met at the Windmill of Ganshoren, where
our Artillery was drawn up upon the Height, to divide the Posts for the Army in
case of an Alarm, which the Quarter Masters marked the next morning with Field
colors, for every Regiment to know his post; and this day Colonel Gohr's
Regiment, that had been left in the Bois-de-Sogne for the Guard of the Baggage,
came into the Camp, all the Baggage not having been able to get up to us till
this day. The 16th, Belcastel's Brigade was commanded out of the second Line,
to go and incamp upon the right of all in the Village of Laacken, and secure
that passage which covered our Right Wing of Horse, and was no proper post to
be defended by it; and the four Battallions now mentioned that encamped in the
Counterscarp of Scarbeck-porte were ordered to come into the Line, where the
three last of those four Battallions made up Fairfaxes Brigade, in the place of
Belcastel's. The 17th the Retrenchment to stop the passage into our Camp from
the Height of Dillebeck, being very near finished, and being thus pretty secure
on this (though the most dangerous) side, the Army worked at a General
Retrenchment from the Height of the Village of Berchom to the Canal at Laacken,
taking in the little plains between Berchom and Ganshoren, Ganshoren and Jette,
and Jette and Laacken, which quite shut up our Camp and rendered it not only
inaccessible to the French with the many defiles and difficult passages before
us, but likewise kept the Soldiers in it, out of which they could not easily
stir to Marode or Desert, and this (may be) was the thing chiefly designed in
the making of it; for it is hardly probable, that the French would have come to
attack us, though we had not made this Retrenchment, considering the difficulty
of the avenues into our Camp every way, and the great Army we were now going to
have by the joining of the Rhine Troops. The 18th, the Army continued to work
at the great Retrenchment, the same day, the Munster Troops commanded by
Brigadier Corfay passed through the Town of Brussells to incamp before the Fort
of Monterey, consisting of Four Battallions, being those of Conaritz, Corfay,
Landsberg and Schwarts, and the Three Regiments of Horse of Heytersleben,
Raffeldt and Haenstein, making Six Squaprons: In the Evening, the King went to
visit the Electrice of Bavaria at the Palace, where His Majesty was received by
the Count de Prysingen at the Head of all the Gentlemen of the Palace, and
conducted through the Guard Chamber, where all the Halbardiers were drawn up in
two Lines, to the Electrice's Apartment, where her Highness, being then big
with Child and pretty near her time, received the Kings Visit in her Bed of
State, His Majesty being attended by most of the Chief Officers of the Army;
Madame de Led Lady Governess presented the Electoral Princess to the King,
being then an Infant of about a Twelve Month Old: After this His Majesty went
to see the Electrice's Apartments, and so was conducted back to his Coach by
the Count de Prysingen with the same Ceremony as before, and from thence the
King went to visit the Princess of Vaudemont. The 19th, the great Retrenchment
being finished before our Army and the Artillery dispersed all along into
several Batteries, we had the leisure to work at the Line, designed by
Lieutenant General Cohorne to cover Brussells for the future with a small Army
from being Bombarded; and it was accordingly traced out this day after this
manner, a Work upon the Right of the Height before Anderlecht-porte (a deep
bottom, hollow ways, and Fishponds remaining between it and Cockelbergh) and
another upon the Left just by the Village of Anderlecht where it fell upon the
Caussey that goes from thence to Brussells through the Meadows caused by the
Neighborhood of the Senne, and which can be over flowed by it, and these two
Works are joined together by a Line of Communication over the Height of
Anderlecht; again, to cover the Town on the other side of the bottom and
Fish Ponds now mentioned, and so on as far as the Canal, against a Bombardment
from the Height of Cockelberg (as the other did from the Height of Anderlecht)
a Retrenchment was made to include the Fauxbourgs of Cockelberg and Malenbeck,
with the Left upon the bottom and Fishponds, that continued the defense to the
Works upon the Height of Anderlecht, and the Right upon the Meadows along the
Canal between Brussells and Laacken; and the Banks of the Canal on this side
being covered (as it has been said before) by a Branch of the Senne, the
Retrenchment terminating upon the Meadows, and the Banks of the Canal so
flanked one another, that no Lodgement could be made in them near enough to
Bombard the Town from thence; and besides, I believe that these Meadows can be
overflowed by stopping up of the River at the Fort des Trois Trous upon the
Canal This is a very strong Retrenchment and of as large dimensions as the
Ramparts of a Town, being a Redan or work with Salliant Angles, (most of them
being right or as near right as could be) flanking one another, and so were the
Works upon the Height of Anderlecht, with a good Fosse, Counterscarp, and
Glacis with an outer Ditch before it: The Army worked at this Line from this
day till the end of the Campaign every day more or less (if not prevented by
Foul Weather) and completed it all but the Palissading of it; and though it
has cost the Town a great deal of Money, yet Peace being concluded between
France and the Allies soon after, we may reckon it as a Work lost, and that it
will soon run to Ruin, though it is very necessary for the safety of Brussells
in any War between Spain and France, whilst Mons and Ath are the only Frontier
Towns that cover it, and either of them being taken, the French can come to the
very Walls of Brussells.

The same day that we begun to work at this Line being the 19th, two
Battallions of the Duke of Holstein came up to the Camp from Germany and took
their Post upon the Left of the Second Line near the Flanders port: The Hesse
Troops Commanded by Velt-Marshal Count de Lip came up to Diegom, and the
Hereditary Prince of Hesse came to Court to wait upon His Majesty: The 20th the
Hesse Troops marched through Brussells to incamp without Halle port before the
Fort of Monterey being composed of Four Battallions, viz. one of the Life
Regiment, one of Grenadiers, and two of Blixen-croon, and the Regiments of
Horse of Spiegel and Garstenbroeck, and those of Dragoons of the Prince of
Hombourg and the Prince of Hesse, making together Eight Squadrons; so that we
had now a reinforcement of 18 Battallions and 26 Squadrons from the Rhine, and
Five Battallions from England, which were soon followed by Three more, and
Three Battallions of the Garrison of Ath, being in all 29 Battallions, which
having left no detached Companies, but being full Regiments, may be reckoned at
600 men one with another, amounting in all to 17400 Foot; and 2900 Horse and
Dragoons, all which together made 20300 men; Add this to the Sum of His
Majesty's and the Elector's Armies, and it made the Allies about 125000 strong
in the Field now in Flanders, out of which our Army about Brussells consisted
of no less than 99 Battallions and 175 Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, being
so posted that they in a manner invested the Town: The Main of the Army
encamped between the Senne and the Canal, Eight Battallions of Hesse and
Munster, and Five of Anhalt's Brigade, and 26 Squadrons of German Horse and
Dragoons were on the other side of the Senne upon the Height before the Fort of
Monterey under the Command of Velt-Marechal General Count de Lip, where they
made a very good Line to cover the Town on that side, almost in the same place
with the Retrenchment as Prince Vaudemont made in the Year 1695; General
Auerquerque encamped with the English Cavalry and Dragoons at Ever and Diegom
on that side of Brussells which is toward Malines and Lonvain; the Wood of
Sogne covered the rest: By this disposition, if the Marechal of Bouflers had
passed the Senne with his Army from the Camp of Halle to march toward Genap
and Nivelle, we had all the Troops encamped at Diegom and without the Fort of
Monterey to join in one march about Wavre; the first by Neer-Ische and the
second through the Boisde-Sogne, which together would have made above 100
Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, and 13 Battallions which could have been
considerably reinforced with Infantry from the Garrison of Namur and the Army
at Cockelberg, and thus the next day we could have secured the Camp of Masy and
covered this Important Place; for it was the opinion of some People that the
Marechal of Bouflers (after the French had wedged our Army between the Senne
and the Canal at Brussells) would have marched toward Namur to get between
this Place and the Allies; but, as His Majesty had disposed his Army about
Brussells, we could reach the Camp of Masy as soon as Bouflers could come to
the Plain of Fleury, and thus cover at once both Namur and Brussells, the first
against the Marechal of Bouflers, and the second against that of Villeroy; and
indeed (as I have said it before) if the Allies had had all the Troops in the
Field in the beginning of the Campaign which they had now, it is a question
whether the French could have Besieged even Ath it self, notwithstanding their
150000 Men.

The Marquis de Harcourt, who had marched from Montroyal with his flying Camp
toward the Low Countries on the 31th. of May, to observe the motions of the
Troops which the Allies expected there from the Rhine, passed the Meuse at
Givet the 15th of June about the same time that the German Reinforcement was
getting up to our Camp about Brussells; the 16th he marched to Phillipville
from whence he was to pass the Sambre and join the Marechal of Bouflers; who as
well as the Marechal of Villeroy was now at a stand upon the Measures that had
been taken by His Majesty in bringing off his Army with so much expedition, and
posting of it so strongly and conveniently about Brussells; and the French
seemed at present to have no other design with these two Armies but to Forage
and waste all the Country along the Dender and between the Scheld and the
Canal of Brussells.

As for the Marechal of Catinat, we have left him encamped at Lignes, where he
came with his Army after the Siege of Ath, (and that he had repaired the
Breaches and levelled the Line of Circumvallation) on the 9th Instant, in order
to march into Flanders: The 12th this Army advanced toward the Scheld and came
to incamp along the Run between Anvain and Cords, the Marechal of Catinat's
Quarter being in the last of these places. The 13th he marched to come up close
to the Scheld, and the Head Quarter was at Herines; all the Artillery and heavy
Baggage was ordered to pass the Scheld this very Evening, at the Bridge of
Boats made since the Campaign between Pottes and Canaffe, and the Army passed
the River the next day upon this, and another Bridge made for this occasion
with Boats that were sent from Doway after the Siege of Ath for the use of this
Army, which encamped this day about half way between the Lys and the Scheld.
The 15th the Marechal of Catinat marched on toward the Lys, and came to incamp
at Vive St. Eloy, where he was joined the same day by the Forces that had been
posted within the Lines of Courtray under the Command of Monsieur de Montrevel,
and this Army, according to the French accounts, consisted of 52 Battallions
and 69 Squadrons; but the Marechal of Catinat having sent back all the
Reinforcements he had from the Marechal of Villeroy at the Siege of Ath, the
most that he could have at the repassing of the Scheld must be but 25
Battallions, and when joined by Montrevel his Army could not well exceed Forty;
but whatever his Strength was at present, he ventured to march with it close to
the Elector's Army, and came the 17th to incamp between Cruy's houtem and the
Lys, within a League and a half of Deinse, his Right being at Nackeren and Left
at Zulte upon this River, where the General Quarter was; so near the Marechal
of Catinat encamped now to the Elector of Bavaria, only the Lys remained
between them.

This March of the Marechal of Catinat so near to Deinse obliged the Elector to
look about him, and this made his Electoral Highness call a Council of War upon
these Motions of the French toward him, to consult what was to be done in the
present Conjuncture; his Army consisted of about 43 Battallions including the
Brigades of Holstein-Norburg and Ransaw that were incampd upon the Right of all
between Landeghem and Ansbeck and eighty five or six Squadrons; Four
Battallions had been detach d under Baron Sparre, since the coming back of the
Army from Brabant to Audenarde; three at Dendermond and in the Pays de Waes,
and two behind the Canal of Bruges which made the remainder 43 Battallions; the
Marechal of Catinat's true strength was not at first known, some made him
stronger than he was and others weaker which accordingly caused a variety of
Opinions; and the Elector sent Monsieur Verboom his Quartermaster General, to
the King to give His Majesty an account of it, and it was resolved in the mean
time to fortify the Bridge of Deinse at Peteghem and to have a very strong
Guard there, being the next Post to the Marechal of Catinat, and to lay Bridges
over the Canal, one at Ansbeck and another lower at Dorme either to receive
Reinforcements that way if Catinat came to attack the Elector, or to be ready
to march behind the Canal if Catinat should march toward Bruges or Newport. In
the midst of these Doubts the Elector had Advice that the Marechal of Catinat's
Army at his coming to Zulte, had but fourteen Battallions in the first Line and
fewer in the second, and that he was but weak in Horse and Dragoons; this made
His Highness very desirous to pay a Visit with his Army to the Marechal of
Catinat, but he had a mind first to know the Truth of the Matter, for though
the Camp was very strong where Catinat was posted, yet it could hardly be
imagined that he would have ventured so near the Elector with so inconsiderable
an Army: The Elector therefore sent that very Night to Newport for Major
General Fagel, and ordered the three Battallions of Lorne, Buchan and St. Amand
that were about Bruges, and those of Reinard and Brandenbourg behind the Canal,
to come up and join together at Bellem to be there in a readiness to reinforce
the Army upon occasion. The 18th in the Afternoon His Highness went with a
strong Escorte as far as the Windmill of Osselghem, from whence he might
discover the whole Line of Catinat's Army, and in the Evening Major General
Fagel came to the Camp. The 19th at Night the Elector had advice that the
French had laid Bridges over the Lys near Zulte, with a Design to Forage the
next day about Wacken and the Mandel, on this side of the River; wherefore His
Highness commanded that a strong Detachment of Horse, Foot and Dragoons should
immediately be sent that very Night with Cannon to disturb this Forage, and
accordingly 8000 Horse, Foot and Dragoons with eight Pieces of Cannon were
ordered for this Command, and stood paraded at the Head of the Camp till Ten or
Eleven of the Clock the next Morning, to hear of the Enemies passing of the
Lys; but the Marechal of Catinat having advice of our Preparations to attack
his Forragers ordered the Bridges over the Lys to be taken up again, and laid
this Design aside, of which the Elector being informed, this great Detachment
was countermanded. Major General Fagel went back the overnight to Newport and
the five Regiments of Foot at Bellem were sent again to their former Posts. The
20th a great Detachment of 1500 Horse was commanded away toward Bruges for a
feint to cover the Design which the Elector seemed to have still of marching up
to the Marechal of Catinat, for at the same time he ordered Bridges to be laid
over the Lys between Deinse and Bachtem, and the 21th the Brigades of Ransaw
and Holstein-Norbourg were ordered to come and incamp close upon the Elector's
Right between Nevel and Landeghem, whereas before they were posted near the
Canal of Bruges between Landeghem and Ansbeck. But on the 22th at night the
Marechal of Catinat marched off privately with his Army from Zulte to get back
toward the Lines and encamped with his Right near Courtray, and his Left
toward Harlebeck; it was generally supposed then, that these Preparations of
the Elector's obliged Catinat to withdraw so suddenly and with so much Secrecy
into the Lines. But it is more probable that this Retreat of Catinat's was upon
Montrevel's going with the Body under his command, to post himself near
Grammont upon the Dender; where his Troops were ordered, to cover the Convoys
that come by Water from Tournay to Pottes and Canaffe, and thence by Land to
Villeroy's Army. and the Marechal of Catinat could not pretend to keep in this
Camp of Zulte without that Re-inforcement which Montrevel commanded. Thus I
shall leave the Army in Flanders to go back to His Majesty's Camp near Brussels
and speak of the Transactions that happened there, of which some were of great
Importance and cannot well be omitted.

At His Majesty's first coming to this Camp to cover Brussels, the Army had
abundance of Forage, of which there was a great Plenty all about it; and most
laid in Forage at the first coming to this Ground for a Fortnight at least
without going far for it; but this being the only Camp the main of the Army had
for all the rest of the Campaign, and Villeroy and Bouslers being Masters of
all the Country about Alost, and between the Scheld and the Canal, it is no
wonder if there was at last a very great Scarceness of Forage hereabouts. The
first General Forage which the Army made was not till the 20th being about
Grimberg and the outside of the Canal, to get as much as possibly we could all
before us, about Asch, Zellich, Wemmel and Grimberg, which was now reckoned but
as so much taken from the French. But I shall say no more of these Affairs,
which make the ordinary and daily Transactions of Armies, to speak of things of
more moment and which had a nearer Relation to the Happy Conclusion of this
Campaign in Peace.

The 22th Pensionary Heinsius of Holland, who had lately been named by the
States General for their third Plenipotentiary at the Conferences for the
Treaty of Peace at Ryswick in the room of the Sieur Boreel lately deceased,
came to the Camp to wait upon His Majesty; and this Voyage, which could not be
but about Affairs of Consequence, occasiond abundance of Discourses some
tending to War and others to Peace: For Business went on a little slowly at
this time in the Congress at Ryswick, some time had been taken up at first in
adjusting of the Ceremonial, which had been agreed upon at last and not long
since, wherein it was concluded that in relation to Visits, and paying of the
first Visit and the receiving of it, the Plenipotentiary Ambassadors of
Crowned Heads that had come first to the Hague or Delft for the Congress of
Ryswick, should pay the first Visit to the last Comers, without inferring from
thence any Consequence about Precedence, or derogating in any manner from any
one's Privileges or Pretentions about it; and according to this Regulation
Count de Caunitz and Count Straatman that had come to the Hague before the
French Plenipotentiaries arrived at Delft, went to pay them the first Visit at
their own Houses, and afterward the French Plenipotentiaries returned the same
Complement to the Counts of Caunitz and Straatman at the Hague, and paid at the
same time the first Visit to the Baron of Zeilern the third Imperial
Plenipotentiary, being come into Holland after them; and the same Method was
observed in the Visits of the rest. After the adjusting of the Ceremonial, the
French Ambassadors were required by the Mediator to give in their Project of a
General Peace with the Allies, in pursuance of the Overtures already made in
the Preliminaries, and so to enter upon more Essential Business than had
hitherto been handled in the Congress: The French, on their side, were delaying
to give it in, putting of it off from Congress day to Congress day, which made
People generally believe they had first a mind to know the Issue of three great
Undertakings which France had now in hand, and of which News were daily
expected with a great deal of Impatience on all sides, to model their Project
accordingly; and that was, first Monsieur de Pointy's Expedition in the
West Indies against the Galleons, having sailed from Breast the beginning of
January last, with a Squadron of about twelve Men of War, having Troops and
Transport-Ships along with him and other Necessaries for a Landing, not without
giving us some Jealousy in England at first, especially for Ireland: The
second was the Election of Poland, for which the Prince of Conti stood
Candidate, and was now so fair for the carrying of it, that the Election of
Marechal of the Diet met at Warsaw to choose a King, was carried by the French
Party, which showed but too much the Superiority of it against any other
Pretenders, which gave them very great Hopes on that side. The third was the
Siege of Barcelona, formed by the Duke of Vendome, General of the French Army
in Catalonia, since the beginning of this Month, and which was now carrying on
with a great deal of Vigor.

Several People thought that Pensionary Heinsius's Journey to the Camp was
concerning the Retardments which the French made in giving in their Project,
and to concert thereupon some Methods of carrying on the War with more Vigor
than we had done hitherto, and oblige the French not to be so backward in
giving reasonable Terms for a General Peace as they were reported to be at
present; others imagined that it regarded the Forwarding of the Negociations at
Ryswick where there seemed to be a certain Slowness among some of the Allies
and especially the Imperialists: These were the public Discourses about this
Journey, but one may rather imagine from what followed, that it was to make way
for the Conferences that happened few days after between the Earl of Portland
and the Marechal of Bouflers; and that, may be, the French Plenipotentiaries
had made some Overtures about it to those of the States, by the French King's
order, because His Majesty being not yet acknowledged by the French as King of
Great Britain, there could be no Conferences in the Congress between the
Plenipotentiaries of England and those of France: But whatever was the occasion
of Pensionary Heinsius his coming to the Camp, these were only Conjectures, and
I do not pretend to dive farther into the Matter.

The 24th Prince Cerclas of Tilly was commanded with the Liege Horse and
Dragoons and the German Cavalry lately come from the Rhine, to march toward
Namur, where he encamped at Masy; the German Horse was under the Command of
Major General Bulau, and the Prince of Tilly was joined in this Camp by two
Battallions of the Liege Troops, the rest being to follow upon occasion; for we
were strong enough without them at present, and the sending of them that way
spared so much the more Forage about Brussels, where the Army was like to
continue long enough to want it; and besides, the Marquis de Harcourt was
marching back to repass the Sambre, in order to incamp at Bossu upon this River
with the Forces he had brought from the Moselle, where at his coming he
received six Field pieces from Philipville; and though Harcourt was posted here
upon no other account but for the Security of Convoys from the Meuse to the
Sambre against the Garrison of Namur, and thence to be sent to Mons for the use
of the Armies, yet it was necessary to have a proportionable Body near Namur to
observe him, especially now that the Marechal of Bouflers was encamped
conveniently enough to march that way as soon as the Allies.

The 25th Pensionary Heinsius went back for Holland, and in the Evening at the
Orders His Majesty was pleased to declare the Hereditary Prince of Hesse Major
General of his Forces. The 26th the Princess of Vaudemont attended with most of
the chief Ladies of Brussels came in the Evening to see the Camp, going at the
Head of the Line with a Train of about a dozen Coaches with six Horses; the
Electrice was near her Time and could not go abroad. The 27th the Marechal of
Villeroy's Army came to Forage about Zellich, and his Out guards advanced
pretty near our Camp, which gave us the Allarm; His Majesty immediately rid
out, being followed by the Prince, to observe the Motions of the French, and
Haxhausen's Brigade of Danes, encamped upon the Height between Ganshoren and
Berchom, was ordered to march with the Dragoons we had in the Camp on this side
of Brussels; all the Cavalry received Orders to mount on Horseback, and
Belcastel's Brigade at Laacken took Arms. About thirty Squadrons of Horse were
commanded to attend His Majesty, who rid to the Height on the other side of the
Abbey of Dilleghem, and it being found that the French had no other Design but
to Forage between Zellich and Asch, it was not thought expedient to attempt
any thing which might have engaged us in a General Battle without our
Retrenchments, but only to watch and observe their Motions, and His Majesty
came back to the Camp. The 29th the Dragoons of Tiviot, Rosse and Jedborough
which, at our first coming to this Ground, had been posted at the Burnt-bridge
upon the Canal, received Orders to march and join the Main Body of English
Horse and Dragoons encamped at Diegom under General Auerquerque; and
Scheltinga's Regiment of Anhalt's Brigade was commanded in their place to cover
the Canal from thence to Willebrook, as Colonel Murray's did on the other hand
to Vilvorde and the Fort des trois Trous. The same day was the first Interview
between the Marechal of Bouflers and My Lord Portland in the open Field on this
side of Halle; the Marechal of Bouflers had sent a Trumpet into our Camp to
attend his Lordship, who went in his Coach without any other Escorte, and the
Marechal of Bouflers who was come to the place of Rendezvous with some
Squadrons of Horse, ordered them all back to his Camp, when he saw My Lord come
without any Guard, and only the Trumpet that he had sent, with him, but the
General Officers that attended him remained: After great Civilities on both
sides they withdrew apart to enter upon Business, and My Lord Portland came
back into our Camp in the Evening; notwithstanding that his Lordship went this
first time very privately, yet it was the public Discourse of the Camp the
next day, and the Opinions were divided about the Business, some conjecturing
one thing and some another, but most agreed that this Conference had more
Relation to the Affairs of Peace than War. The 30th the King went to Dine in
the Abbey of Dilleghem, which is very pleasantly situated about two English
Miles from Brussels in the way to Wemmel, and was now almost a Mile in the
Front of our Camp; it is of the Order of St. Norbert or Premontre, and stands
upon an easy Ascent of a Hill with fine Walks and Woods, Gardens and Fish
ponds about it. Colonel Webb's and Colonel Walter Collier's Regiments were
ordered out to cover the Abbey, and a Detachment of 200 Men of the Guards were
sent here to do Duty about His Majesty's Person; the King's Kitchen and
Furniture had been sent in the Morning, and the Army (that was now full of the
News of yesterdays Conference) would have it, that the Marechal of Villeroy met
the King in this place; but the King found his Quarter at Cockelberg too close,
being environed with the Camp on one side and the Town on the other, and His
Majesty had once a mind to remove his Quarters to this place to have a better
and a freer Air, but it was too far out of our Camp, and too much exposed, to
hazard His Majesty's Person there, and that Design was given over: In the
Evening the King rid the Tour in his Coach about the chief Streets of Brussels,
according to the Custom of the Nobility in these Countries, and the next day
His Majesty went to the Opera; this gave very good hopes to those that were
Well-wishers for Peace, to see the King mind some Divertisements in the midst
of a Campaign.

The first of July His Majesty had by an Express from the Hague, July.
the News of the Elector of Saxony's being chosen King of Poland in the Diet at
Warsaw, which came by a Courier at the Hague to the Sieur Bosen the Elector of
Saxony's Plenipotentiary at the Congress for the Peace, and which he
communicated immediately to all the Ministers of the Allies, who went to
Complement him upon this occasion; the Elector of Saxony had not publicly
appeared as a Candidate till the Meeting of the Diet, and that the French Party
had carried their Point in the Election of a Marechal; and the Prince of Conti
and the Prince Royal eldest Son to the late King of Poland seemed to be the
only Competitors that stood fair for the Crown; as for the Elector of Saxony he
was not yet talked of, and his Design seemed hitherto to continue in the
Emperor's Service and command his Armies in Hungary the Campaign following; but
when the French Party appeared so great at the Meeting of the Diet, none but so
Powerful a Prince as the Elector of Saxony, who could offer such great
Advantages to the Poles, and make them Powerful by the joining of those
Dominions and the Electorate of Saxony under one Head, as they are in
Situation, and recovering thereby the Ancient Limits of that Republic upon the
Turks, by the Siege of Caminieck; I say none but so Powerful a Prince that
could bring such Advantages along with him to the Poles, could then frustrate
the Designs of the French Party and oppose the Prince of Conti's Election:
Colonel Fleming was sent to the Diet as the Elector of Saxony's Ambassador, who
declared his Master one of the Candidates and made very great Offers to the
Republic, and indeed greater than any one of the other Candidates could do; he
was soon countenanced by the Imperial Party, and that the Religion which the
Elector had hitherto professed might be no Obstacle to his Election, he
produced a Certificate of His Highnesses Abjuration of the Protestant Religion,
and of having received the Sacraments of Confession and Communion some time
before from the Duke of Saxen-Zeits his Kinsman Bishop of Raab, signed by the
said Bishop; and the Pope's Nuncio attested the Truth and Validity of the
Certificate as knowing the Hand of the said Bishop; The Electors of Saxony were
the first that received Luther's Reformation.
and it cannot be believed that the Pope's Nuncio would have made that step if
the Pope had been so Neutral in that Affair before the Election as he pretends
to be since. The Elector of Saxony marched at the same time with all the Forces
he had in his Country being about 8000 Men into Silesia and came to Breslaw
upon the Frontier of Poland, to be as near Cracaw as he could to back his
Pretentions: When the day of the Election came, the Standards of the Prince
Royal's Party appeared in the Field as if they were still resolved to stand by
him; and Saxony's and his being then divided, the Majority appeared on the
French side, which made the Cardinal Primate, without any farther Poling,
proclaim the Prince of Conti the very first day of the Meeting for the
Election; the Prince Royal's Party seeing that it was in vain to struggle for
him any farther, and that if they did, the French must carry the Election,
joined that of the Elector of Saxony, which now made them much Superior to the
Prince of Conti's Faction, and thereupon the Bishop of Cujavia proclaimed the
Elector of Saxony King of Poland in the Field, and Sung Te Deum for it in the
great Church of Warsaw, which the Elector's Party had shut up against the
Cardinal Primate, who therefore Sung it in the Field; and thus it came to a
double Election, about which I shall say no more, than that this Crown will in
all likelihood be used hereafter as a Bait to bring the most Powerful Princes
of Germany over to the Church of Rome, and thus at length ruin the Protestant
Interest in the Empire, where we see it daily grow weaker and weaker: There is
yet another Method of the Pope's to undermine the Protestant Religion in
Germany, which it is not unfit to mention upon this occasion, and that is the
alluring of the Younger Brothers among the Protestant Princes who are but Poor,
with Money and Preferments to profess the Romish Religion; and if the Elder
Branches fail, Rome gets this Advantage, that they have a Prospect of
succeeding. This is sufficient to show that, next under God, the Welfare of the
Protestant Interest does depend from the Good Union of England and Holland and
the Northern Crowns, not only to Support it abroad, but even to keep it up in
their own Dominions: This Good Union and Correspondence is most especially
necessary between the two former, and the Enemies of our Religion can hardly
compass their Designs but in setting us together by the Ears, in which ('it is to
be feared) they meet but with too much Encouragement from the People on both
sides.

The Second, The Marechal of Villeroy sent a Trumpet to the Prince of Vaudemont
to notify to him, that a Courier had passed through the Marechal of Catinat's
Army the day before, going to the French King with an Account of the Prince of
Conti's Election to the Crown of Poland, and that he had been proclaimed King
by the Cardinal Primate before the Courier came away from Warsaw: The same day
all our Artillery was drawn off from the Batteries upon the Retrenchment, and
paraded upon the Height near the Windmill of Ganshoren, the Post where it had
been before at our first coming to this Camp; it was at first supposed that
this bringing of the Artillery together was for a Feu de joye for the Duke of
Saxony's Election to the Crown of Poland, but it was brought from thence to
incamp in the Rear of the Second Line two or three days after. The Fourth in
the Evening, all the Artillery in the Marechals of Villeroy and Boufler's
Armies being drawn up together in a Line upon a Height between them both toward
Brussels, it was thrice fired, with as many rounds of Small-shot in both
Armies, for the News of the Prince of Conti's Election to be King of Poland,
and the same thing was done in all the other Armies of France by the King's
Order. The Fifth, My Lord Portland went to the second Conference with the
Marechal of Bouflers privately as before, and it was held in the same place in
the open Field; several General Officers and others waited upon the Marechal of
Bouflers to the place of Conference, and the Marechal told My Lord Portland,
that if his Lordship would come attended with the Generals and other principal
Officers of our Army, they should be very Welcome: Orders were given this
Evening for all the Horses to Graze in the daytime, thereby to spare Forage,
which began now to grow very scarce about our Army; The Horses belonging to the
Infantry grazed accordingly the next day before our Camp, toward Zellich,
Releghem and Wemmel, having a good Detachment to cover them; of which the
Marechal of Bouflers having Intelligence, he came with about 30 Squadrons to
disturb them, and all our Graziers were forced to come back into the Camp
without any considerable Loss; but upon first notice on our side, the Earl of
Athlone was commanded out with about 20 Squadrons of Horse with orders not to
engage himself in any Action, only to observe the French and shelter the
Retreat of our Graziers: Several Squadrons of the French Horse and ours came
very near one another and drew up in Opposition, a deep hollow way remaining
between them, and faced one another for a while, the Trumpets and Kettle-drums
making a very good Entertainment at the same time on both sides, without any
Disturbance; but at last one of our Troopers, or some body else, fired a Shot
or two from behind a Hedge, which alarmed the French, and some of them fired
again, and killed two of our Troopers, which broke up this kind of an
Interview; the French drew off and went their way, and so did we.

The Tenth was held the third Conference between My Lord Portland and the
Marechal of Bouflers in the open Field as before, My Lord went attended this
time by about twenty Persons of note from our Camp, among whom were the Earl of
Rivers Lieutenant General, and the Earl of Essex, Mr. Hill His Majesty's Envoy
at Brussels and Treasurer of the Army, and Mr. Stepney the King's Envoy to
several Princes of Germany, lately arrived from thence, and several others: The
Marechal of Bouflers received them very kindly being presented to him by My
Lord Portland, and desired the Dukes of Roquelaure, Luxembourg and
Guiche-Grammont to entertain them in Conversation whilst he and My Lord should
go aside to talk of Business.

The French Plenipotentiaries gave in at last their Project of a General Peace
with the Allies this day; the Affairs of Poland had not succeeded according to
the Desires and Expectations of the French Court, Monsieur de Pointy's
Expedition had produced nothing remarkable but the Sacking of Carthagena and
the Galleons were safe; but Pointy himself seemed not to be so now, and the
French were very apprehensive of his meeting with Admiral Nevil, that had been
sent from England to the West Indies with a strong Squadron to observe him, and
there were several Reports at present in Europe which were not at all
favorable to Pointy, and the Parties concerned were very much afraid that they
should have no great Share in the Booty made at Carthagena; and though Pointy
should escape Nevil yet he had another Risk to run, and that was his getting
into Bresl: As for the Siege of Barcelona, this place was very obstinately
defended by the Spaniards, who had all the Forces they were Masters of
Catalonia, concerned in the Defense by a Communication between the Town and the
Army by the Fort of Monjouy, and which within and without amounted to about
17000 Men; whereas the French were not above 27 or 28000 strong, and too weak
to take up the Posts all about the Town, but were forced to leave the Quarter
of Monjouy open, which served for a Communication between the Besieged and the
Spanish Army without, where they had not then above six or seven thousand Men
commanded by the Vice roy of Catalonia; this made the Siege of Barcelona
doubtful, and there was no likelihood of taking the place as yet: The French
did not therefore think it convenient to delay the giving in of their Project
any longer, and it was delivered in this day in Congress to the Mediator,
consisting of three Heads (according to the Tenor of the full Powers which the
French Plenipotentiaries had of Treating with the Emperor and Empire, the King
of Spain, the States General and their Allies) and 37 Articles. The French King
by this Project offered chiefly (in relation to the Empire) either to restore
Strasbourg in the Condition it was when taken, or to give in exchange all the
places he had in Brisgow and Alsatia on the right side of the Rhine, as
Brisack, Fribourg, etc. and the Fort of Kell on the same side of the Rhine
opposite to Strasbourg; and likewise to restore Philipsbourg, and all other
places taken in the Palatinate or elsewhere in the Empire since the Treaty of
Nimeguen; and in case the Emperor and Empire accepted of the Equivalent for
Strasbourg, that then the Rhine should serve as a common Limit to Germany and
France all above Philipsbourg, and thereupon that the Emperor and Empire should
have no Forts nor Fortifications from thence upon the left side of the Rhine,
nor the French upon the right side of it; according to which Propositions if
agreed to, the New Town of Brisack on the left side of the Rhine, the Bridge of
Philipsbourg and the Work that covers it on the same side, were to be
demolished by the French, in delivering of those places up to the Empire; and
the French retaining Strasbourg and Fort-Louis were to demolish all the Forts
upon the Islands of the Rhine in both these places, and the Works upon the
right side of the Rhine opposite to Fort-Louis; but the Fortifications on the
other side of the Rhine opposite to Strasbourg were to be delivered up to the
Empire as part of the Equivalent for this Town: The French King offered
likewise to restore the Duchy of Lorraine (notwithstanding the Pretensions he
had by virtue of the Treaty of Nimeguen) in the State and Condition that
Charles the 4th enjoyed it in the Year 1670, just before it was seized by the
French; only he reserved to himself the Sovereign Property and Possession of
the Town of Saar-Louis and a Territory of half a League about that place, for
which the Duke of Lorraine should have an Equivalent somewhere else, in which
he should have a Sovereign Property and Jurisdiction himself. The Substance of
this Project in relation to Spain was, to restore first, all that had been
taken either in Flanders or Catalonia since the War to His Catholic Majesty.
2ly, The Town of Luxembourg taken since the Treaty of Nimeguen, or else to give
an Equivalent for it; which Equivalent was left in Blank in the Project, but
was given out by Reports to be Maubeuge upon the Sambre, Conde upon the Scheld;
Menin upon the Lys, and the Town and Chatellenie of Ipres. 3ly, To revoke all
the Re-unions made since the Treaty of Nimeguen, which by virtue of this Treaty
were to be restored: And lastly, To give back the Town and Castle of Dinant in
the Condition they were when taken. As for what related to Holland in this
Project, it does not belong to the Affairs of War hereabouts, and therefore I
shall not take notice of it; only I shall add, that the Peace made between
France and Savoy in the Year 1696, was to be comprehended in the General
Treaty, and by the 35th Article all those that should be named on both sides by
common Consent, either before the Ratification or within six Months after;
which was the only one that could be interpreted to have any relation to
England; and may be, My Lord Portland's Conferences with the Marechal of
Bouflers were about this Project in relation to England, which (by reason the
French had not yet acknowledged His Majesty) could not be inserted in the
General one we are now mentioning; And lastly, The French allowed the Allies to
consider of this Project, till the 20th day of August following Old Style,
after which if they did not consent to it before or upon the said day, they
pretended to be at liberty of altering the Conditions and making new Offers;
But if the Treaty were concluded between France and the Allies, that then the
King of Sweden as Mediator, and any other King's, Princes and Republics might
give their Guarranty for the Faithful Execution and Observation of the same.

But to return from the Congress to the Camp; the 13th the King, having
reviewed the English Horse and Dragoons and the German Troops some time before
at Diegom, began the Review of his Infantry this day, and the five eldest
Brigades, being those of the Guards, Haro, Orkney, Fairfax and Ingoldesby, drew
out in the little plain without the Retrenchment between Ganshoren and Jette to
pass before His Majesty, the General Officers saluting at their proper Posts;
the 14th the Regiments of Foot of Selwyn, Trelawny and Earl, having Landed
lately at Willemstadt from Edgland, came up to the Camp, where they were posted
in a third Line in the Rear of Orkeney's Brigade; the Duke of St Albans and
Major General Stewart, that had passed along with them, came some days before
to Court. The 15th Tiffin and Maitland's Brigades reviewed before His Majesty,
with Sir Henry Bellasis Lieutenant General, Sir David Collier and my Lord Cutts
Major Generals at the head of them, but Brigadier Maitland's Regiment did not
appear this day because the Clothing was not yet come from England. The 16th
His Majesty reviewed Selwyn's Brigade (being the three Regiments lately come
over) and Belcastels, Major General Stewart saluting on the Right, and the
Prince of Hesse on the Left. The Marechal of Bouflers and my Lord Portland had
the fourth Conference this day in a Meadow just without the Town of Halle,
where his Lordship went attended with several of our Generals and other Chief
Officers, among whom were Lieutenant General Bellasis, Major Generals Ramsay,
Earl, Lord Cutts and Lumley, and my Lord Raby, having all of them a very fine
Retinue both of Servants and Horses along with them: The Chief Officers that
came on Bouflers side, were Count de Tallard, Count de Gasse, and the Duke of
Roquelaure Lieutenant Generals, the Marquis de Crenan and Monsieur de Pracontal
Major Generals, etc. there were a great many Embracings on both sides at the
first meeting, and great expression of Respect and Esteem, and the Marechal of
Bouflers received our General Officers with abundance of Civility, as they were
presented to him by my Lord Portland, taking particular Notice of those whom he
had occasion to hear of in the Siege of Namur; the Generals and other Officers
on both sides entertained one another in Conversation whilst the Marechal and
my Lord held their Conference; several went into the Town to drink a Glass of
Wine together, and others into the French Camp it self, where they were made
very welcome; but my Lord Portland and the Marechal of Bouflers, having conferred
together for some time in the open Field, went at last into a House of the Town
together, and Sentries were posted upon the Doors to hinder any body from
coming near; and it was pretty late when my Lord and his Company returned this
Night. The 17th the King reviewed several Brigades of the Dutch Infantry, and
men begun now to talk of the Kings leaving the Army to go to Loo, and that the
Conferences between my Lord Portland and the Marechal of Bouflers had brought
Matters to a very good Issue, not only in relation to His Majesty's Affairs,
but those of a General Peace.

The French had now been encamped a considerable while, Bouflers near Halle and
Villeroy about St. Quintin Linneck, and Forage begun to be scarce about their
Armies; this made them resolve to march into the Paysd' Alost and Forage the
Country all thereabouts, and between the Scheld and the Canal of Brussells.
The 17th the heavy baggage of the two Armies was commanded away toward
Grammont for the more convenient march of the Armies into our Country; the
18th the Marechal of Villeroy's marched upon the Right from the Camp between
Goick and Struhem in very good Order (because it was to advance pretty near to
our Army) for fear of our Parties, and came to incamp with the Right near the
Abbey of Affleghem, and Left at Bardeghem; and that of the Marechal of Bouflers
marched in the same order upon the Left, to incamp with the Left near
Affleghem, and right between Sandvord and Asche. The 19th Bouflers Army
continued to march upon the Left, to change Ground for Villeroy's Army to have
the right; and encamped with the Right at Bardeghem, and Left toward St. Amand
upon the Scheld below Dendermond. The 22th both Armies marched to rectify
their Camp and take up the Country between Brussells and Dendermond,
Villeroy's Army came to incamp more toward Brussells, the Right making an
Elbow between Asche and Sandvord facing to Halle; the rest of the Camp made a
Line from Asche to the little Village of Peck near Opwick behind the Brook of
Eiche, where was the Left of this Army, and the Marechal of Villeroy's Quarter
at Maseele between Affleghem and Asche; that of Bouflers made a movement at the
same time, to incamp in a Line with Villeroy more back toward the Dender which
was now in his rear, the Right was at Opwick near the Left of Villeroy's Army,
and the Left at Wiese, where the Marechal of Bouflers had his Quarter within
half a League of Dendermond; and the Marechal of Bouflers Camp formed an Elbow
here upon the Left facing toward Dendermond, as Villeroy's did at Asche and
Sandvord to face toward Halle and Brussells: The French lost 40 or 50 Horses
this day, and had several Prisoners taken by some of our Parties sent out from
the Regiments, which had been commanded behind the Canal to cover it upon this
march of the Enemies, who were now encamped within two Leagues almost in a
parallel with it.

This near Neighborhood of the French to the Canal and the Scheld, obliged us
equally to look to security of the Countries covered by them, and to prevent
their passing of either; and according to the situation of Places and the
Positions of our Camps, the Canal seemed to be designed for the Care of our
Brabant Army, and the Scheld for that of Flanders; wherefore His Majesty upon
the first News of Villeroy's and Bouflers marching to come nearer the Canal,
ordered Belcastel's and Oxenstern's Brigades (making eleven Battallions) to
march on the 18th and incamp between the Burnt-bridge and Willebrook, where
they were to be joined by Colonel Murray's and Scheltinga's Regiments already
posted upon the Canal; my Lord Tiviot Major General was commanded the same way
with five Regiments of Dragoons, being those Tiviot, Essex, Rosse, Jedborough
and Mirmont; and all these Regiments together, Foot and Dragoons, made about
9000 Men under the command of Count de Noyelles Lieutenant General: Upon this
removal of Oxenstern's and Belcastel's Brigades to march behind the Canal, that
of Selwyn was ordered to incamp at Laacken in Belcastel's place; Anhalt's
Brigade encamped before the Fort of Monterey, marched through the Town upon
this, to incamp at Cockelbergh and fill up the Room of Oxenstern's; and the
Brigade of Horse of Oost-frise encamped before the Fort of Monterey, in lieu of
that of Foot of Anhalt; Infantry being more necessary in our Camp, as we were
now entrenched, than Horse.

As for the Elector, he had been forced to leave the Camp of Nevel since the
11th to come to Ghendt for his Health, being very much troubled with sore Eyes;
but his Army had a little more plenty of Forage, that Corn being now ripe,
which was not good for Horse when it was Green. The 17th the Elector received
an Express from His Majesty to give him notice that the Marechals of Villeroy
and Bouflers were to march the next day toward the Canal of Brussels and the
Scheld; and therefore that it would be necessary for His Electoral Highness to
send twenty Battallions and all the Dragoons of his Army to incamp about
Dendermond, there to oppose the Passage of the Scheld by the French; and all
his Cavalry under the Cannon of Audenarde, to incamp on the Brabant side of the
Scheld and disturb the Enemies Convoys, who after the next March would be far
from their Frontier Garrisons, and therefore very much incommoded by them, and
that the rest of his Army should get behind the Canal between Ghendt and
Bruges: Orders were likewise sent by the Elector to the Governor of Dendermond
to let the Waters out to overflow the Country about this Town, which for this
reason is strongly situated at the Confluence of the Scheld and the Dender,
having abundance of Water at command by the Tides coming up the Scheld beyond
it, and the lowness of the Country on both sides especially at the mouth of the
Dender; so that with the Sluices they have at Dendermond they can drown all the
flat Country about it and render it inaccessible. The Elector who was now at
Ghendt (as I have just now said) repaired back to the Camp the same day, upon
the first News of the Motions of the French, to regulate the Marches and
Operations of the Army upon this Conjuncture.

The 18th General Heyden marched by the Elector's Orders with all the
Brandenbourg Foot being 18 Battallions (which, with the two Battallions of the
Electoral Prince of Bavaria already behind the Scheld, made 20, the Number
thought convenient by His Majesty) two Regiments of Brandenbourg Dragoons, and
three Squadrons of Horse of the same Nation, and the Dutch Regiment of Dragoons
of Holstein-Ploen toward Dendermond for the Defense of the Scheld, where
General Heyden encamped this day at Grimberg Opsandt near that Town; the two
Brigades of Ransaw and Holstein-Norbourg that had encamped all this while apart
upon the Right about Landeghem were ordered to come and incamp in the Line in
the place of the Brandenbourg Foot, and Fagel's Regiment was detached to cover
the Canal of Bruges: The same day the Elector had Advice that the Marechal of
Catinat was marched with the remainder of his Army (Montrevel being at
Grammont) behind the Lines from Harlebeck. The 19th the Elector left the Army
of a sudden to go to Brussels, and the Command of the Army remained to the
Prince of Nassau-Sarbruck, who on the 20th received Advice that the Marechal of
Catinat was marched from the Lines to pass the Scheld, of which he sent an
Express to Prince Vaudemont at Brussels. The French being now so near
Dendermond and the Scheld, had very much alarmed the Inhabitants of the Pays de
Waes who sent to the Prince of Nassau to desire his special Protection, and to
take care for the Defense of the Scheld, where the Troops already posted about
Dendermond did not seem sufficient; therefore the Prince of Nassau sent the
21th twelve pieces of Cannon, with Powder, Ball and other Necessaries to incamp
on the other side of Ghendt at Distelberg, there to be ready to join General
Heyden upon occasion; and the 23th the Prince himself left the Camp of Oydonck
and Nevel, being attended by Major General Salisch and the Duke of
Holstein-Norbourg Brigadier, with the Troop of the Friseland Guards, the
Regiment of Horse of Nassau-Sarbruck, and six Battallions, being those of
Nassau Walloon, Holstein-Norbourg, Lochman, Dona, Harsolt and Willekens, and
twelve pieces of Cannon with the Kettle-drum; with which he marched through
Ghendt to get behind the Scheld for the further Security of it at this time,
and encamped with his Right at Huysen and Left near Melle-veer upon the River,
where the twelve pieces of Cannon that had been sent to Distelberg came to his
Camp and made up his Artillery to consist here of 24 pieces of Cannon: The rest
of the Army which remained in the Camp of Nevel was under the Command of Count
d'Arco General of the Bavarians, and Lieutenant General Opdam of the Dutch. The
24th, the Prince of Nassau went to visit all the Posts along the Scheld,
between Calcken and Melle-veer, and he ordered the Dragoons of Holstein-Ploen
that had marched with General Heyden to come back to his Camp at Huysen. The
25th both the Troops of Brandenbourg and Holland began to work upon some
Retrenchments for the Defense of the most dangerous Passages of the Scheld; and
the 26th General Heyden and Major General Salisch went to view the several
Posts upon it between Calcken and Dendermond; for below Dendermond there was no
great Danger, the Scheld being very large and a great Tide coming up, which
rendered it very difficult for an Enemy to make Bridges over if there were any
manner of Force to oppose them; and therefore the French could not pretend to
attempt the passage of this River but between Dendermond and Ghendt, and
consequently if they had such a Design, they must have passed the Dender (as
they were now encamped) between Alost and Dendermond to come near this part of
the Scheld. The 27th a Disposition was made for the Troops to incamp along the
Scheld for the Defense of the most dangerous passages of it, in the manner
following; over against Basserode below Dendermond one Battallion, at
Dendermond one Battallion, at Appels-veer one Battallion, upon Berleer Heath
nine Battallions, and the Dragoons of Marwitz, the Horse-Grenadiers, the
Grand-Musqueteers and the Gens d'Armes with General Heyden: At Vtberg the
Dragoons of his Electoral Highness and three Battallions, and over against
Schellebeck three Battallions more, all these made the Troops of Brandenbourg
commanded by General Heyden. The two Battallions of the Electoral Prince of
Bavaria were posted at Witteren, where they were to be joined by three more of
the same Nation now expected daily from the Rhine: The rest of the Posts along
the Scheld toward Ghendt were taken up by the Dutch Troops which came with the
Prince of Nassau-Sarbruck, who during the Elector's absence, did now command
the Army in Flanders.

This was the Method taken for the guard of the Scheld, but the French did not
express any Design that way, they seemed only to content themselves with
subsisting of their Army in this Country, which was now open to them (as they
were encamped) to the very Confluence of the Scheld and the Rupelle within two
Leagues and little more of Antwerp, where they found abundance of all manner of
Forage, no Armies having encamped all this War thereabouts to destroy it, or
to discourage the Boors from Tilling of the Ground, or frighten them out of the
Country; but if the French were so conveniently encamped for Forage, they
suffered for it another way by the Difficulties they must meet with to get
Provisions into their Camp, at such a distance from the Frontier Towns: Ath
being newly taken, they could have no great Magazines there, and therefore they
were forced to have their Bread and Provisions from Mons and Tournay, which
places were far distant from them: To level these Difficulties as much as was
possible, Monsieur de Courtebonne was detached with ten Battallions and twelve
Squadrons from Bouflers Army to go and incamp near Mons for the Communication
of that place with the Army; Monsieur de Montrevel was already encamped at
Grammont (as we have said before) to cover the Convoys from the Scheld to
Villeroy's Camp upon his advancing to St. Quintin-Linneck: But now the Convoys
from Mons to the Armies being very difficult, because it lay so remote and all
Land-carriage, and some thing exposed to our Army at Brussels; and therefore
that most of the Bread and Provisions must come from Tournay and the Scheld,
for which Montrevels little Body at Grammont was not sufficient to furnish so
many Escortes, for this reason the Marechal of Catinat marched from within the
Lines of Courtray, to post himself at Helchin upon the Scheld for the security
of Convoys by Water from Tournay to Renay, and thence by Land to Grammont;
whence, being Escorted by Detachments from Montrevels Army, they were sent by
the Dender to Alost for the use of the Army, where the French had now several
Battallions in Garrison; and there were Discourses at first that they had a
design not only to Fortify this plaee, but also Ninove and Grammont, thereby
to be Masters of the Dender as far as Dendermond it self; but as it has
appeared, their Garrison in Alost was only for the present occasion. Catinat
being obliged to leave the Lines and post himself upon the Scheld for the
Security of Convoys to the two Armies beyond Alost, the Marquis de la Mothe,
who commanded a Body of Eleven Battallions and Six Squadrons between Ipres and
Furnes, marched to post himself within the Lines between Ipres and Comines upon
the Lys and observe the Troops we had left at Nevei; And most of the French
Troops being now near the Scheld, Major General Fagel who Commanded a small
Camp about Newport, sent several Regiments to post themselves about Bruges
there to be ready to march toward Dendermond if the Marechals of Villeroy and
Bouflers offered to pass the Dender, and endeavor to force the Scheld: The
French, however, thought of nothing else at present but destroying the Forage
in this plentiful Country, and as soon as they came to incamp hereabouts, the
Marechal of Villeroy went to view with a strong Escorte, all the Country to
the very confluence of the Rupelle and the Scheld over against Rupelmonde,
where the Spaniards have a little Fort called the Fort of Ste Marguerite, and a
small Garrison in it; this gave the Allarm as far as Antwerp, and fearing that
the French might seize this Fort, which would cut off the Communication between
Brussells and Antwerp, a Reinforcement of Spaniards was sent from the Citadel
by the Governor of Antwerp for the security of the place; but the French made
no attempt against it, only they sent parties sometimes upon the Banks of the
Rupelle, which fired once or twice upon the Barge or Vessel that carries
Passengers every day between Antwerp and Willebrook, where the passage to and
from Brussels is by the Canal in a Track-Schout or Barge that goes 'twice every
four and twenty Hours; And thus I come insensibly to His Majesty's Camp near
this Place, and therefore to speak of our Affairs on this side.

We have left the King reviewing of the Infantry of his Army Brigade by
Brigade, and taking care for the safety of the Canal upon the late Motions of
the French, with some thoughts at the same time of leaving the Army and going
shortly to Loo. On the 20th the King continued to review several Regiments of
Foot, and Lucq's Brigade and the German Foot in the States Service reviewed
before His Majesty this day; afterward the King saw my Lord Albemarle's
Carabiniers and Dopft's Dragoons exercise, which they did with a great deal of
Dexterity and order; My Lord of Albemarle was sent this day by His Majesty to
the Hague, and the Fourth Troop of Guards marched out of the Camp to post it
self in Relays for the Guard of His Majesty's Person between Breda and Loo: In
the Evening the Elector, who had left the Camp of Nevel the day before, and lay
the same Night at Antwerp, came to Brussells, and after having paid a Visit to
the Electrice, he went to wait upon His Majesty at his Quarter at Cockelberg.
The 21th the King went to take his Leave of the Electrice and of the Princess
of Vaudemont; 22th the King reviewed Haxhawsen's Brigade of Danes, and the Duke
of Wirtemberg and Major General Count d' Alfeldt saluted at the head of it. The
23d my Lord Portland had the Fifth Conference with the Marechal of Bouflers
about half way between the two Camps, but the King being to leave the Army the
next morning, my Lord had not much Company with him; the Chief of our Officers
that attended him were Major General Collier, the Earl of Arran, my Lord Raby
and Brigadier Ingoldesby, etc. as for the Marechal of Bouflers he had much the
same attendance as before. We had a great many of our Maroders out of our Army
this day, which were met by the Marechal of Bouflers a great way out toward
the French Camp, he advised them to go back or else that they were in danger of
being taken Prisoners, but our Soldiers told him that a Peace was made, and
that there was no great danger of it; this answer made him smile, and he was so
Civil as to get this Officers to command them back to our Camp: In the Evening
His Majesty was pleased to declare Brigadier Dompre of the Dutc-Horse, Major
General of the States Forces; and the Elector was late with the King this
Night, but came again very early the next Morning to see His Majesty go away
for Holland, most of the Chief Officers of the Army came to Court at the same
time: His Majesty left the Army about seven or eight this Morning being the
24th, the Elector took his leave at the Kings Quarter and went back to
Brussests, and the King went on to pass the Canal at Vilvorde and go from
thence by Malines to Breda, Prince Vaudemont went as far as Vilvorde in His
Majesty's Coach, where he took his leave of the King and then came back to the
Camp to command the Army in Chief, and the Duke of St. Albans and my Lord
Portland accompanied His Majesty in the Coach to Breda; whence his Lordship
went the next day for the Hague to conferr with our Ambassadors and the Chief
of the Allies touching his Negotiations with the Marechal of Bouflers; but the
King went to Dieren, where His Majesty tarried several days, and thence to Loo,
there to take the Divertisements of the Season.

Prince Vaudemont, being now Commander in Chief of our Army in Brabant,
reviewed Haxhausen's Brigade of Danes and Brigadier Muitland's Regiment on the
27th. because he had been indisposed when they reviewed before the King. The
Electrice of Bavaria was brought to bed this Afternoon of a Prince, and in the
Night all the Artillery was fired thrice round the Ramparts, and there were
abundance of Fireworks and great Illuminations in Town upon this occasion:
Eppingers and Lloyd's Dragoons which had hitherto kept with the Camp at
Cockelberg, were commanded this day to march behind the Canal and incamp with
the rest of the Dragoons under the Command of Lieutenant General de Noyelles.
The 28th the Army Forag'd beyond Malines and Louvain on the other side of the
Dyle, Count d'Alfeldt Commanded the Escorte which was ordered to take two days
Bread, because the Army could not Forage so far and return the 29th. This
scarcity of Forage was very troublesome to the Army, and the Prince, to make it
subsist as easy as 'twas possible, in a Camp which we could not abandon,
ordered all the Horses belonging to the Infantry, with all the Artillery
Horses, and those belonging to the Bread-Waggons to be sent to Graze in the
Meadows along the Rupelle and the Dyle about Malines, and detachments were made
at the same time from the Army, being a weekly Command under a Field Officer,
to cover them; one for the English and another for the Duteh: There were yet
two or three Forage days about our Camp which were reserved for the Horse, but
the Chief Officers and Colonels of the Foot, and others that were obliged to
have Horses in the Camp had orders on the 31th to send for dry Forage from the
Magazines of Brussels, for which they were to pay nine Stivers a Ration; This
day in the Evening the Elector, being attended with his Court, came to see the
Camp, and rid along both the Lines, and went to see the Retrenchments we had
made both for the Securities of the Camp and to cover the Town; but the King
keeping still his Quarter at Cockelberg, where most part of his Camp-Baggage
was left, and a Guard mounting daily upon it (His Majesty being resolved to
come back again, if the French did attempt any thing during the remainder of
the Campaign) the Elector therefore thought it fit to go back again and command
the Army in Flanders, and execute the Design that had been agreed upon at
Brussels of advancing with the said Army as far as Rousselar, where it could
now subsist conveniently for Forage; which the Marechal of Catinat could not
hinder, whilst the Marechals of Villeroy and Bouflers were encamped so near the
Canal of Brussels and so far removed from their Frontier. For the Marechal of
Catinat could not pretend to pass the Lys and dispute this Camp with the
Elector, unless he was reinforced by Montrevel's Troops encamped at Grammont,
in which case the Marechals of Villeroy and Bouflers could not subsist where
they were, without making great Detachments from their Armies to Grammont and
the Scheld, to make good their Communication with their Frontier, and secure
their Convoys, which otherwise could not come to their Camps without very great
Difficulties, the Garrison of Audenarde laying unluckily in the way to cut them
off; then, if the Marechals of Villeroy and Bouflers made such Detachments, the
Prince could send proportionable Detachments from his Army to guard the Scheld;
or if the joined Marechals did send any greater Reinforcements to the Marechal
of Catinat, then Prince Vaudemont could (by slipping of Troops from his Army
behind the Canal and so to the Scheld) defend the Pays de Waes himself, and
General Heyden could have marched from thence to join and reinforce the Elector
at Rousselar: But if only Montrevel joined the Marechal of Catinat, and
Villeroy and Bouflers made no other Detachments from their Armies but for the
Post of Grammont to seoure their Convoys, it would be sufficient for the Prince
to send a Brigade of Foot and two Regiments of Dragoons to guard the Scheld
below Dendermond, whilst General Heyden should provide for the Defense of it
above between Dendermond and Ghendt; where the passage of this River is most
practicable, but was at present in no great danger whilst the French were on
the other side of the Dender toward the Canal of Brussels and the lower
Scheld; or otherwise if both the said Marechals should pass the Dender to get
between Dendermond and Ghendt, then all the Troops we had upon the Canal of
Brussels were to pass the Scheld at Rupelmonde and reinforce General Heyden,
and other competent Detachments were to be made by the Prince to put that
General in a Condition to hinder the joined Marechals from attempting to pass
the River: This was the Disposition made between the Elector and the Prince at
Brussels for the marching of the Army of Flanders to take the Camp of Rousselar.

According to this Resolution, the Elector left Brussels the second of August.
August and came to Antwerp, where he had ordered Don Bernardo de Quiros the
Spanish Plenipotentiary Ambassador at the Congress of Ryswick for the Treaty of
Peace to meet him, there to conferr together about the Affairs relating to that
Negotiation. The Third the Elector came to Ghendt, and Don Bernardo de Quiros
went back for the Hague; and the same day our Flanders Army marched in two
Bodies in order to take the Camp of Rousselar the next; the Spanish and
Bavarian Troops which had remaind'd in the Camp of Nevel marched to Thilt by
Vinck, and Arseel, where they were joined by the two Battallions of the
Electoral Prince of Bavaria which had been all this while behind the Scheld,
and three more of the same Troops, come some days before from the Rhine and
encamped at Distelberg, being a third Battallion of the Elector's Guards, and
two of Litsebourgh: The Dutch Forces and Brandenbourg Horse which had continued
at Nevel under the Command of Lieutenant Generals Opdam and Heyden and Major
General Lindeboom, marched by Grammen and Wouterghem to Denterghem, where the
Prince of Nassau-Saarbruck joined them with the Troops and Artillery he had
with him at Heusen behind the Scheld, and encamped with the Right at Roode
Vierschaer, and the Left at Vondeghem, Denterghem (which was the Prince of
Nassau's Quarter) remaining between the two Lines in the Body of Foot. As for
General Heyden, he had the Guard of the Scheld committed to his care, and the
18 Battallions of Brandenbourg Troops, the Regiment of Dragoons and three
Squadrons of that Elector's Horse under his command, were posted according to
this Disposition, at Dendermond one Battallion, from Dendermond to Appels-veer,
the Boors of the Pays de Waes were to keep Guard till the coming of the Brigade
of Foot that was to be sent by the Prince; the main Body upon the Heath of
Berleer, consisting of nine Battallions and the Horse and Dragoons, was to take
care of the Posts upon the River from Appels to Vtberg; at Vtberg, were posted
two Battallions; at Schellebelle, upon the Height over against the Village, two
Battallions; above Wetteren upon the Right, two Battallions to guard the Scheld
between Wetteren-Noort and Quatrecht; and higher up toward Ghendt one
Battallion upon the Heath of the Chateau d'Ansaut, to guard as far as
Claverken; and from thence to Ghendt the Scheld was to be guarded by the
Garrison of the Town; all these Regiments had Orders to incamp double to make a
larger Front thereby, and the Boors of the Pays de Waes were commanded to have
Men of the Country with Arms ready, to secure any of the forementioned Posts,
in case all the Brandenbourg Forces should be obliged to join together, by the
Motions of the French to attempt the passage at any one particular place. The
Fourth, The Elector's Army having encamped at Thilt and Denterghem the day
before, marched to join together at Rousselar; the Spaniards and Bavarians from
Thilt by Pettem, Ardoye, and Baveren, and the Dutch and Brandenbourghers from
Denterghem by Mulenbeck, Ingelmonster and Emelgem, and so encamped all together
in a Line of Battle with the Right at St. Thomas's Chapel between Rousselar
and Hooghleede, and the Left near the Bridge upon the Highway from Rousselar
to Caecktem; the Elector came this day to the Camp from Ghendt, a good Escorte
being left by the Army to attend His Highness along the way, and both the
Elector and Prince of Nassau-Sarbruck had their Quarters in the Town of
Rousselar: This Army consisted at present of 29 or 30 Battallions, 18 having
been left behind the Scheld, two upon the Canal of Bruges, (being those of
Fagel and Reinard) four sent to Audenarde, and one left in Dendermond. The
Marechal of Catinat, whose business it was to observe the Motions of our Army
in Flanders, left Helchin upon the Scheld on the Seventh, and not being able to
hinder the Elector from taking the Camp of Rousselar, he came on the Fourth to
post himself behind the Lys, the Foot between Menin and Comines, and the Horse
at Courtray to Forage without the Lines: And the Fifth, Monsieur Montrevel
detached eleven Battallions and a Regiment of Dragoons of his Body at Grammont
to post themselves at Helchin, there to be in a readiness to join Catinat upon
occasion, and the Brigade of Mouroux from Villeroy's Army, and another from
Bouflers, were commanded to reinforce Montrevel, and make up the Number he had
sent to Helchin.

The Prince, being obliged on his side to provide at present for the Safety of
the Scheld, and the Reinforcing of General Heyden upon occasion, commanded on
the third Major General Stewart to march with Tiffin's Brigade (except
Saunderson's Regiment) by the Canal to Willobrook and so to Rupelmonde, where
he was to pass the Scheld, in order to post himself in the Pays de Waes, being
to be reinforced in his March by Eppinger's and Lloyd's Dragoons. The Fourth,
Major General Stewart came with the said Forces into the Neighborhood of
Dendermond, where he disposed them Regiment by Regiment to incamp about the
Villages near the Scheld, his Quarter being at Berlcer; and the Brandenbourg
Troops removed from hence to Heusen, where General Heyden encamped with the
main Body, but the rest of the Brandenbourgers remained posted as before: The
same day in the Morning was a Rencounter near the Wind mill of Releghem,
between Zellich and Wemmel, of a Party of the French Life guards and Dragoons,
with one of Dutch Horse commanded by Colonel Balthuin of the Duke of
Holstein-Pleon's Regiment, where the French were worsted; the Prince had been
informed overnight, that the French had a Design to carry off the next Morning
our Patrouille of Horse, which was sent daily at break of day from one of our
Out-guards to the Wind mill of Releghem, whereupon he ordered that very Night a
Detachment of 250 Horse and 50 Dragoons, to be sent to the Windmill of
Releghem under the Command of Colonel Balthuin, there to put himself in
Ambuscade and expect the French, who accordingly ordered a Squadron of fifty
Horse in the little Plain by the Windmill, and posted himself in a
Neighboring Defile: The French made that night a Detachment of fifty Dragoons
of Ste Hermine's Regiment under the Command of the Sieur Sainfal, and 80 Horse
of the King's House commanded by the Sieur Philipes. Exempt of the Guards, all
which he divided into three Squadrons, to come and carry off our Patrouille;
when, early in the Morning, they came near the Windmill, they met with the
fifty Horse and Dragoons we had in the Plain, and Sainfal, who commanded the
first Squadron, charged them so briskly that they retired into the Defile,
where being pursued by the French, Sainfal got thus into our Ambuscade, where
both he and the Squadron would have been entirely cut off, had not the Sieur
Philipes come and rescued them as well as he could, but by his assistance they
got off after a considerable Loss; about twenty were killed upon the Spot on
both sides, of which fifteen or sixteen were French, and amongst them a
considerable Person who was buried the next day in the Church of Releghem with
Trumpets and Kettle-drum; on our side, the Captain-Lieutenant and
Quartermaster of Wirtemberg's Regiment, a Lieutenant of Prince Philip's, were
wounded and taken Prisoners, and six Troopers either killed or Prisoners, and
two wounded; On the French side, a Sub-Brigadier of the Life-guards, two Life
guardmen and 12 Dragoons were made Prisoners, and 20 Horses taken and brought
into our Camp: Colonel Balthuin having gained this Advantage, did not think it
convenient to pursue the French, for fear of falling into an Ambuscade himself,
but retired, after this Action, to our Camp.

At this time, not only Forage but likewise Straw was very scarce about
Brussels, and the Soldiers lay very ill for want of it; on the Fifth, My Lord
Cutts, with the Prince's leave, sent a Party to the Village of Mais to fetch
all the Straw that was there, for the use of the Guards and Royal Regiment,
which was above half way between Villeroy's Camp and ours, but where we had
kept a Guard in the Chasteau all this while, the French having on their side a
Safeguard in the Village; this Detachment was made out of the Guards and the
said Regiment, and a Man of a Tent for Straw, who here provided themselves with
it and got back safe into the Camp; the Safeguard was absent at the first
coming of our Party, but returned to his Post before they went off, he reported
that the Marechal of Villeroy had reviewed his Army that day, and therefore had
been obliged to go to the Camp and repair to his Company; and, may be, had it
not been for that, the bringing off of the Straw from this Village could not
have been done without some Skirmish with the French. The Sixth, Colonel
Saunderson's Regiment (the Remainder of Tiffin's Brigade) was ordered to march
behind the Canal of Brussels, and guard it between the Burnt-bridge and the
Fort des Trois Trous on both sides of Vilvorde, being the Post which Colonel
Murray's Regiment had before.

The Ninth in the Evening the two Marechals of Villeroy and Bouflers had Te
Deum Sung at their Quarters for the taking of Barcelona, the Capital City of
the Principality of Catalonia, and afterward all their Artillery and
Small-shot was fired thrice round, and the same thing was done this Evening in
the Marechal of Catinat's Army: This place had been invested the Second of
June, the Trenches opened the Fifth in the Evening, and after having held a
Siege of one and fifty Days from the opening of the Trenches, it began to
Parley the 26th of July, and a Cessation of Arms was agreed upon, but the
Besieged did not consent to Capitulate till the 27th, under pretext of
conferring first with the Chief Officers of the Town, and the next day, of
giving notice to the Viceroy of Catalonia encamped seven or eight Leagues off,
but the French allowing no longer term for the Cessation, the Hostages were
exchanged the 27th in order to Capitulate; yet the Capitulation was not made up
and signed till the 31th, because of the great variety of Business it included,
for the Army, Courts of Judicature Ecclesiastical and Temporal, Civil
Magistrates and Burghers, Barcelona being the Head Town of Catalonia, and all
this Principality surrendered up to the French with it: The Marquis de
Chemerant Brigadier of the Army brought the Capitulation to the French King,
who made him a Marechal de Camp or Major General for this Service; and by it,
the Besieged were to march out of the Town and the Fort of Monjouy (which was
delivered up with it) on the fifth of August, to go thence to Tarragon, with 30
Pieces of Cannon and six Mortars, and to be conducted as far as Martorel upon
the River of Lobregat; a Cessation of Arms was likewise agreed upon by this
Capitulation, between the two Armies till the 22th of August Old Style, during
which time the River Lobregat should serve as a Barrere for the French and
Spaniards, each to keep on their respective side: But I must not forget (whilst
I speak of this Capitulation) to add, That the Article, made by the Besteged
for the Preservation of the Authority and Privileges of the Inquisition-Court
held in this Town, was rejected by the French, and consequently this Court laid
aside whilst Barcelona should be in their Possession, as if 'twas yet a severer
Tribunal than the Military Inquisition of Dragoons. Thus Barcelona fell into
the hands of the French, after a Famons Siege, not so much for the Strength of
the Place, (for it is but weak and ill fortified) as for the Defense that was
made in it, the Number of the Besieged, and that of the Besiegers: The
Besieged, though the whole Army of Spain, by the Communication of the Fort of
Monjouy, was concerned in it, got a great deal of Honor in the Defense of a
large and weak Town, and vigorously pressed with Cannon and Bombs; and the
Prince of Hesse d'Armstadt who was once Colonel of an English Regiment and
Brigadier of His Hajesty's Army, and in a manner trained in our Service in the
War of Ireland, had a very great share in the Glory of so good a Defense; the
French on their side, with a small Army of about 28000 Men, out braved the
great Resistance of all the Spanish Army, and carried it, when they did not
exceed the Besieged by above 10 or 11000 Men; which Consideration must help
very much to set off the Vigor, Boldness and Resolution of the Besiegers, who
ought to have a great deal of Honor allowed them upon this account: It Is true;
that they ransacked all the Forts and Garrisons in Languedor and Provence,
whereby they got a Reinforcement of six or seven thousand Men to repair their
Losses, and were by this means almost as strong at the end of the Siege as at
the beginning of it; but if the number of Burghers that were in Barcelona, who
no doubt had a hand in the Defense of it, be considered, this will not very
much lessen the Glory of taking of it. I do not know the Situation of
Barcelona, yet it can hardly be imagined, but if the Spaniards (having no other
place to defend to put a stop to the Progress of the French Conquests in a
Country where they could not subsist with great Armies) had made by times a
good and strong Retrenchment on one side of Barcelona for to cover their Army,
and at the same time good Fortifications and Outworks on the other, that if
the French had besieged it in such a Posture of Defense, Barcelona could have
taken by them; and even as Barcelona was, if Spain had transported the Troops
they had to spare in Italy since the Peace on that side, it would have been an
Attempt above their Power: As to this last, the Spaniards say that the Duke of
Savoy kept still the Forces on foot he had during the War, and therefore that
they could not leave the Milane's open and exposed to an armed Neighbor, if it
was so, the Duke of Savoy has done, in that, a signal piece of Service to the
French King; as to the first, the Spaniards pretend that the English and Dutch
were to send a good Squadron to their Assistance, and then that Barcelona would
have been in no Danger; for the French Army before this place could not subsist
but by the Communication it had by Sea with Provence and Languedoc, and the
Seaports they were Masters of in Catalonia; and if we had sent a Fleet in the
Mediterranean at that time, the French must not only have raised the Siege, but
the Army could not have got off but with very great difficulty: Whatever reason
the Spaniards might have to expect a Fleet from England and the States, yet no
Man can say that this does excuse them from acting their part in providing for
the Safety of the Place, and putting of it in a good Posture of Defense,
chiefly considering that we had already a Squadron of about twenty Men of War
in the West Indies to watch Pointy's Motions and protect the Galleons, which
must otherwise have fallen into the hands of the French; and may be, this was
as much as England could do at that time, considering our late Money
Difficulties.

Notwithstanding the great Advantages which the French had over the Allies by
this great Conquest; and that the French Plenipotentiaries had given in their
Project the Tenth of the foregoing Month in the very middle of this Siege, and
that no Relief could be expected for the Place, but purely from the vigorous
Defense of the Besieged, yet this did not seem to hasten the Negociations
amongst them at Ryswick: Copies of this Project had been given to the
Plenipotentiaries of the Empire, Spain and Holland, according to the Tenor of
it; and the Project as well as full Powers of the French, being directed to
treat with the Emperor and Empire, the Empire had therefore in the Diet at
Ratisbonne, made a Solemn Deputation to treat on the behalf of all the States
and Princes of Germany with the French King; in which, among the Ecclesiastical
Electors that of Mentz, the Secular, those of Bavaria, Saxony and Brandenbourg;
and out of the College of Princes, for the Catholics, the Arch bishop of
Saltsburg, the Great Master of the Teutonick Order, the Bishops of Wortzburg,
Spire, Constance, Hildersheim, Liege and Munster, the Princes of the House of
Austria, Palatine and Newbourg, etc. and for the Protestants, Brandenbourg for
the Duchy of Magdebourg, Sweden for the Dutchies of Bremen and Deuxponts,
Saxen-Cobourg, Saxen-Gotha, Brandenbourg-Cullenbach, Brunswick-Zell,
Brunswick-Wolfembuttle, Hesse-Cassel, Wirtemberg, Holstein, Anhalt and the
Counts of Wetteravia; out of the Imperial Towns, for the Catholics, Cologne
and Augsburg, and for the Protestants, Francfort and Nuremberg were appointed,
by their Plenipotentiaries at Ryswick to represent the whole Body of the German
Empire, and to treat in its Name with the French King's Ambassadors. These
having a Copy of the Project laid before them, gave in their Answer to it,
wherein they insisted upon the full and entire Restitution of every thing as it
had been established in the Treaty of Westphalia, reserving a Power to the
Emperor and Empire of keeping a Garrison in the Town of Straisbourg, for which
they could not accept of an Equivalent; neither could they allow the French
King to keep Saar-Louis with the pretended District about it in the Duchy or
Lorrain, but that the whole must be restored to that Duke: This was the chief
Substance of their Answer, when at this time the French were pressing the Siege
of Barcelona very hard, that they had taken Ath in Flanders, and that Prince
Lewis of Baden was still on the other side of the Rhine, notwithstanding the
Weakness of the French that way. This Answer seemed to raise great Obstacles to
the forwarding of the Treaty, if the Empire would insist upon it to the last;
and yet notwithstanding these Difficulties, 'twas about this time The first
Conference August the Sixth.
that they began to treat personally at Ryswick in the Mediatour's Chamber,
whereas hitherto the Conferences had been carried on in Writing by the
Mediator, the Allies and the French keeping to their respective Apartments.

The Term given by the French in their Project was now drawing near, but in the
mean while it is fit to see what the Armies were doing in the Field: The two
French Armies commanded by the Marechals of Villeroy and Bouflers, were now
advanced a great way from any of their Frontier Towns, which made Convoys
tedious, and every thing but Forage very scarce in their Camps; and, had it
not been for the Convenience of Water carriage, from Tournay to Renay upon the
Scheld, and from Grammont to Alost by the Dender (no Land carriage remaining
but from the Scheld to Grammont, and from Alost to the Armies which were just
by) it had been impossible for them to have subsisted where they were; and the
great Rains that fell about this time so broke the ways, that the little
Land-carriage they had became extremely difficult, and the Boats could hardly
for the same reason be drawn by Horses: If this made Provisions scarce and dear
in the French Armies, it created no less an Inconveniency for the bringing in
of Forage, and they were forced at this time to cut down vast Quantities of
Fascines for the repairing of the Ways, and the making of Bridges over the
Ditches, being all filled with Water by the excessive Rains. The 12th, the two
Brigades of Foot that had been commanded to Grammont, were ordered to return to
the two Armies, and the 11 Battallious detached from Montrevel came back from
Helchin to their former Post, because the Brandenbourg Troops had not marched
to Rousselar with the Elector, but continued in the Pays de Waes, and therefore
the Marechal of Catinat did not want Assistance for the defense of the Lines:
But the French having consumed by this time all the Forage hereabouts, and
being obliged to Forage the last time on the other side of the Dender toward
Ghendt, began to think of retreating with their Armies and coming nearer to
their Frontiers; and thereupon ordered this day 8000 Men to go and cut Fascines
under the cover of a Brigade of Swissers and some other Battallions, for the
Reparation of the Ways and making Bridges over the Dender, which were carried
to the places appointed, by the Horse and Dragoons; for the Weather was so bad
at this time, that we thought the French could not stir at present, because
they (as some supposed) could not carry off their Artillery; but by the help of
vast quantities of Fascines, and of Trees cut down and laid across under them
in the most dangerous places, they compassed this Difficulty: The Marquis de
Harcourt, who had left Bossu to come and incamp at Solre lower upon the Sambre,
was driven by the Rains from the Banks of this River, to incamp between
Walcourt and Florennes. The 14th, The French having repaired the Ways, and
finished the Bridges over the Dender, the Artillery and heavy Baggage was
commanded away out of both Armies, that of the Marechal of Villeroy passed the
Dender, and that of Bouflers kept on the right side of it. The 15th, The
Marechal of Villeroy's Army marched upon the Left to pass the Dender, and
Prince Vaudemont, who had Information of their Design and of the March of their
Artillery the overnight, ordered then a Detachment of 1500 Horse and 1000 Foot
to be ready the next Morning, with which he went betimes to observe the
Marching off of the French, and see if any Attempt could be made upon their
Rear-guard, having advanced for this end, between Zellich and Asche; but the
French marched off in such order, that no advantage could be taken, and no
other Action happened but that of some Pickeering of our Hussars amongst them,
and thus passed the Dender upon several Bridges at and about Alost, and
encamped with the Right near this Town, and the Left at Denderleuwe, where the
Marechal of Villeroy had his Quarter: The same day the Marechal of Bouflers
marched upon the Right to change Post again with Villeroy, and came to incamp
at Alost, the Dender remaining between them; and 16 Boats came down that River
this day from Grammont to Alost, laden with Biscuit for the use of the Armies
which wanted it very much at present. The 16th, the Artillery and heavy Baggage
marched on before, because of the badness of the Ways, having a strong Escorte
of several Squadrons and Battallions commanded by the Marquis de Crequi
Lieutenant General; The Marechal of Villeroy's Army halted this day, but that
of Bouflers marched from Alost up the Dender, which River was upon the right
Colomn of the March, and came to incamp at Ninove, keeping still on the same
side of the Dender. The 17th, The Marechal of Villeroy's Army marched on upon
the Left toward Audenarde and the Scheld, and came to incamp with the Right
beyond Esche, the Left at Ste Marie-Oudenhove and General Quarter at Steinhuys,
to destroy the Forage, and subsist between the Scheld, the Dender and Ghendt,
where the Armies had not yet encamped this Year; but Bouflers Army halted this
day, and marched on the 18th upon the Right higher up the Dender toward
Grammont, where it encamped for the Convenience of Forage on both sides of the
River, with the Right at Stanberg toward Gamerage, and the Left on the other
side toward the Scheld. The 19th, the Marechal of Villeroy removed his Quarter
from Steinhuys to Ste Marie-Oudenhove upon the Left, where the French and
Swisse Guards, and the Dragoons of Fimareon, had Orders to come and incamp to
cover his Quarter: The Marechal of Bouflers Army being now posted near
Grammont, Monfiour de Montrevel was ordered to incamp at Helchin with the Body
under his command, consisting of 16 Battallions and 20 Squadrons.

These Motions of the French seemed to threaten Audenarde, and we were
apprehensive of it; for the Marechal of Villeroy had gone, at his first coming
to this Ground, to view all the Posts and Avenues about this place, and the
Banks of the Scheld both above and below, with a strong Detachment of the
King's House, Light Horse and Dragoons, as if he designed to Invest it; and the
Siege of Audenarde was discoursed of very hotly upon this occasion, in case the
Peace was not Signed by the 20th Iustant, according to the Time prefixed by the
French in their Project; and it being now just upon the time, every Body longed
to know the Event of that day at Ryswick: The Affairs relating to the
Differences between France, England and Holland were adjusted, and the Treaty
ready to be Signed; Spain had just now lost all Catalonia in the loss of
Barcelona, and therefore had no reason to stand upon very high Terms; and the
Empire had as little Prospect of bringing the French to the Treaty of
Westphalia; this made most People expect that a General Peace would be Signed
that day; but when it came to the very nick of time, the Imperialists pretended
to have a longer time for their Instructions, which they could not have time
enough to Sign at present; and insisted upon having better Terms than those
offered by the French, which in several cases derogated from the Treaty of
Westphalia, and thereupon refused to Sign: Our Plenipotentiaries and those of
Spain and Holland having no Instructions to Sign separately from the rest of
the Allies, were therefore obliged to stand out too: The French, who had their
Measures ready, as if they expected this from the Imperialists, gave in a
Memorial to the Mediator the very next day, in which they laid out the great
Advantages their Master had gained over the Allies in the whole Course of the
Campaign, and especially by the taking of Barcelona, which could not do
otherwise than give him great Hopes of gaining considerably by the farther
Prosecution of the War; and, although the Allies had let the Term given in
their late Project pass, and consequently that they had a Right to enter upon
new Propositions, yet the French King (to show his great Moderation to the
World, and that in the midst of his Conquests he sincerely desired the Peace
and Repose of Christendom) was contented, notwithstanding all his Advantages,
to change and alter nothing in the said Project, but in relation to Strasbourg,
which he did now pretend to keep to himself, and that the Emperor and Empire
should be obliged to take the Equivalent, without any farther liberty of Choice
in that Matter; and likewise, that Spain should yield to him about seventeen
Villages of the Chatellenie of Ath for a Land Communication between Tournay and
Conde; and a farther Term was given in this new Memorial to the Allies, till
the Tenth of September following.

This Memorial made a great Noise at first at Ryswick, and People began to
apprehend it might break off the Negociations; the Imperialists especially
talked very much of renewing the War, and prosecuting of it with greater Heat
and Vigor than it had been hitherto done; and so they had need: But
notwithstanding all this Bustle, they grew calmer by degrees, and this new
Memorial seemed to have been contrived on purpose to obviate all the
Difficulties which otherwise must have occurred in the Choice of the Equivalent
for Strasbourg; for the restoring of Strasbourg, a Sovereign, Free and Imperial
Town, as it was offered by the French, did not accommodate the Emperor nor
indeed the Empire; because then it would still have been at the French King's
Mercy, and must have opened its Gates when ever his Armies should come that way
to pass the Rhine: But the keeping of it accommodated the French King, and the
Equivalent the Emperor; and it could not be expected, that, whilst there was a
Liberty of Choice, the Empire could be brought to accept of the Equivalent but
with very great Difficulties; though, in Truth, the Equivalent was a better
Barrier to the Empire, than the Restoration of Strasbourg in the State it was
in when the French took it, and they would not offer it upon any other Terms;
but the lapsing of the Term given in the first Project, and the putting in this
new Memorial thereupon, was an Expedient to satisfy both Parties, and to
compass their Ends without any Difficulty. And thus the Negociations were not
interrupted by this Memorial, and the French, who seemed to threaten Audenarde
with a Siege, and had brought their Armies toward the Scheld upon the
Expiration of the Term given in their Project, did not think it fit at present
to attempt this Undertaking: I have therefore little to say concerning them in
this place, and so shall come to speak of the Transactions in the Elector's
Camp during these Affairs, which I have left at Rousselar.

The Sixth, the height of Hooghleede commanding very much the Camp, it was
thought fit to alter it, and bring the Right to secure a Post at present of
such Consequence for the Army; which was executed on the Seventh, and the Army
encamped with the Right at Hooghleede, and the Left toward Caectem, extending
it self as much as was possible. A Field-Officer out of every Regiment of Horse
and Dragoons was ordered at the first coming to this Camp, to go with
Quarter-Master-General Ivoy, and see what Forage was to be found in the
Country hereabouts toward Dixmuyde and Ipres, where they found enough for the
Army to have subsisted here, much longer than it did, though some would have
represented to the Elector, that it could not subsist hereabouts for want of
it; but nevertheless this was a very inconvenient Camp another way, because the
Army was but small and far advanced from our Frontier, and the Convoys
difficult, which consequently must Harrass it very much by the greatness of the
Duty; and the Country about it was close and Woody, and very convenient for the
Parties out of Courtray, Menin and Ipres, which made them take daily a great
many Horses: For these Reasons it was thought necessary to bring the Army back
nearer to our Frontier, either toward Dixmuyde or Bruges; and the Elector went
this day to view the Camp of Hantsame and Cortemark near Dixmuyde, and that of
Torhout near Bruges, with an Escorte of 500 Horse; which was not the only
Security His Highness had for this Journey, for Major General Fagel was
marching at the same time that way from Newport, to reinforce his Army at
Rousselar, where he arrived this day with the four Hanover Battallions, of the
Guards, St. Paul, Hulsen and Cinqvilles, and two Dutch, being those of Beyma
and Swansbeck; and by this Reinforcement the Elector's Army consisted now of 35
Battallions: Upon this Motion of Fagel's, Colonel Soutandt had the Guard of the
Canal of Bruges, with his Battallion and those of Fagel and Reinardt; and
Colonel Buchan's and the Lord Lorne's Regiments were ordered to march for
Plassendal to be near Newport. The Elector thought to have kept the Field
longer in this Camp with this small Reinforcement, but the Rains came on so
violently, that it would be a very hard Matter to get Convoys from our
Frontier, and must make Provisions very Scarce and Dear; for this and the
Reasons above mentioned, it was resolved to leave this Camp, and march either
toward Dixmuyde where every thing could come by Water to the Camp, or else
toward Torhout, which was but between three and four Leagues from Bruges; the
first, though very Convenient, was not thought advisable, because then if the
Marechal of Catinat had the Advantage of one March, he would easily get to
Bruges before the Army could come there to cover it; and therefore the Camp of
Torhout, where Bruges and the Canal were at once covered, was thought the most
convenient. Accordingly the Army marched the 15th upon the Right (all the
Infantry upon one Colomn being the Left, and all the Cavalry upon another which
made the Right, and the Artillery and heavy Baggage upon a third within the two
others, and covered by them, toward the Canal of Newport) and came to incamp
with the Right beyond the Chapel of Wynendale with the Wood before it; the
Body of Foot between the Castle of Wynendale on the Right, where the Prince of
Nassau-Saarbruck had his Quarter, and Town of Torhout on the Left, where was
that of the Elector; the Left Wing, being all composed of Brandenbourg Horse
and Pyper's Brigade, extended it self farther upon the Left beyond this small
Town: A Captain of the Bavarians, that had been detached with a Party to cover
the March, and Scower the French Parties which Sculk'd up and down in this
close Country, defeated three of them, and killed three and twenty French,
besides several wounded and Prisoners. The 16th, Major General Fagel marched
back to Newport with the six Battallions under his Command. The 17th, the Army
made a General Forage in the Villages of Hantsame, Cortemarck and Werckene,
where the Elector went in Person; Lieutenant Colonel Pechman of the Bavarian
Guards, who was ordered to Scower the Woods with a good Detachment of Foot,
defeated two French Parties, killed and wounded several, and brought 25
Prisoners of the first, and 19 of the second into the Camp; all the Forragers
had their Arms by the Elector's Orders, and this Affair was managed so well,
that the Army did not lose one Horse. The 19th, the Elector viewed all the
Bavarian Troops in the Heath between Torhout and Wynendale, and went thence to
Bruges, being still troubled with sore Eyes; the same day the Prince of
Nassau-Saarbruck left the Camp to go to the Baths of Aix la Chappelle for his
Health, and Count d'Arco, General of the Bavarians, was left Commander in Chief
of the Army: Upon this going of the Prince of Nassau's to Aix la Chappelle, My
Lord of Athlone had once Orders to go and Command the Army in Flanders, and was
preparing to leave the Prince's Army for that purpose, but how this came to be
altered, is what brings me to speak of the Affairs of our Army in Brabant.

The Marechals of Bouflers and Villeroy being now separated, and marched from
the Neighborhood of the Canal of Brussels, a great deal of our Cavalry could
be spared out of our Camp, where there was hardly any Forage to be had at
present, to go and subsist more conveniently some where else; and therefore all
the Cavalry upon English Pay, being first joined with the Dragoons that had
been posted behind the Canal, marched on the 18th from Diegom to Wavre upon the
Dyle for the Convenience of Forage, but the Dutch Horse being left in this
Camp, were furnished with dry Forage from the States Magazines in the Town:
Upon this March of our English Cavalry to Wavre, the Prince of Tilly left Masy,
and passed the Meuse at Namur to incamp within the Retrenchment upon the Height
of Ste Barbe, there to subsist in the Condros and spare the Forage on this
side for our Cavalry. The both, the Duke of Ormond and the Prince of Hesse left
the Army, the first to go for England and thence to Ireland for his Domestic
Affairs, and the last into Germany, and this day, being the Term given in the
French Project, there was no other Discourse in the Camp but of Peace, but how
this came to fail, is what I have given an account of just now. The 24th, the
Prince gave Orders for all the Artillery and Baggage-Horses to be sent for from
Grazing, and for the Army to be ready to march, upon Information that Bouflers
Army was upon the March toward the Plain of Fleury; the said Marechal having
left the Camp of Stanberg and the Neighborhood of Grammont on the 22th to come
to Enghien, whereupon Count Tillard was left at Grammont with 18 Battallions
and as many Squadrons for the Guard of the Convoys between the Scheld and
Villeroy's Camp, and of the Bread which was Baked in this Town for the use of
the Armies. The 23d, the Marechal of Bouflers continued to march upon the
Right, and came to incamp at Soignies, where he was joined by the Marquis de
Courtebonne and the ten Battallions under his Command, which had been posted
about Mons since Bouflers March toward Dendermond. The French being got so far
toward the Sambre alarmed the Prince, who (as we have now said) ordered all
the Horses to be sent for from Grazing, but did not get into the Camp till the
25th, and the Artillery and heavy Baggage could not march till the next day
toward Louvain; Major General Stewart with Tiffin's Brigade was now upon his
March from the Pays de Waes back to the Canal of Brussels, who, with the Body
commanded by the Count de Noyelles upon this Canal, was to join the Prince's
Army at Louvain. Our English Cavalry and Dragoons at Wavre were to march
toward Namur, who, with the Prince of Tilly and the Garrison we had in the
place, might have covered it till the coming up of the Prince's Army. The 26th,
the Artillery and heavy Baggage began to File off toward Louvain under the
Escorte of a Colonel with 1000 Foot, and the Army had Orders to follow the same
way the next day, to march thence toward the Mchaigne, But Count Nassau
Lieutenant General, and Major General Earl, were to be left at Brussels with 15
Battallions English and Dutch, to incamp within the new Line which was now
almost finished, there to cover the Town. The Prince had sent an Express to Loo
to give His Majesty an account of the Marechal de Boufler's Motions, and of his
Resolutions thereupon; but Namur being at present an Attempt not to be made by
the French, considering the Strength of the place with that of its Garrison,
and the Forces we had about it, and the Backwardness of the Season; and that,
besides, it would put the Army to great Difficulties to march that way without
any pressing Occasion, and Boufler's Army being halted at Soignies where it was
now Hutted, and in no likelihood to stir from thence; it was therefore thought
convenient to countermand this March, and it was accordingly countermanded the
27th; for the English Infantry could not stir but with great Difficulty,
because they wanted Horses to carry their Baggage; two Wagons had been allowed
each Battallion till the coming up to this Camp, which had been hired by the
King the beginning of the Campaign, to supply the present Necessity; but having
been dismissed at the coming to this Ground, only one could be had at present,
and if the Army had been obliged to march, most of the Officers must have left
all their Baggage behind them, for very few had Horses to carry it; and
therefore, not to put them to such a Hardship, it was thought more Expedient to
let the Foot remain where it was, and that it would be sufficient to send the
Dutch Cavalry and Dragoons (being still in this Camp) under the Command of the
Earl of Athlone, toward the Mehaigne: These Agitations had stopped his Design to
go and command the Army in Flanders in the absence of the Prince of Nassau
Saarbruck, and that thought was now quite laid aside, to go and command the
Army we were going to form toward the Mehaigne; where, besides all the Dutch
Horse and Dragoons, My Lord was to have Tiffin's Brigade from the Pays de Waes,
and the two Brigades of Belcastel and Oxensterne from the Canal (making
together sixteen Battallions) which now could be spared from thence upon the
Marching off of Villeroy toward Audenarde, and Bouflers to Soignies; and only
one Battallion was left thereupon for the Guard of the Canal. The 28th, all
these Regiments joined together near Louvain, under the Command of the Count de
Noyelles Lieutenant General, and Major General Stewart, and encamped behind the
Dyle about a League above the Town, with the Left at Corbeck, and the Right
extending it self toward Neer-Ische; but that of Colonel Saunderson was
commanded to incamp with the Artillery at Louvain without Brussels-porte, and
the Detachment of the Prince's Army that covered it was ordered back to the
Camp. The 30th, all the Horses belonging to the Infautry encamped at Cockelberg
were remanded to Graze as before along the Dyle, between Louvain and Malines,
and a Colonel with a Detachment of 1000 Foot was sent to Louvain to bring the
Artillery back again to our Camp: The same day My Lord Portland came from the
Hague to Brussels, in order to have another Conference with the Marechal of
Bouflers (as 'twas supposed) upon what had happened at Ryswick the 20th
Instant, and to put Affairs in the same State as before, for the approaching
Term given in the French Memorial; and his Lordship was Lodged in the Prince's
Palace, where most of our Generals waited upon him the next day.

The 31th, all the Duteh Cavalry and Dragoons marched out of the Camp of
Cockelberg, under the Command of the Earl of Athlone, to go and Subsist toward
the Mehaigne (except Iselstein's Brigade, My Lord of Albemarle's Carabiniers
and Dopft's Dragoons, which remained in the Camp to furnish the Patrouilles and
Out-guards) and having crossed the Canal upon our Bridges of Boats between
Laacken and Brussels, they were joined on the other side by Oost frises
Brigade, which had marched through the Town from its Camp before the Fort of
Monterey, and so came to incamp between Neer-Ische and Roeux St. Augustine. The
First of September, My Lord of Athlone passed the Dyle at Florival, being
followed by the Infantry commanded by Count de Noyelles and twelve pieces of
Cannon detached from our Artillery at Louvain, and encamped together this day
with the Right at Iudoigne (where was My Lord of Athlone's Quarter) and left at
Pietrain on this side of the Geet, where they had Orders to Hutt: The same day
the Artillery came back from Louvain to the Prince's Camp, and all the Horses
were sent to Grass, but Colonel Saunderson's Regiment marched with My Lord of
Athlone: My Lord Portland went likewise this day in one of the Prince's
Coaches, being attended with Lieutenant General Bellassis and Mr. Hill, to
Tubise beyond Halle, where he was met by the Marechal of Bouflers from
Soignies, and after having conferred together, they parted with great
Expressions of reciprocal Esteem, and My Lord came back to Brussels this
Evening, but did not return to the Hague till the Third in the Afternoon. This
renewed the Discourses of Peace in the Army, which had very much fallen since
the 20th of August, till this Journey of My Lord's. There happened very little
Extraordinary in this Camp to speak of after this, till the Conclusion of the
Peace and the Separating of the Armies on both sides; this obliges me to leave
the Prince's Army, and see what was doing toward Flanders.

Notwithstanding that the French had laid aside the Thoughts of Besieging
Audenarde, which of it self would have been a Doubtful Siege, considering the
great Armies the Allies had at present, with the Reasons I have spoken of
before, and the continuing of the Negociations at Ryswick, and that therefore
the Marechal of Bouflers had left Grammont and the Neighborhood of the Scheld,
to go and incamp at Soignies, yet they seemed to have some Design on foot for
the Marechal of Catinat's Army which was now shut up behind the Lys, where it
subsisted at the Expense of the Pays-Conquis; but if reinforced, could march
toward the Elector's Army, and oblige him either to accept of a Battle, or
else to retire into the Retrenchments of Bruges, and leave all the Country
without the Canals for the Convenience of the French, there to subsist without
being Burdensome to their own Frontier: For which Design several Pontoons were
sent from Tournay to the Lys for the use of this Army, and Lieutenant General
Montrevel marched on the 21th with the Body under his Command from Helchin upon
the Scheld to reinforce the Marechal of Catinat upon the Lys, and four
Battallions of the King's Regiment, and two of Stouppa, were sent from
Villeroy's Army to incamp at Helchin in Montrevel's place under the Command of
Monsteur de Surville Major General, and were followed the 23d by the Queens
Dragoons, and those of Ste Hermine and Davaray: The same day the Marechal of
Catinat, being joined by Montrevel, passed the Lys about Menin, and the Horse
at Courtray, and came to incamp at Becelar and Dadyzeel about half way between
Courtray and Ipres. The 24th, he went with a strong Escorte to reconoitre the
Country about Rousselar Camp, which had been left by the Elector's Army some
days before, and see what Forage was to be had thereabouts for his Army; or to
visit the Ways for a March toward Torhout, in case the Elector was resolved to
maintain his Ground there.

Upon the first News of Catinat's passing the Lys, the Elector, who was at
Bruges since the 19th, went back the 23d to put himself at the Head of his Army
at Torhout, and concert with his Generals what was to be done upon it;
immediately after his Arrival a Council of War was called, and it was resolved
to leave the Camp of Toxhout if the Marechal of Catinat advanced as for as
Rousselar; for Catinat being joined by Montrevel and La Mothe, would be near 60
Battallions strong, but the Elector had not above Thirty; and if Fagel's
joining had been sufficient, yet it was not safe at present to have them from
Newport; as for the Horse and Dragoons on both sides they were pretty near
equal: But where to go from Torhout, the Generals were divided upon this Point,
some were for going to incamp between Ghistel and Oudenbourg along the Canal of
Newport, where the Army could still share the Forage of the Country with the
French, and spare the Free of Bruges with the rest of the Country behind the
Canals, from subsisting of it with dry Forage; others were of opinion to march
directly into the Retrenchment of St. Andre before Bruget to cover this place;
that it was better to put the Country behind the Canals to some Expense, than
Bruges should be in danger, and if the Elector marched to Oudenbourg, Catinat
would certainly come to Torhout, and endeavor to cut him off from getting
within the Retrenchment of St. Andre: The first of these Advices seemed to be
pitched upon for the present, and to prevent Confusion in the March, and
execute this Design with more Ease and Expedition, it was resolved to send all
the Artillery and heavy Baggage beforehand in the Retrenchment of St. Andre,
from whence it could come and join the Army at Oudenbourg and Ghistel, or the
Army would follow the Artillery if it marched to Bruges. The same day a
Detachment was made out of the Army to go and repair the Ways toward Bruges,
for the March of the Artillery and heavy Baggage, and toward Oxdonbourg for
that of the Army, which Work was finished by the next Morning. The 24th, all
the Artillery and heavy Baggage was sent to the Retrenchment of St. Andre,
under the Convoy of the two Battallions of Dona and La Mothe, and a French
Party attacked it in a long Defile between Torhout and the Chateau of
Malstapel, in which case it is very difficult to cover a whole Line of the
Baggage and Artillery of an Army; the Party being in Ambuscade, took the
Opportunity to fall upon it where it was weakly guarded, and rifled the Baggage
of three Regiments of Foot, and carried away their Horses. The 26th, Monsieur
Ivoy Quartermaster General, and all the Quarter Masters of the Army, were sent
to mark a Camp between Ghistel and Oudenbourg for the next day; the Elector's
Quarter was appointed at Ghistel upon the Right, and the Prince of
Nassau-Saarbruck's at Oudenbourg upon the Lost; but in the Night they received
Orders to go immediately and mark the Camp within the Retrenchment of St. Andre
before Bruges, for the Elector had received an Account this Evening that
Catinat was marching to Rousselar, in order to come and attack him; whilst a
Body of Villeroy's Army which had been detached under the Command of Monsieur
de Surville to Countray, should endeavor to cut off his March to Bruges; this
made the Elector resolve, without any farther Ballancing, to go and secure the
Retrenchment of St. Andre with his Army, upon which this Order was sent to the
Quarter Masters at Oudenbourg; and the Army began to march at Ten of the Clock
this Night, and got the next Morning within the Retrenchments before Bruges,
not without some Confusion and Disorder; though it proved afterward but a
false Alarm, for Catinat was not yet stirred from Becelar; however, it is true
that Surville was come to Courtray with the six Battallions and two Regiments
of Dragoons above mentioned, doubtless upon some Design: This Retrenchment had
been repaired lately with no Alteration but the taking in of the Abbey of St.
Andre, and Gazoon'd (that is faced with Turf) both within and without, and was
now in a very good Condition; the Elector took his Quarter during this Camp at
Schipstal, the Landing place from Ostend to Bruges, and the Prince of Nassau's
was marked at the Abbey of St. Andre.

The 29th, the Marechal of Catinat's Army advanced from Becelar and came to
incamp at Rousselar, with the Right here and Left about Hooghleede, but the
Marechal himself went this day to Courtray to meet with the Marechal of
Villeroy, who had come there to conferr with him: but it is probable that the
Elector's March had broke their Measures, for Villeroy returned to his Army the
next day, and Monsieur de Surville was ordered back with the Body under his
Command to Helchin. The 30th, in a general Forage along the Scheld, the
Marechal of Villeroy took occasion to demolish an old Castle which the
Spaniards had at Cavre upon that River, situated upon a little Mount in the
middle of it, where they always kept a small Garrison of 30 or 40 Men detached
from the Citadel of Ghendt, but had now been reinforced upon Villeroy's March
toward the Scheld, more to run upon Parties than for any Defense; and all the
Spaniards were made Prisoners. The Marechal of Catinat, who had come back the
29th from Courtray to the Army, marched upon the Left from Rousselar to
Dixmuyde, and encamped with his Right at Hantsame near Cortemarck, and his Left
at Esene toward that Town, having the Brook of Hantsame before him and his
head Quarter at Zarren, where at his coming up to this Camp, he was joined by
Monsieur de la Mothe with the Troops under his Command, which had encamped all
this while about Furnes and Ipres, consisting of eleven or twelve Battallions,
and some Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons; so that the Marechal of Catinat was
now reckoned near 60 Battallions strong, and about 80 Squadrons: But all the
Waters having been let out at Newport, upon his March hither, the Water about
this Camp was found too Brackish and Unwholesome, and therefore on the 31th; the
Army passed the Brook of Hanisame to come more toward Torhout and Wynendale,
and encamped with the Left upon the Wood of Be, the Right at Werckene, and
the General Quarter at Waldesloo.

The Elector of Bavaria having put Bruges under cover as well as his Army, by
Incamping in the Retrenchment of St. Andre, took care at the same time for the
Defense of the Canals and Newport, whereupon Lorne and Buchan's Regiments were
ordered to guard the Canal of Newport, the first at Laffine and the second at
Snaeskirk, and Soutlandt's was ordered from the Neighborhood of Bruges back to
Major General Fagel at Lombarzyde; the Duke of Holstein-Ploen's Dragoons and
the Battallions of Harsolt, Marquet, Dona and La Mothe, were ordered, at the
coming to St. Andre Camp, to go and post themselves behind the Canal of Bruges,
which, with the Regiments of Fagel and Reinardt already there, they were to
guard all along to Ghendt. The 29th, His Highness went to Newport to see every
thing thereabouts in a good Posture of Defense, and at the same time ordered
Major General Schlipenbach, with four Squadrons of Dutch Horse, two of Bavarian
Cuirassiers, and six of Brandenbourg, to march that way with ten or twelve
pieces of Cannon; Brigadier Rantsaw was also sent to incamp with the
Battallions of Willekens, Rantsaw, Obergen, Schack and Weed, behind the Canal
of Ostend over against Plassendale; the Waters were let out at Newport to
overflow all the Country about it toward Furnes and Dixmuyde, and a Garrison
was put into the Chateau of Ghistel; and the Elector, having given his Orders
at Newport, came back the same day to the Camp at Schipstall near Bruges: His
Highness had been informed the day before, that the Barrier upon the Line of
Furnes had now been shut up two or three days together, without suffering any
Body either to go out or come in, which gave some Apprehension for Newport; but
it was quickly known that it was for the Prince of Conti, who was come Post to
Dunkirk, in order to imbark with his Retinue and about 1000 chosen Men and
Volontiers, on Board of a small Squadron of light Frigates, commanded by the
Chevalier Bant, to Sail for Dant: zick, and endeavor to make good his Election
to the Crown of Poland by the Cardinal Primate and his Party; which, since the
Diet at Warsaw, had again been ratified by the Party in a Rokosz, or
Confederation of the Party met at the Cardinal's Summons, which invited the
Prince to come into Poland to take Possession of the Crown, and protect his
Friends; but this Expedition was made too late, when the Elector of Saxony was
already Crowned and had Possession of the Government, which Conti's Party could
not now deprive him of; and thus that Expedition failed, and the Prince of
Conti, after having remained a great while on Ship board in the Road of
Dantzick, was forced to come back without being able to attempt any thing.

The Third of September, the Elector, who had never been at Sea, went to
Blankenberg (a little Borough inhabited by none but Fishermen September.
between Ostend and Sluys) where he and his Retinue went on board of several
Fishing-boats a little way out to Sea, to try the Temper of this Element; two
or three Privateers were sent out at the same time to guard the Coast, and the
Elector had almost the Satisfaction of seeing a Sea Engagement, for they were
pursued back into Ostena by some French Privateers, which obliged His Highness,
after having been some few Hours at Sea, to come back to Blankenberg, and from
thence returned to the Camp. The Sixth, The Elector left the Army to go in
Relays to Antwerp this day, where Prince Vandemont was to meet His Electoral
Highness the day following from Brussels, and the Command of the Army in
Flanders fell thereby to the Count d' Arco General of the Bavarians. The
Seventh, Prince Vaudemont came accordingly from Brussels to wait upon the
Elector at Antwerp, and conferr together upon the present State of Affairs; the
Prince went back the same day to the Army at Brussels, but the Elector remained
in that Town: The Term prefixed by the late Memorial given in by the French
drawing near, His Electoral Highness was more conveniently here, than in any
other Town of his Jurisdiction, to send Expresses to or receive them from Don
Bernardo de Quiros the first Plenipotentiary of Spain at the Congress of
Ryswick, who had received express Orders from the Court of Spain alarmed by the
Loss of Barcelona, to Sign then upon the Conditions offered by the French, Sign
who will for the rest; and (as 'twas reported) had had a Reprimand for not
Signing the 20th of August, the Term given before in the Project; which was a
Tune many Notes lower than at the beginning of these Negociations, when Spain
as well as the Empire, were so unwilling to Treat upon the Foot of the Peace of
Nimeguen. The Prince at his return to Brussels, began to review the Army,
Brigade by Brigade, not so much to be sati fied of the Strength of the
Regiments, as to see them Exercise, there being little to do at present for
them. The Ninth, Selwyn's Brigade posted at Laacken exercised before him; and
the Tenth, the half Brigade of Guards of the first Line continued the same
Pass-time. The 11th, The Prince being informed that the Marechal of Villeroy
had advanced with his Army from Ste Marie Oudenhove nearer to Ghendt, and was
come to incamp at St. Lievens-Houthem, ordered Selwyn's Brigade and the
Regiments of Columbine and Granville of Fairfax's, to send for their
Baggage-Horses from Grass, in order to march the next day, being designed for a
Reinforcement to the Brandenbourg Foot encamped at Heusen for the Defense of
the Scheld between Ghendt and Dendermonde; for if the Peace had not been Signed
the overnight, of which there could be no News as yet in our Camp, it was
expected that the War would begin again with more Vigor and Animosity than
ever; and that Villeroy thereupon might have endeavored either to Bombard
Ghendt or pass the Scheld. But it pleased God at length to put an end to a War
which for nine Years together had Harassed and severely Chastis'd most Parts of
Christendom, and the Peace was Happily Signed the 10th at night between
England, Spain and Holland on one part, and France on the other: The Spanish
Plenipotentiaries Signed about Midnight, and after them those of the States
General, which being done, the French were now obliged according to the
Preliminary Articles, to acknowledge His Majesty for King of Great Britain,
without any Restriction, Condition or Reserve; our Plenipotentiaries were
thereupon introduced by the Mediator, and received by the French with all the
Civility that was due to the Plenipotentiaries of the Crown of England; after
which the Articles were Signed between England and France in the presence of
the Mediator, and the Plenipotentiaries on both sides embraced one another
with all the Demonstrations of Friendship, Esteem, and an entire
Reconciliation; and the Conversation soon fell upon the Panegyric of the two
Most Powerful Monarchs in Christendom, whose great Actions must hereafter make
the best part of the History of these Times; the French especially spoke of the
great Veneration that all Brave Frenchmen had for so Renowned a Prince as King
William the Third, and of the great Esteem and Value the King their Master had
for him.

As for the Imperialists, they still stuck out and refused to Sign, alleging
that they had not time enough given them to have Instructions from the Emperor
and Empire about the Matters in Debate, and especially one of such Consequence
as the Dismembring of Strasbourg from the Body of the Empire was, and insisted
still upon the full Restitution of Lorraine, without the Reservation of
Saar-Louis and Longwy to the French: After this second Refusal of the
Emperor's Plenipotentiaries, those of England, Spain and Holland Signed
without them, according to the Instructions they had received; but a Separate
Article was added at the end of every one of these three several Treaties, in
which it was stipulated between the Mediator, the Powers that had Signed and
the French, that a farther time should be allowed to the Emperor and Empire
till the 22th day of October inclusive, next ensuing, (being six Weeks time) to
regulate the Affairs relating to the Empire; during which time all manner of
Hostilities should cease between the Germans and the French; for the
Performance whereof, the Powers that had Signed engaged themselves as
Guarrantees; but if by that time the Peace was not Signed between the Empire
and France, that nevertheless the Treaty concluded at Ryswick should stand
good, and the Powers that had Signed should remain Neuter in the War between
France and the Empire. I will not pretend to advance, that there was a Design
in the refusing to Sign by the Emperor's Plenipotentiaries, both the former
Term and this; but this may be said for Truth, that the refusing to Sign the
time before, put it out of the Empires Choice to take Strasbourg or the
Equivalent; and their refusing to Sign now, left them to Treat with the French
among themselves, which has brought in the Fourth Article of the Treaty for the
Empire, so Prejudicial to the Protestant Religion in Germany, and Derogatory to
the Treaty of Munster in its behalf; which may be looked upon as the
Fundamental Constitution of the Empire, as it is now divided between the
Protestant and the Romish Religion; which Article, it is very probable, would
not have been so easily gained to the Prejudice of the Protestant Interest, if
the Imperialists had acted and signed in Conjunction with the rest of the
Allies: I need not give an account of the three several Treaties Signed at
Ryswick the Tenth, because they are already Printed by themselves, to which I
shall referr the Reader; only I shall mention something concerning Luxembourg
and the Equivalent offered to Spain in lieu of it, namely, That the Equivalent
offered by the French, being Maubeuge, Conde, Menin and Ipres, was much more
Advantageous for the Spanish Dominions in the Low Countries; because it made
them more united, and gave them a better and more defensible Frontier, and for
the same reason was so to England; but, the French restoring Lorrain, it was
better for the Common Interest of Europe to have Luxembourg back again for a
Communication between Lorrain, the Empire and the Low Countries, for otherwise
without it, the French might still have over-awed the Empire upon the
Lower-Rhine, and have had an Inlet into Holland, for which reason Luxembourg
has been preferred to the Equivalent; and the French, who to be sure expected
that it would be so, and therefore were aware of it, resolved to retain
Saar-Louis and Longwy to have still a Bridle upon the Empire and Luxembourg;
and also for a Defense to France it self in case of such another Alliance
against it, as the last.

Immediately after the Signing of the Peace at Ryswick the 10th or rather 11th
of September, Expresses were dispatched to all the Courts in Christendom to
give notice of it, and our Plenipotentiaries at the Hague thought it convenient
to send one to Prince Vaudemont at Brussels who commanded all His Majesty's
Forces and Armies in Chief in the Low Countries; the Express passed by Antwerp
at Nine of the Clock at Night, and Mr. Hill His Majesty's Envoy at the Court of
Brussels, who was then at his Pay-Office at Antwerp, had the first News of it
before the Elector; about Twelve the Express came to the Prince at the Camp,
and the good News were all over the Army next Morning; our Express was followed
by two Spanish Couriers going to Madrid, the first with the News of the
Signing, and the second with the Treaty in due Form to be Ratified, who both
received the Elector's Orders at Antwerp in their way: And as if Providence had
designed this to be marked for a Happy day in the Calender, the Elector
received, soon after the passing of the first Spanish Courier, an Express from
the Emperor, with the News of the Great and Glorious Defeat which Prince
Eugene of Savoy had given the Turks at Zanta near the Theysse in Hungary on the
First of September; which as it appears by the Accounts of it, was as complete
and entire a Victory as has been gained for many Ages; and so much the more
Welcome, that it was gained in a time when Men were very apprehensive for the
Emperor's Affairs in Hungary, the Grand Seignior having a much more powerful
Army; with which he had already driven the Imperialists from Titul, and was now
passing the Theysse, to march toward Peter-Waradin; when, his Army being
imprudently divided by the River, either for want of Boats to make several
Bridges, or Conduct, Prince Eugene attacked that part which had passed under
the Command of the Grand Vizier, and gave it an entire Rout, and in the Pursuit
over the Bridge (which occasioned the loss of most of the Infidels) put that
part, which was commanded by the Grand Seignior on the other side, into no less
Confusion and Disorder. The Elector having received this joyful News by the
Express, dispatched immediately the Count de Milan to the Electrice and Prince
Vaudemont at Brussels, with the Letter he had received from the Emperor upon
this occasion: Several People wished that this Victory had happened a little
sooner for the sake of the Allies, who (if the Turks had been brought to make a
Peace, which would have been much more Honorable than what they at present can
expect) could then have given the Law in the Congress of Ryswick, and obliged
the French to much greater Restitutions, or else have carried on a War that
must have been Fatal to them; but the French Court has known so well how to
manage the Turks upon this Point, in all the Misfortunes they have had for
these seven or eight Years last past, that there was no more reason to expect
the Turks would seek for a Peace after this Defeat, than after that of
Salankement, or the Losses of Guyla and Great-Waradin.

The 12th in the Evening, the Elector followed the good News and came to
Brussels, and the next day he sent the Marquis d'Vsies, a Sergeant General de
Battaille in the Spanish Troops to the Marechal of Villeroy, and Baron Simeoni
to the Marechal of Bouflers, to give them an account of the Signing of the
Peace on the Tenth at Night, and to know what Orders they had from the French
Court about their Armies between this and the Ratification, which was to be
made within three Weeks after; Count Monasterol was sent at the same time by
Count d'Arco from the Army near Bruges to the Marechal of Catinat upon the same
account; they were received with great Civilities in the French Camps, and
nobly entertained, but returned with this Answer, That no Orders were yet come
from Court to them upon the Signing of the Peace, but that as soon as they did
receive any, they would give an account of it to His Electoral Highness,
thereby to regulate Affairs on both sides accordingly. The 14th, all the
Artillery was drawn out before the Camp upon the Height uear the Wind mill of
Ganshoren, and all the Army drew out in the Evening to fire three Volleys for
the great Victory obtained over the Turks by Prince Eugene of Savoy, but it
fell a Raining very hard, and all the Troops were dismissed to their Tents, and
the Artillery commanded back to its former Post; which, may be, was not the
true Reason, but rather it was not thought convenient to have any public
Rejoicing about it, the Peace being Signed between England and France; which
made England to have no Interest in the Emperor's Affairs that way; For I do
not remember that there were any public Rejoycings in England for the raising
the Siege of Vienna in King Charles the Second's Reign, or even for the taking
of Buda in King James's, though a Popish Prince: But Te Deum was Sung this
Evening in the Elector's Chapel, and all the Cannon fired thrice round the
Ramparts of Brussels, with abundance of Illuminations and Fireworks; and Count
d'Arco the Bavarian General, who commanded at present the Army of Flanders in
Chief, had Te Deum Sung in his Quarter by the Chaplains of the Spanish and
Bavarian Troops, and the Army and Artillery being drawn out, fired three rounds
for this Victory. The 17th, Prince Vaudemont left the Camp to go and wait upon
His Majesty at Loo, not only to regulate the Marching of the English Troops out
of the Country, but chiefly to Thank His Majesty for the great Honors he had
received in commanding of his Armies in Flanders the three last Campagnes, and
to pass as much time as he could with the King before His Majesty went for
England, now that the parting would be for some time, the Prince being
appointed by the King of Spain for Governor of Milan in the Room of the
Marquis de Leganes; where we may expect from so Brave and Wise a Prince, that
he will manage Affairs so as to conserve the Peace and Repose of Italy, and
contribate thereby to maintain that of Christendom in General. The Prince being
now gone to Loo, the Duke of Wirtemberg became in course General in Chief of
the Army near Brussels.

The 19th, the Marechal of Bouflers sent Monsieur de Pracontal a Merechal de
Camp or Major General of his Army, to the Elector of Bavaria at Brussels, to
give His Highness an account, that the French King had sent Orders for his
Armies to retire forthwith out of the King of Spain's Territories in that
Country, and cease all farther Acts of Hostility against His Catholic
Majesty's Subjects, or any others belonging to the Powers which had Signed the
Peace on the 10th instant; whereupon an Order was published by Beat of Drum in
the Armies on both sides to publish the Signing of the Peace at Ryswick, and
prevent all manner of Hostilities hereafter upon pain of Death; and all Parties
were immediately after drawn off, and commanded back to their respective
Regiments or Garrisons, and the Country left free and open for an intercourse
and Commerce between the Subjects on both sides in pursuance of an order to
this purpose proclaimed in all the Towns of the French and Spanish Frontiers.

On the 20th. the Three French Armies commanded by the Marechals of Villeroy,
Bouslers and Catinat, marched out of the King of Spains Territories to retire
into the Pays Conquis, in pursuance of the Orders they received from the King
their Master, yet so as to subsist in the Country which they were to restore by
the Treaty, and spare their own: The Marechal of Villeroy came to incamp just
without the Scheld in the Chatellenie of Ath to Forage the Country between
this place, and Mons and Tournay; the Marechal of Bouslers left Soignies to
pass the Sambre and subsist between Beaumont and Charleroy, and the Marechal of
Catinat repassed the Lys to come into the Chatellenie of Courtray with the best
part of his Army to demolish the Line (this place and Chatellenie being to be
restored to the King of Spain by virtue of the Treaty) and the rest marched
into the Lines of Ipres. The Marquis de Harcourt had been commanded back, just
before the Signing of the Treaty, toward the Moselle and the Rhine, to
reinforce the Marechal of Choiseul; for the Germans had at last past the Rhine,
and the main of the Army commanded by Prince Lewis of Baden was come to incamp
at Creutznach between the Electorate of Treves and the Palatinate of the Rhine,
whilst the rest besieged the Town and Castle of Eberenbourg belonging to the
Elector of Treves, which the French had possessed themselves of since the
beginning of the War: Prince Lewis of Baden was carrying on of this Siege at
the time of the Signing of the Treaty, and the Marechal of Choiseul was not in
a condition to attempt the relief of it, which obliged the Marquis de Harcourt
to march back toward Montroyal and endeavor jointly with the Marechal of
Choiseul to raise that Siege; for which purpose, immediately after the retiring
of the French Armies out of the Spanish Dominions in the Low Countrey's, great
detachments, especially of Horse, were sent to follow the Marquis of Harcourt,
and no less than 150 Squadrons were then commanded that way; which was done,
not only in order to force the Germans to raise the Siege they were engaged
in, but likewise to send them to subsist between the Meuse and the Rhine, where
the Peace was not yet concluded, and spare their own Frontier by that means;
but Harcourt could not come time enough to join the Marechal of Choiseul and
relieve Eberenbourg, nor could the besieged hold out long enough to prevent the
loss of the place by the Cessation of Arms agreed upon at Ryswick between
France and the Empire; for they were forced to capitulate but a day or two
before the order came to cease all acts of Hostility on both sides, upon the
Six Weeks Truce made at Ryswick between the Germans and the French: This shows
very plainly that if the Germans had been as early in their Motions this
Campaign, as the Allies were in the Low Countries, they would have made the
French pay dear for the Siege of Ath or else would have prevented it; and if
they had not past the Rhine so late, not only Eberenbourg but Kirne must have
fallen into their hands; by which means they could have established themselves
good Winter Quarters on this side of the Rhine in the Electorate of Treves and
the Palatinate; which would have been of vast consequence toward a vigorous
prosecution of the War, in case the Congress at Ryswick had broke up without
concluding of a Treaty; or the Imperialists would at least have had some reason
to back the pretensions they insisted upon so much in these Negotiations, which
have considerably deferred the General Peace: But the slowness of the Germans,
where their Operations depend from so many Princes and States of different
Interests, and having often private grudges among themselves, and no common and
General Magazines for an early taking of the Field, will always be an obstacle
to any thing that is Brisk and Vigorous in a Confederate War; and the French
for this reason will ever be beforehand with them in the Field, which is of
very great moment in the operations of a Campaign; and we have seen, but the
last Summer, the Marechal of Choiseul subsist a considerable while between the
Rhine and the Neckre, with an Army that did not dare show its face, when the
Germans had once taken the Field.

After the taking of Eberenbourg by Prince Lewis of Baden, the Marquis de
Harcourt who was marching that way to reinforce the Marechal of Choiseul,
turned with his Army into the Country of Liege beyond the Meuse; which, being
a dependence of the Empire the French thought they could very justly put their
Troops to subsist there and ease their own Frontier, whilst the Peace was not
Signed as yet between France and Germany; and accordingly they crowded as many
Troops, especially Horse and Dragoons, as they could thereabouts, and likewise
in the Duchy of Luxembourg, which was to be restored to Spain by the Treaty.
As soon as the French had retreated with their Armies out of the King of
Spain's Territories in Flanders, to get into their own Conquests, and that a
Cessation of all manner of Hostilities was thereupon published, and a Free
Trade and intercourse between the Frontiers on both sides proclaimed, the
Elector of Bavaria left Brussells and went to Loo to see His Majesty, and
partake of the Divertisements which the Country thereabouts afforded in this
Hunting Season, and at the same time to conferr with the King about the
marching of the Allies Troops out of the Spanish Netherlands, and retaining a
certain number of the States Forces to keep Garrison in the Frontier Towns of
that Country, as they were to be after the Ratification and Execution of the
Treaty of Rvswick; as Luxembourg, Namur, Charleroy, Mons, Ath, Audenarde,
Courtray and Newport, which the Spaniards were too weak to Garrison themselves;
Four and Twenty Battallions of the States Forces were agreed upon for this
Service, which, with the Seven Battallions of Bavarians, and the few Troops of
Spaniards, Walloons and Italians in this Country, were thought sufficient to
Garrison the Frontier Towns in time of Peace.

In the mean while, till the Ratification of the Treaty, the Armies on our side
continued encamped as before; the Infantry of the Brabant Army at Cockelberg;
the English Horse and Dragoons at Wavre under General Auerquerque; the Dutch,
with Tiffin's, Belcastel's and Oxenstern's Brigades of Foot, at Judoigne, under
the command of the Earl of Athlone; and our Flanders Army in the Retrenchments
of Bruges; where it was commanded by the Count d'Arco, till the coming back of
the Prince of Nassau-Sarbruck from the Baths of Aix la Chappelle, which was on
the 23d, when he arrived at Bruges, and took his Quarter (as it had been marked
at the coming of the Army to this ground) in the Abbey of St. Andre. The 25th,
all the Bavarian Cuirassiers and Dragoons left the Camp to march toward the
Rhine and Winter in Bavaria, being designed for the Emperors Service in Hungary
the next Campaign; but the Foot marched into the Spanish Guelderland to Quarter
in that Country till the evacuation of Luxembourg, where they were appointed
by the Elector to Garrison in this and other places of that Duchy, as La Roche
and Arlon, and went this day by water from Bruges to Ghendt; Count d'Arco left
the Camp at the same time and went to Brussells with all the Spanish Court and
Generals. The 27th. all the Brandenbourg Cavalry and Dragoons left the same
Camp to go and join General Heyden and the Brandenbourg Foot in the Pays de
Waes in order to march from thence toward the Meuse and the lower Rhine. The
29th the Prince of Nassau's Adjutant General came from Loo with the Patents for
the March of all the States Troops in Flanders to go and Garrison, some in the
States Brabant and Flanders, and others to go from the Sas of Ghendt by Water
into Holland, Guelderland, Zutphen, Friseland, etc. but 15 or 16 Battallions of
them were ordered to continue in Flanders under the command of Major General
Lindeboom being to enter in the King of Spain's Service for the Garrison of the
Spanish Frontiers in that Country toward France.

On the First of October being the time specified by the Treaties October.
Signed at Ryswick the 10th of September between England, Spain and Holland on
one part, and France on the other, the said Treaty was Ratified and Exchanged
in due form between France and Holland; that of England under the Broad Seal
could not come over time enough by reason of the contrary Winds, and therefore
was ratified under the Kings Signet in the Interim, and the Instruments were to
remain in the hands of the Mediator; but the Ratification under the Broad Seal
coming over that very day, the Treaties between England and France were
exchanged some few days after: As for the Ratification of the Spanish Treaty
from Madrid, it could not come time enough, but the French were satisfied to
stay for it, which was not long. After this, the Marechals of Villeroy and
Catinat went to Court, and the French Armies in the Netherlands were
distributed into Quarters, only the Marechal of Bouflers remained in his
Government at Lisle some time after, to forward the Evacuation of those Towns
which were to be restored by the French to the King of Spain. The Confederate
Armies in this Country begun to separate at the same time; all the Troops we
had received this Campaign from the Rhine marched off the first, to go back
into Germany, and the Infantry encamped at Cockelberg decamped Brigade by
Brigade; the English went all into Flanders there to be in a readiness to
imbark, and were quartered in Ghendt, Bruges, Newport and Ostend, which, for
this reason, were at the beginning more crowded with Troops than ever: The
English and Dutch Guards came to Ostend in order to imbark the first for
England, and all the Foot were to go there on Board of such Men of War as
should be appointed to carry them over: All the English Horse and Dragoons left
Wavre after the Ratification, and were sent to Quarters, the first to Ghendt
and the 2d to Bruges, in order to march from thence to Willemstadt one after
another, as Transport Ships could be got ready to bring them into England; and
the Life-Guards, being the first to go over, marched directly to this place.
The Dutch Infantry encamped at Cockelberg separated to go into Quarters in the
Frontiers of Holland, as Maestricht, Boisleduc, Breda and Bergen-op-Zoom,
except 7 or 8 Battallions, which, with those of the Flanders Army
abovementioned, were to go into Spanish Garrisons. The Danes were Quartered at
Dendermonde, Alost and Ninove, where they remained till their accounts were
made up, and cleared out of His Majesty's Service, in order to march from
thence overland by the Meuse and the Rhine and so through Germany into Denmark.
The four Battallions of Hanover in the Flanders Army left the Camp near Bruges
on the 5th, and were to be joined in their march by the Regiments of
Wolfembuttle Guards and Hering then in Garrison at Audenarde to go into their
own Country; and those of Nassau and Brandenbourg out of the Brabant Army, and
Willekens out of that of Flanders, which had been upon English pay all this
War, marched into Holland and were taken back in the States Service. All the
Dutch Troops began to break up at the same time on all sides, the Cavalry under
the command of Lieutenant General Opdam marched toward Ghendt on the outside
of the Canal in order to march into the States Dominions. The English and Dutch
Guards and some other English Battallions came down the Canal in Bilanders the
6th from Ghendt to Bruges; and the 7th all the Dutch Foot that was to march to
Garrison in the Frontiers of Holland were sent to Ghendt by Water in the same
Bilanders that brought the English to Bruges, being the Regiment of Nassau
Walloon to go to Boisleduc, Marquet and Willekens to Heusden and Bommel,
Nassau-Friseland consisting of two Battallions, were to imbark at the Sas of
Ghendt, to be carried by Water through Holland and over the Zuyder Sea to
Leewarden, etc. Keppel (being the Regiment which lately was Lieutenant General
Tettau's) was to go to Zutphen, the two Battallions of Cappol and one of
Lochman, and the Regiment of young Holstein to Maestricht, and that of Fagel to
the Grave. The 9th, the Prince of Nassau Saarbruck went to Holland, and left
the Command of the Forces remaining about Bruges to Major General Lindeboom, or
in his absence to the Duke of Holstein-Norbourg, consisting of 17 Battallions
which were all to enter into the King of Spain's Service, except two or three
that were to Quarter in the Holland-Flanders, as Sluys, the Sas of Ghendt,
Hulst and the Fort of Lillo; of these 17 Battallions, Four were encamped at
Plassendale being those of Weed, Rantsaw, Obergen and Schack; Four at Newport,
viz. Soutlandt, St. Amand, Beyma and Swansbeck; Six in the Retrenchments of
Bruges, being the Regiments of Lindeboom, Holstein-Norbourg, Dedem, the two
Battallions of Swerin and that of Carles, and Three more encamped behind the
Canal of Bruges, viz. the Regiments of Harsolt, Dona and La Mothe: All these
Regiments were soon after dispersed to Cantoon up and down in the Neighborhood
of the Towns that were to be restored by the French, in order to Garrison
there, except those two or three Regiments which were to Quarter in the Holland
Flanders. My Lord of Athlone's Camp at Judoigne was the last to break up,
either to subsist the Dutch Cavalry upon the Country hereabouts as long as was
possible, or else to provide for the security of the Meuse, whilst Harcourt was
on the other side with a considerable Army to Forage the Pays de Liege; and
did not go into Quarters, but between the middle and latter end of October,
when Tiffin's and Belcastel's Brigades were ordered to march into Flanders to
quarter in Ghendt and Bruges with the rest of our English Forces.

The Elector continued all this while with His Majesty at Loo and Dieren
sometimes at the one and sometimes at the other, where among their
Divertisements they settled the Routes and Marches of the Allies out of the
Spanish Netherlands, and his Highness did not come back to Brussells, till the
13th of October, by which time all the Confederate Forces had cleared the
Country, except His Majesty's National Troops which were to pass over into
England, Scotland or Ireland, with as much expedition as the Season would
permit; and the Danes, which did not begin their March homewards till the
November following. But the King still remained sometimes at Loo and sometimes
at Dieren; where His Majesty had passed the time in Hunting and such other
Country Divertisements, from his first leaving of the Army to this time,
except two or three days that His Majesty went to Soestdyke, to have an
Interview with the Czar of Muscovy at Vtrecht, which was on the first of
September; His Majesty coming to the Czars Lodgings was first Harangu'd by the
Muscovite Embassy, to express the great Esteem and Value their Master had for
his Person, and how much he admir d the great reputation of his Government; the
fame whereof had filled all Russia and Muscovy, and had brought the powerful
Monarch of those vast Countries to visit a Prince so renowned for his undaunted
Valor and Courage joined with a most profound and consummated Prudence! and
who has gone through so many Dangers and exposed himself to the greatest
hazards for the Defense and Liberties of all Europe, which none but himself
could keep and secure from becoming a Prey to an overgrown formidable Power!
And to convince the King that all these Protestations of the Czars Esteem and
Admiration of so great a Monarch, were no formal Complements, they acquainted
His Majesty that the Czar their Master was in the next Room himself, having
come so far out of his Dominions to assure His Majesty of it in Person: After
which they introduced the King into the Czar's Chamber, where they were
together above an Hour, His Majesty being attended by the Earls of Albemarle
and Jersey, and Three or Four more Persons of Quality; but the Czar who
Traveled Incognito in the Retinue of his own Embassy could not accept of the
Invitation to dine with the King, but went back after the Interview to
Amsterdam.

The Czar had contrived this way of Traveling in the Train of his own Embassy
as a private Person, on purpose to see England and Holland, the most
flourishing and wealthy Countries in the World, and the most famous for Trade
and Navigation; being very desirous to improve his own Subjects that way,
especially now, that being Master of Afoff upon the Mouth of the Tanais he had
a very good Harbor open to the Black Sea, by which, if he could gain any
Strength on those Seas, he may not only increase very much the Trade and
Wealth of Muscovy, but cut himself a way at the same time to the Greek Empire,
and become Master of Constantinople. These are thoughts worthy of so great a
Prince, and to put himself thereupon in the best way of compassing such great
ends, he came with his Embassy to the Baltic Shore about the beginning of the
last Summer where he embarked to come to Coningsberg the Capital City of the
Ducal Prussia, belonging to the Elector of Brandenbourg; where his Electoral
Highness was then with all his Court, to be near Warsaw during the time of the
Election for the Crown of Poland. The Czar and his Embassy were nobly
entertained here, and pursued their Travels over-land afterward through
Prussia, Pomerania, Brandenbourg, Westphalia, etc. to come to the Rhine, and
Embark there for Holland; and after a considerable stay in Amsterdam, the
greatest Town for Trade and Navigation in the World, unless this mighty
Character be most deservedly due to London, his Czarish Majesty is at length
come himself privately to England, to see our Shipping and Docks, where the
most stately, curious and perfect Models for Building of Ships in the World are
to be seen; and to instruct himself in Navigation and Maritime Affairs, now
that he has the Sea open to him, in a milder Climate than Archangel, whereby he
may at once make his Subjects considerable for their Trade, and become a
Terror to the Turkish Empire, which may one day be subdued by his power on the
Black Seas; and Visit the greatest and the most wealthy City in Christendom and
Imperial Seat of a Great Monarch, who has all the Power which the Purses of the
wealthiest Nations of the World can afford without any Arts of Tyranny,
Oppression or Arbitrariness to have them; who has had Vast Fleets at Sea and
Numerous Armies in the Field, and the People not oppressed by those heavy
Burdens which always attend an Absolute Power, and without which even Arbitrary
Power it self can never be great; and who Rules the most Flourishing States in
the Universe so happily and with such Justice, Equity, Gentleness and Wisdom,
that notwithstanding the vast difference of Governments, one may find in the
Commonwealth all the duty and respect of Subjects without any derogation to its
Liberties; and in the Monarchy, all the Liberty of a Free People consistent
with the Fealty and Allegiance due to a Sovereign. These are Master pieces of
Government altogether peculiar to our great Monarch, and which (were there no
other reason) must raise his Name above all Princes that have Reigned before
him. This Voyage of the Czar's to Holland and England will make so considerable
a Figure in History hereafter, that I could not well pass it over, without
omitting one of the Chiesest Ornaments of this Account. After this Interview
the King went back to Loo where the D of Holstein Gottorp came to wait upon His
Majesty, and the Prince Vaudemont from Brussells, being followed about a Week
after by the Elector of Bavaria: But notwithstanding that the Three Treaties
Signed on the 10th of September were Ratified and Exchanged, and that the Peace
had been proclaimed upon it, first at the Hague, then at Paris the 13th of
October, and at London the 19th following, yet the King was resolved not to
come to the Hague till the Imperialists and the French had made an end of the
Treaty depending between them, and therefore still kept at Loo and Diercn,
where Prince Vaudemont remained after the Elector's going back for Brussels;
and His Majesty named here his Excellency the Earl of Portland for his
Ambassador Extraordinary to go to the Court of France.

The 22th of October being the Term allowed in the Separate Article of the 10th
of September, the Peace was Signed between the Empire and France, according to
the Project given by the French Ambassadors, and the Memorial of the 21th of
August; and by it the French quitted to the Empire all Brisgow and Alsatia on
the Right side of the Rhine, with the Towns of Brisach and Fribourg, the Fort
of Kehl opposite to Strasbourg, and the Town of Philipsbourg, all on the same
side of the Rhine, together with the Territories belonging to the Electorate of
Treves, and the Palatinate on the left side of the Rhine; and obliged
themselves farther, to demolish all the Forts they had upon that River on the
right side of it; and moreover Montroyal and Traerbach upon the Moselle, after
which they were to be restored to the Elector of Treves, together with the Town
of Treves in the Condition it was then: They likewise engaged to restore the
Duchy of Lorrain and Bar in the Condition wherein Charles the Fourth enjoyed
it in the Year 1670, only they reserved to themselves the Town of Saar-Lonis,
with a district of half a League about it, and the Town and Provostship of
Longwy upon the Frontier of Lorrain toward Luxembourg; for which Towns the
French promised to give an Equivalent of the same Extent and Value in one of
the three Bishoprics, as it should be agreed upon between Commissioners
appointed by the French King and the Duke of Lorrain for that purpose; and
farther, to give back the Duchy of Deux-Ponts to the King of Sweden, the
County of Mont-belliard to the Dukes of Wirtemberg, with all the Manors and
Feudships belonging to the said Family in the Duchy of Burgundy and
Franche-Comte; the Towns and Bishoprics of Worms and Spire, the first to the
Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, and the latter to the Archbishop of
Treves: And the Elector Palatine re-entering in the Possession of all his
Territories and Revenues on both sides of the Rhine by this Treaty, according
as they were restored at the Peace of Westphalia, the Emperor and the French
King were named to be Arbitrators of the Duchess of Orleans's Pretensions, in
which if they did not agree, that then the Pope should decide that Matter
according to the Laws and Constitutions of the Empire; and in the mean while
that the Elector Palatine should allow the Duchess of Orleans a Yearly Pension
of 200000 Livers French Money. Lastly, The French promised to deliver up the
Town and Castle of Dinant to the Elector of Cologne as Bishop of Liege, in the
Condition they were at the taking of them before the Treaty of Nimeguen. And in
Consideration of the Equivalent given by the French, the Emperor and Empire
consented that Strasbourg should be dismembered for ever from the Empire, and
annexed to the Most Christian King's Dominions, with a Sovereign Property and
Jurisdiction over it; that the Bridge of Philipsbourg should be broke down, and
the Fort, which covers it on the left side of the Rhine, demolished; that the
new Town of Brisach on the same side of the Rhine should be dismantled, and
that hereafter the Rhine should be the common Barriere in Alsatia between
France and the Empire, so that France should have no Forts upon the Rhine nor
right side of it, nor the Empire upon the left: And, as a common Article, that
this Treaty should be Ratified by the Empire and the French King, within six
Weeks after, But there was a Clause in the Fourth Article, whereby the Roman
Catholic Religion was to be maintained in all the Places restored by the
French, in the Condition and State it was at the Signing of it, which created
very hot Contestations between the Protestant and Bopish Deputies of the
Empire, as being expressly contrary to the Treaty of Westphalia; this made all
the Protestant Deputies, and the Mediator himself, as Deputy for the Duchy of
Deux-Ronts in the King of Sweden's Name, refuse to Sign it as Derogatory to the
Treaty of Westphalia; except the Deputies of the House of Wirtemberg, and of
the Imperial Town of Franckfort: There was not the least mention made of this
Clause in the General Project given in by the French, nor in their new Memorial
of the 20th of August; but England and Holland having Signed before without the
Empire, or rather the 10th of September seeming to have been lapsed on purpose
to bring this about, the French, and Popish Members of the Empire, took hold of
such an Opportunity, to gain Ground upon the Protestants in Germany.

The Treaty being Signed between the Empire and France, and consequently a
General Peace established among all the Parties concerned, the King came then
to the Hague on the 29th, attended by the Prince of Vaudemont, where his
Princess came to wait upon His Majesty to Complement him upon the Peace, and
take her leave before her parting for Italy with the Prince her Husband, who
were lodged together in the Oud Hoff, one of the King's Palaces at the Hague.
All the Plenipotentiary Ambassadors and Foreign Ministers went to Complement
the King upon his Arrival and the Conclusion of the Peace, and among them the
three French Plenipotentiaries came there the next day in a Body, by the French
King's order, and had an Audience in Form as his Ambassadors Extraordinary, to
make the first Complement to His Majesty.

The Fourth of November (being the King's Birth day) was kept at the Hague with
a great deal of Solemnity, the Court was thronged Nov.
with Foreign Ministers upon this occasion, and the French Plenipotentiaries
especially made their Complement to His Majesty upon his Birthday; and in the
Evening a Magnificent Ball was given by the Prince and Princess of Vaudemont at
the Oud Hoff. After this the King waited only for a fair Wind to bring him over
to England, and went some few days after to Oranje-Polder to imbark, but the
Wind coming about contrary, His Majesty went back to the Hague: At last the
Wind coming fair, the King embarked at Oranje Polder the 13th in the Morning,
and happily arrived at Margate on Sunday the 14th of November between Ten and
Eleven in the Morning, and went to lay that Night at Canterbury: The 15th, His
Majesty came to Greenwich, in order to make his Public Entry the next day in
the City of London, where His Majesty was then received with all the Solemnity
and Magnificence that Loyalty and Affection accompanied with an Universal Joy
could be capable of, to see His Majesty return Safe to his Kingdom after so
many Fatigues and Dangers, so many Campagnes and Voyages, Battles and Sieges,
with the Olivebranch of a Happy and Honorable Peace in his Hand; and the
Lord Mayor and Citizens of London had made it their particular Request to
receive His Majesty publicly, to express thereby their Affection, Duty and
Gratitude upon such an Occasion, in a manner suitable to the Wealth and
Grandeur of that Famous and Renowned City; in the Particulars, of which
Magnificent Reception, it is not my Business to enter at present, as belonging
properly to the History of England: I shall only add, that His Majesty received
afterward Congratulatory Addresses from all Parts of his Dominions for his
safe Return, after having Happily terminated a most Obstinate and Expensive
War; carried on for so many Years by our late Enemies, chiefly and on purpose
to bereave him of a Throne he fills with so much Fame and Renown; and to
deprive us of his most Just and Equitable Government, and of what has a
necessary Dependence upon it (all that can be Dear and Precious to a People)
our Religion, Laws, Privileges and Liberties. These are Exploits which require
the utmost Gratitude of all True Patriots and Lovers of their Religion and
Country, which can do no less than express it self in hearty Prayers to the
King of Kings, that he would Bless His Majesty with a Long, Happy and
Prosperous Reign over us, as a Just Reward of so many Glorious Achievements
for our Safety and Preservation.

All this while the French were not yet ready to Evacuate any of the Places
they were obliged to restore to the King of Spain by the late Treaty of
Ryswick; being first, by virtue of it, to carry away all their own Artillery,
Ammunitions, Provisions and Stores, and leave behind them the Artillery and
quantity of Stores they found in these places at the taking of them: It Is true,
the Evacuating of these Towns required some time upon this account, but it is
very probable that the French delayed the fulfilling of this Article purposely,
till they saw what Success the Treaty they had Signed on the 22th of October
with the Empire, should have at Ratisbone, where 'twas likely to meet with a
considerable Opposition from the Protestant Princes in the Ratification; for if
the Treaty, instead of being Ratified there, had been declared Illegal and
Derogatory to the Treaty of Westphalia, and to the Articles provided therein in
behalf of the Protestant Religion, it would not have been very convenient for
the French King's Affairs, that Luxembourg, and other places to be restored by
the Treaty of the Tenth of September, should be in the King of Spain's hands.

The Plenipotentiaries of the Protestant Princes having refused to Sign the
Treaty between the Empire and France on the 22th of October, had still some
Conferences with those of France to find a temper for the fourth Article, so as
they might Sign jointly with the rest of the Empire, but they were all to no
purpose: England and Holland had bor'n the Burden of a long and very Expensive
War, and their Trade and Commerce (the very Springs of all their Wealth) had
been considerably impaird, and therefore were not able to meddle at present in
that Affair, and vindicate the Interest of the Protestant Religion in Germany,
against these Encroachments upon it so contrary to the Westphalian Treaty; so
that the Protestant Princes wanting Power, for this Reason, to maintain and
carry on their Opposition against the Treaty lately concluded between the
Empire and France, the Ratification was Signed in the Imperial Diet at
Ratisbone, without any Alteration to the Fourth Article, by which the Popish
Religion is to continue in several Towns and Places of the Palatinate,
according as it was Established by the French King whilst in his Possession;
where before the War were none but Protestant Churches, to the great Oppression
of the Protestants, and the Violation of the Treaty of Munster in their behalf;
and France has gained this Advantage over the Empire, as to Sow the Seeds of
such Divisions in this Treaty between the Protestant and Popish States, as may
in time be very Fatal to Germany, and increase very much the Greatness and
Power of the Most-Christian Kings, which for several Years last past, has been
found so Prejudicial to the Peace and Quiet of Europe.

The Treaty between France and the Empire being Ratified within the Term
prefixed in the Articles, it was thereupon exchanged at Ryswick the beginning
of December, and the French having secured this Point, restored, immediately
after, the Towns of Mons, Ath, Charleroy and Courtray in the Low Countries, and
Barcelona, Gironne, Roses and Belver in Catalonia to the Spaniards; but they
did not quit the Duchy of Luxembourg till the Month of January following, when
la Roche and Arlon, little Fortresses upon the Frontier toward the Pays de
Liege, were delivered up to Spanish Garrisons on the 17th; and the 19th they
took Possession of the Town of Luxembourg, whereof the Count d'Autel General of
the Palatine Troops had been appointed Governor by the King of Spain, through
the Queen's Interest, being the Elector Palatine's Sister.

By this time all or most of His Majesty's National Forces, Horse and Foot, had
left Flanders, and were passed the Seas and got over into England, Scotland or
Ireland, except six Scots Regiments of Foot, which the States have taken into
their Pay and Service; being those of Lauder, Murray, Walter Collier, Ferguson,
Strathnaver and George Hamilton, and the three French Battallions of Refugies
of la Meloniere, Belcastel and Marton, My Lord Gallway's Horse, and the Marquis
de Mirmont's Dragoons which are still kept in His Majesty's Service in
Flanders: And the French were then working to demolish the Works on the Rhine
and elsewhere, which are to be Razed by the Treaty, and to evacuate those which
they are to restore to the Empire; but as yet have not performed it, however we
need not doubt but they will, and News are daily expected of their having begun
with Philipsbourg and delivered it up to an Imperial Garrison; but these
Affairs do not come directly within the compass of this History, and therefore
I need not speak any more about them, lest that should swell this Account to
too great a Bulk; which is long enough already, and longer than I would have
made it, if it could have been done conveniently without omitting some Material
Passages.

I have no more to add, but some few short Reflections upon the Peace lately
agreed upon at Ryswick, which brings this History to a most happy Period, and
to its wished for Conclusion; the Negociations whereof have been carried on
with more Calmness, Tranquillity and Expedition, than any General Treaty we can
read of before, notwithstanding several Occasions, which have offered
themselves seasonably enough to take hold of them, thereby to disturb or
prolong this great Work. We have seen the King of Sweden, Charles the Eleventh,
(who by his Mediation had so wisely managed Affairs, as to bring the
Plenipotentiaries of the several Princes and States engaged in the War,
together, in order to open their Conferences) April 5. 1697.
dye, as 'twere, upon the very Threshold of the Congress, and yet the Treaty
not delayed at all by so Fatal an Accident: The Regency under his Successor
Charles the Twelfth, who was then a Minor, carried on the Mediation without any
Intermission, by dispatching new full Powers to the Swedish Minister at the
Hague, and both the Allies and France received it without any Wrangling or
Hesitation; which, as on the one hand it redounded very much to the Glory and
Honor of the Crown of Sweden, so on the other, it demonstrated plainly the
Sincerity of the most Powerful Parties concerned in the War, and that they
desired in earnest the Peace and Quiet of their own Dominions, and the General
Repose of Christendom. We have seen France gain considerable Advantages over
the Allies, both in Land and Sea Expeditions the last Campaign, and yet not
stand upon much higher Terms for it in the Treaty, unless it was the keeping of
Strasbourg and the giving an Equivalent for it; which, if duly considered, was
as much for the Advantage of the Empire, as Strasbourg was for that of France;
for Strasbourg, an Imperial Town, would have made but a very weak Barriere to
the Empire, but as it is now, that the Empire has the Fort of Kehl opposite to
Strasbourg, and all the Forts and strong Places on the right side of the Rhine,
it seems to be in a better Condition to hinder the French from passing of the
Rhine, than in the State 'twas left by the Treaty of Nimeguen: And indeed 'twas
well for the Peace and Quiet of Europe, that those met with most Success the
last Campaign, who wanted Peace the most; else a General Peace could not have
been negociated with so much Expedition, and so few Difficulties to overcome:
And for this reason we find no Losers in the Treaty, but it seems at once
Advantageous for all the Parties concerned.

Spain has reduced the French, by its strict Union with the Allies more than by
any Efforts of its own, within the Bounds and Limits of the precedent Treaty,
notwithstanding that the French were Masters of the whole Duchy of Luxembourg
before the War; whereas before, in all the precedent Treaties since that of
Vervins, the Spaniards were always giving up considerable Towns and Provinces
to France, and especially in those of the Pyrenees, Aix la Chappelle and
Nimeguen. The Empire has a much stronger Frontier by this Treaty than by that
of Nimeguen, considering the better Conditions given at present to the Duke of
Lorraine, and that France has quitted all the Country, Towns and strong places
it had on the other side of the Rhine before, by virtue of the Westphalian
Treaty and that of Nimeguen; and although the Empire has quitted Strasbourg and
delivered it up to the French, in lieu of Brisach, Fribourg and all that France
had beyond the Rhine, yet having the Fort of Kehl by virtue of this Treaty, on
the opposite side of the Rhine to Strasbourg, it will always be a Curb and a
Bridle upon the French, and will hinder them from Subsisting beyond the Rhine
with an Army, as long as this Place is in the hands of an Imperial Garrison;
which Strasbourg of it self could not have done, if it had been restored to the
Empire in the Condition wherein 'twas taken by the French.

The States General have plainly gained their Cause about the Electorate of
Cologne, which was one of the Articles upon which France declared War against
Holland, and by regaining with it the Duchy of Luxembourg to Spain in the late
Treaty, they have removed the French altogether from their Frontier, especially
from the Rhine, whereby they made that Fatal Irruption upon them in the Year
1672. They have likewise Parried a Mortal Stroke to their Religion, Commerce
and Liberties, by the Happy and Miraculous Turn of Affairs in England just at
the beginning of the Wars, which in a great Measure was due to their
Assistance; and their Liberty laying upon the same Stake with ours, and the
Protestant Interest all over Christendom, but especially in the United
Provinces being embarked upon the same Bottom with the Fate of the Church of
England, we may say that they have been, together with us, delivered from
Popery and Slavery.

As for the Advantages of France in this Peace, notwithstanding that it has
lost all Footing in Italy by the Separate Treaty with Savoy, by giving back
Pignerol after a Possession of above Sixty Years, to obtain it; that Lorrain is
restored upon much better Terms for that Duke and the Empire, than those agreed
upon in the Treaty of Nimeguen; and notwithstanding the great and prodigious
Expenses to which the French King has been obliged, to carry on so long and
tedious a War, which in truth he began himself, against so many Confederates,
and yet that he is still reduced to the Bounds and Limits of the precedent
Peace; which for this reason looks like so much Blood shed, and Treasure spent
to no purpose; that Cazal has been taken by the Allies, Lorrain and Dinant
restored, both which were in his Possession even at the Treaty of Nimeguen; and
Luxembourg given back to the Spaniards, all which Places were in the hands of
the French before the beginning of the War; and that he has been obliged to
evacnate all the Towns and Fortresses he has taken since, at the Expense of so
much Blood and Money; and all the Country he was Master of beyond the Rhine, in
Exchange for Strasbourg: Yet it must be owned that the French King has managed
the whole War with abundance of Art and Wisdom; that he has gained very great
Advantages over the Allies; that he has brought them to make a Peace upon his
own Terms, and extricated himself very gloriously thereby out of all the
Difficulties which a Powerful Confederacy had brought his Kingdom to, not so
much by the Vigor of their Efforts as by the Necessity of his own Affairs, the
Consequence of a Burdensome and Expensive War carried on by himself against so
many Potent Enemies, which had reduced most of the Provinces of France to an
Universal Poverty and Misery; and at last he remains Master of Strasbourg in
Alsatia, Longwy and Saar-Louis in Lorrain, much more to his Advantage than the
Equivalents he gives, being thereby in a Condition to hinder Lorrain (though
restored) from being troublesome to France, and still to keep the Rhine and the
Empire in awe; and has Power enough left by it, to be still formidable to the
rest of Europe, and to disturb the Peace and Quiet of Christendom as soon as
his Coffers are replenished; unless his Adherence to the Public Faith and
Sacredness of Treaties, constrains him more than the Apprehension of the Power
and Greatness of any of his Neighbors.

Yet notwithstanding these Advantages on both sides in the Treaty of Ryswick,
it is certain that both France and the Allies are fallen very short of their
Expectations in the last War; France proposed to it self at least to have
changed the Twenty Years Truce into a perpetual Treaty, in pursuance of the
repeated Instances made by the French Ambassador at the Diet of Ratisbone for
that purpose; and nothing in the World could have prevented, not only this, but
even the Ruin of the Protestant Religion every where, and with it the Truckling
of the Empire, the Spanish and United Netherlands, to the Power of France, save
the Happy Wonderful and Sudden Revolution in England, when, in all Humane
Probability, His Majesty's Expedition with so considerable a Body of the States
Forces in that Kingdom, must have created such Civil Wars, as would have been
rather Subservient to carry on the great Designs of France, instead of
hindering them; which I think is a sufficient Argument to convince any Man,
unless he is biased by his Passions, Prejudices and Interest, that it was the
doing of that overruling Providence, who, as the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 33.
Makes the Devices of the People to be of none effect, and casts out the
Counsels of Princes. As for the Allies, they had sufficiently felt the Effects
of that Great Power which the French had come to by the Treaty of Nimeguen; and
whilst the Court of England was engaged in the Interests of France, that turned
the Scale so much, that there could be no resistance for them: But that
powerful Kingdom having been so happily and suddenly drawn out of the Interests
of France, or rather delivered out of its Power, by the late Revolution in the
Government, and brought over by it to the side of the Allies (in whose Cause,
the Religion, Laws, Privileges and Liberties of that Kingdom were so nearly
concerned as the Liberties of Europe were reciprocally involved in the Destiny
of that Nation) so the Allies conceived very great Hopes thereupon of reducing
France to much lower Conditions than the Treaty of Nimeguen, and of hindering
it hereafter from disturbing so often the Peace and Quiet of Christendom. But
several Accidents have stopped the Progress of the Allies Affairs thus far; the
first has been the War of Ireland, which hindered England from bending the
Force of its Arms against France at the beginning, to employ them for the three
first Campagnes to recover a Kingdom which so undoubtedly belongs to it, and in
which it was certainly the Interest of the French to maintain the War as long
as possibly they could; not to mention the persidious Malice of a Party of Men
and unnatural Patriots, we have at Home, which has weakened our Efforts very
much, and clogged the Progress of our Affairs, so as to make them often drive
heavy: The second has been the Oversight of the Imperial Court, in not making
a Peace with the Grand Seignior after the Siege of Belgrade, as the Turks so
earnestly solicited it at that time: And the third, The Obstinacy of the
Turks, so prejudicial at last to their true Interest, in carrying on so
unsuccessful a War in Hungary; when by the necessity of the Emperor's Affairs,
whilst engaged in a War against France, they could have made a very
Advantageous Peace for themselves; which they ought to have done chiefly, when
they found that, notwithstanding the great Diversion they expected from the
French upon the Rhine, the Imperialists could give them an entire Rout at
Salankement, and take in the Campagnes following Guyla and Great-Waradin from
them; for which ill Policy they find at present but too much reason to repent,
when they see themselves left in the Lurch, and to deal with a Powerful
Confederacy; which, now that there is a General Peace in Christendom, can bend
all its Forces against a weakened and drooping Empire.

The first of these Obstacles being at length happily surmounted by the
Reduction of Ireland, France contrived an Invasion in the Year 1692. to make us
look to our own defense at home instead of increasing the strength of the
Allies abroad, by which though it miscarried in the main, yet it gained the
Town of Namur: And the defeat of Landen in 1693 having showed the necessity
there was for England and the States to augment considerably their Land Forces,
the Scale begun to turn the Campaign following, and the weight of England
appeared very considerable in the Balance chiefly in the Campaign of 1695 by
the Glorious Recovery of Namur; which, if it be true that France offered to
treat upon the Foot of Nimeguen before, upon the Issue of the Campaign of 1694,
sufficiently justified the Conduct of the Allies in the rejecting of it, when
the French lost Cazal in Italy at the same time: And there is a great deal of
reason to think that the carrying of the War by the Allies thereafter would
have been attended with many other Glorious Advantages and very Fatal to the
French, had it not been for the Duke of Savoy's deserting of the Common
Interest, in the Campaign of 1696; and (what was, may be, in some measure the
Cause of it) the Money difficulties which happened in England at that time and
obliged us to Reform our Coin, which had been Clipped and Debased almost to
nothing; so that it could bear no Price abroad, but must have hindered our
Armies at last from Subsisting in Flander's, and drawn the loss of the Spanish
Netherlands after it without a speedy Remedy: And as we could not carry on the
War nor indeed our Trade without Reforming our Coin, so France expected we
should be reduced to such Extremities in the doing of it, as might have put a
People together by the Ears that is not used to want, which would have made it
worth its while to continue a War, in which it would once more have had a fair
Chance to subdue the League and Compass its great Designs by the Ruin of
England. This may be reckoned the true Cause both of the inaction and weakness
of the Allies for the two last Campagnes, and of the continuing of the War then
by the French King; But though our Money difficulty's occasioned in a great
measure this prolonging of the War by the French, yet our overcoming of them so
happily and in so little a time, (which demonstrated the vast and unexpected
Wealth of a Nation they reckoned altogether impoverished, and which was
represented as such by our Domestic Enemies) has made amends for it in opening
the Eyes of our late Enemies, and letting them see that the Continuation of the
War would Ruin France before it could Beggar England; which has contributed
very much to facilitate and bring about that Universal Peace which Christendom
now Enjoys. And though the Allies have fallen short of their Expectations in
the War, and that France still continues in the main upon the Foot of the
Treaty of Nimeguen, yet England having so successfully rcover'd its Liberties
and maintained and vindicated the Liberties of all Europe at the same time, it
is thereby in a Condition to balance Affairs enough to keep France quiet and
to make it observe the Terms of the last Treaty, unless it would run the Risk
of an Alliance which, hereafter, would be more fatal to it than ever.

My last Reflection shall be about the Advantages which England has gained by
the present Peace. As for the King, he has raised an Eternal Monument of Fame
and Glory to himself by it, in bringing of a War (in which he had already
gained an Endless Renown in exposing his Person so freely to all the Dangers
and Fatigues of it every Campaign) to so happy a Period, in spite of all the
difficulties which seemed rather to intail it upon himself and his Dominions;
in steering all along so justly and nicely among all the different Parties,
Nations, Religions and Interests that made up the Body of the Allies, as to
bring them to join and Center together in effecting his Peaceable and quiet
Settlement upon the Throne of these Realms, even, notwithstanding too many ill
Successes in the Course of the War both for his and their Affairs; and by this
Union among the Chief Powers of the League so strictly carried on, and so
happily managed (of which the French themselves when Enemies, gave the Father
la Rue his Funeral Oration upon the Marechal of Luxembourg.
Applause to our Great Prince) to compass an Honorable Peace for his Allies as
well as for himself. But the Glory of Kings does not always make the Happiness
of Subjects, this would not amount to so much for us, if the welfare of England
was not joined with it; and here it is that we must take a view of the
Advantages which England reaps at present by that Peace it owes to the Wisdom
and Valor of our Good and Gracious as well as Great Sovereign; in which case
it would be enough to say that England has gained its cause by it, and
compassed the great and noble design, it did chiefly aim at in the War, of
recovering under. His Majesty's Government, its Rights, Privileges and
Liberties, which had been so notoriously violated before; and of securing
thereby the Protestant Religion not only amongst us but in the rest of
Christendom, which was then in so manifest and apparent a danger by the violent
Irruptions of a Popish Government; so as for the future we might intail both
our Religion and Liberties to Posterity upon a surer and more solid Foundation
then they could have, when in the reach of Tyranny and Arbitrary Power: But
over and above (which indeed is but a necessary consequence of the former)
England is again re instated in its prerogative of holding the Balance of
Europe, and keeping a due aequilibrium among the contending Powers of
Christendom, as it is its true interest; for Popery nor Arbitrary Power can
hardly be introduced amongst us but by a pernicious Adherence or rather
Servility to one side or the other, to render it formidable thereby to the rest
of the World, by this means to compass such Tyrannical designs under the
shelter of it; and I think we have had but too much experience already to vouch
for the Truth of this Assertion.

And as England has so gloriously recovered itself, and is reinstated in the
Umpireship of the Affairs of Europe, by gaining of our Cause in the happy
Conclusion of a War in which we were so necessarily engaged, so consequently is
it in our Power to make the present Peace Solid, Lasting and Durable; for
neither side will think it their advantage to be troublesome whilst a powerful
Umpire is resolved to maintain the Balance of Affairs. Whilst England is in
this Condition, it is in its true Posture, and as it should be; but in order to
keep and maintain our selves in it, these two things seem to be absolutely
necessary: The first is a Careful regard to the State of Affairs abroad, not to
look upon them with an indifferency because we are in an Island happily divided
from the rest of the World, which frees us from a great many of its Commotions
and Disturbances; but whenever this point of the Umpireship (in which our own
Safety as well as Glory is so nearly concerned) lies at Stake, then to engage
heartily and freely for the Liberty of Europe; for otherwise we must at length
become a Prey our selves, or be involved in a War at last which will then cost
us more Millions, than in taking things at the beginning it would have cost us
Hundred Thousands of Pounds; for the Truth of which I need but appeal to the
vast Expenses of the late War: The Second is Peace and Unity among our selves;
for, besides, that this Umpireship of the Affairs of Christendom wholly depends
upon it, which will always shelter us from Enemies abroad at the same time that
it makes us great in the World, it is the only bottom that the present
Government, and with it our Religion, Privileges and Liberties can stand upon;
for their Fate is at present inseparable, and I may boldly venture to say, that
as Affairs are now in Europe, if our (unhappy Divisions should work to that
height as to produce a Change, (which God forbid) no Revolution can happen in
England from the present Government, but for Popery and Tyranny, without a very
great Miracle to prevent it; which is a Risk no wise Protestant can expose the
Common Interest of all that call themselves Reformed to: And therefore whatever
Designs too many people amongst us may directly propose to themselves in
carrying off of Factions and Divisions to work a Change of Affairs either in
Church or State to their own Advantage, of what side soever they may be yet in
effect they only work for their own Destruction, and must of Course be
involved in the Ruins of that very Fabric which they endeavor to pull down,
and thus open the only remaining Inlet to Popery and Slavery: And I pray God
that all that call themselves Protestants may lay these things seriously to
their Hearts, that so our own Divisions may not one day effect what all the
Power of France prompted and encouraged by the Treacherous and base
Contrivances of an Unnatural Party of Men at home, has not been able to
perform, and to this End may the God of Peace guide our judgments in all
things, and endow our Hearts with a healing Christian Charity among our selves
(which is the only Bond of Peace) so that, though we cannot bring Matters to
an exact Uniformity of Sentiments in Matters of Religion, yet thereby we may at
least be hindered from biting and devouring one another, which cannot end
otherwise but in a Common Ruin, and united in the Methods of a mutual defense,
as we have at present, more than over, an Unity of Interest against the Common
Adversary.

FINIS.
Books printed for Matthew Wotton at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street.
^

^ Numb. 7. Showing the Usefulness of Humane-Learning in Matters of Religion.
Numb. 8. Showing the Necessity of such a Christian Discipline as is Consistent
with Civil Power, in Opposition to the Extremes on both sides.

Books printed for John Newton at the Three Pigeons in Fleet Street.
THE Honorable Hugh Hare Esquire has Charge at the General Quarter Sessions of the
Peace for the County of Surrey, held at Darking. The Second Edition, Corrected.

Dr. Falle's Account of the Isle of Jersey, with a new Map, dedicated to the
King. -- His Three Sermons on several Occasions.

Sir Francis Bacon's Essays.

A Discourse of Natural and Revealed Religion, in several Essays: Or, The Light
of Nature a Guide to Divine Truth. By Mr. Tim. Nurse.

The Anatomy of the Earth. By Thomas Robinson, Rector of Ba^by in Cumberland.


