Holy and Profitable Sayings OF THAT REVEREND DIVINE, Mr. WILLIAMDYER, Late
Preacher of the Gospel at Chesham And Chouldsbury, in the County of Bucks.
MAny have the space of Repentance who have not the Grace of Repentance.

It Is better to Repent without perishing, than to perish without Repenting

For if the second Birth have no place in you, the second Death shall have
power over you.

There is more bitterness following upon sins ending than ever there was
sweetness flowing from Sins Acting

Love to Christ begets a hatred of sin; now he love not Christ at all who loves
him not above all.

All our precious Mercies come swimming to us in precious Blood.

They that sow Holiness in the Seedtime of their live^ shall Reap happiness in
the Harvest of Eternity.

It is better swimming in waterworks of Repentance, than burning in the
Fireworks of Gods Vengeance.

For there is no coming to the fair Haven of Glory, without sailing through the
narrow strait of Repentance

If Christ had not freed us from the Curse, we had lived cursedly and dyed
cursedly, and been damned for ever.

They who despise the Death of the Lamb, shall surely feel the Wrath of the
Lamb.

They that will not own Christ at his first coming, Christ will not own them at
his second coming.

He that came from Heaven to make the Saints Righteous, will also come from
Heaven to make the Saints Glorious. He is the rich Jewel in the Cabinet of
Glory.

Whosoever has him cannot be poor, and whosoever has him not cannot be Rich.

Saints take as much delight in those Precepts, that injoin Holiness, as they
do in those promises that assure Happiness.

If the day of Mercy leave you Graceless, the day of Judgment will find you
Speechless.

Enraged Justice will avenge the Quarrel, of abused Mercy. The longer God
forbears not finding amendment, the sorer he strikes when he comes to Judgment.

If Gods forbearing Mercy do not draw you to Repentance, his Judgment will
drive you to Destruction.

The Sea of Damnation, shall not be sweetened with a drop of Compassion.

As you look for Happiness as long as God has a being in Heaven, so God looks
for Holiness as long as you have a being on Earth.

Man is the Excellency of the Creature, The Saint is the excellency of Man.

Grace is the excellency of the Saint, and Glory is the excellency of Grace.

It is a Greater Favor to be Converted than to be Created. Yea, far better to
have no being, than not to have a new being.

Inward Holiness is better than outward Happiness.

Goodness without Greatness is better than Greatness without Goodness.

Christ threw himself into the Sea of his Fathers Wrath, to save poor Believers
from Drowning.

He has shut the Door of Hell, took us from perdition, and he has opened the
Gate of Heaven to let us into Salvation.

O how much is it the Duty of Man to serve God, since God has made all the
world to that purpose.

If the Life of Christ be not your Pattern, the Death of Christ will never be
your portion.

The Soul of Man is the Cabbinet, the Grace of God is the Jewel; now Christ
will throw away the Cabbinet, where he finds not the Jewel.

Wherever Christ is a Priest for Redemption, he likewise is a Prince for
Dominion.

Wherever he is a Savior, there is he a Ruler.

Where he is a Fountain of happiness there he is a a Fountain of Holiness.

It is seldom seen that the sparkling Diamond of a great Estate, is set in the
Gold Ring of a Gracious heart.

A sight of our selves in Grace, will certainly bring us to a sight of our
selves in Glory.

Those Sins shall never make a Hell for us, that be a Hell to us, for where men
are so dilligent as to do their best, God is so Indulgent he will forgive the
worst.

To be in Christ is Heaven below, and to be with Christ is Heaven above.

But therre is no being with Christ above, if we are not in Christ here below.

Though Holiness is that which a Sinner scorns, yet Holiness is that which a
Savior Crowns.

FINIS.

