THE Turkish Secretary, CONTAINING The Art of Expressing ones Thoughts, without
Seeing, Speaking, or Writing to one another; With the Circumstances of a
Turkish Adventure: As also A most Curious Relation of several particulars of
the Serrail that have not before now ever been made public.

Translated by the Author of the Monthly Account.

Licensed July 3. R. Midgley.

LONDON, Printed by J. B. and sold by Jo. Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball over
against the Royal Exchange, and Randal Tailor at Stationer's-Hall, 1688.

TO THE READER.
THE Book now presented to thee, kind Reader, was written some few Weeks ago in
French by a God-son to the most Christian King, and one that had been a
Secretary of an Embassy of His Majesty at Constantinople. It was dedicated to
the Grand-Duke of Tuscany, and met with so very kind a Reception at the Courts
of France and Florence, that the Author had extraordinary Prais^ and Presents
conferred upon him by the two Soveraign^ and this his Performance has an
universal vogue among the two Nations. As the Translator flatters himself he
has done the Original justice; and as no Country is more famed than Old
England for Hospitality, he does not question but the Turkish Secretary will
meet with as kind Treatment here as among the French and Italians. He has, at
least, the Charm of Novelty. All our other Relations concerning Turkey, treat
only of Policy, Fire and Sword, whereas this displays nothing but Flowers,
Fruits and Gallantries, which I should think most seasonable; so that I may
well expect it to be kindly taken. And as a long Grace to a good Meal and
Appetite is unmannerly; so Gracious Reader, adieu.

THE TURKISH SECRETARY: OR, The Art of making ones mind understood without
Speaking, Seeing, or Writing to one another.
THere are several Ways of Expressing Love. The first School is that of Nature,
and all the Lessons which the Poets have given for this purpose would be
useless without the assistance of that Universal Mistress.

All Animals in general make use of it, but it is only for the Conservation of
their Species. Man to whom the use of Reason is peculiar, never Loves without
endeavoring to augment his Pleasures by new Inventions. He Employs all manner
of means to make the beloved Objected sensible of, and acquainted with his fond
thoughts. A Lover full of the Troubles which his Love occasions in him,
Expresses himself sometimes by Word of Mouth; He makes use of Writing by the
liveliest strokes to represent the ardency that burns him, and upon failure of
Voice and Writing, he endeavors to make known by the Different motions of his
face, the Sentiments of his heart. This is much the manner of making Love in a
free Country, where it is easy to communicate, and where you may speak, see,
or write to one another.

There are Nations that do not enjoy this advantage. The greater part of the
Turks can neither read nor write, and have not any freedom of communicating
with Women. Yet are they not insensible; On the contrary they seem to be more
susceptible of Love, than any other of the Eastern Nations, where the Commerce
of Women is equally difficult. They abandon themselves entirely to this
Passion; they make it their Sovereign Pleasure; they push it even to fury. Nay,
it has been averred to me that there are Turks, both Men and Women, who to
prove their Love in their Extravagancies, run Daggers into their Arms, and
cause burning Sulphur to be dropped into the Wound; and I have commonly seen
them, bite a piece of the flesh from off their Arms, suck and drink the blood
of it, and leave a burning Match to consume it self upon the Wound.

Thus it is not to be wondered if a People of so hot a Constitution, when they
want the usual means of making known their Passion, endeavor to invent such as
are Extraordinary. Flowers, Fruits, Woods, Odoriferous Simples, Silks, Gold,
Silver, Colors, Stuffs, and in short all things that serve to the Commerce of
Life, do among the Turks partake in that Love. This Skillfull Master whose
Empire, by Establishing it self strongly over all Creatures, proves it self by
this maxim of giving Wit to such as have none, of Suggesting Inventions for
the bringing about Designs, which it causes to be conceived, does not fail to
Exercise its Power in the need Lovers have of it in Turkey, where the more
difficult is the frequentation of Men with Women, the more Projects and
Enterprises does this Passion seem there to occasion, particularly in the minds
of Women, to overcome the Obstacles they meet withal in their Amors.
Surprising stories are told us upon this Subject, and which seem incredible.
Certain it is that this Sex being the most attackt by that Violent Passion, is
not the most blameworthy in the World, if it studies all possible means to
procure its satisfaction.

The Custom of a Turk's taking a Young Person for his Wife, without having ever
seen or known one another, but only in concert with the Maids Father, or with
some other Relation; the usage of Marrying a Maid as soon as she is thirteen or
fourteen years Old; the Number of Wives the Turks are allowed to have, and
their manner of considering them in that Estate, not otherwise than as being
proper to afford them Children, and for all the World as they do their Horses,
when they think fitting to use that which pleases them most; All these Reasons
and many more that cannot handsomely be unfolded, are very prevalent to take
away from Women the pleasure of their Husbands, and to Excuse them if in spite
of the rigor which keeps them penn'd-up and inaccessible, they Employ all
sorts of Inventions to revenge themselves of such Injuries and Provocations, by
a Commerce of Gallantry with some Lover.

This is a Subject that would lead me too far, but to come to the manner of
their writing to one another without Pen, Ink and Paper, by the means of
Flowers, Fruits, Woods, Silks, Colors and other things, we cannot positively
affirm that this was invented by the particular Genius of Lovers. There is
reason to believe that this comes from the Ancient manner of Explaining ones
mind by Ciphers, and by Figures such as were the Hieroglyphics among the
Egyptians, before Letters were invented. Be it as it will all these things
which the Turks call Selam in this use, that is to say Safety, or desire of
Peace, have their Natural or Allegorical Signification and Worth, insomuch
that a little Packet of about an Inch bigg, if you have a regard to what it
contains, composes a very Expressive Discourse, which is understood by the
Interpretation of the name of Each thing they send.

For Example, a bit of Sugar in Turkish called Cheker, will signify seni Madem
tcheker, which is as much as to say, My Bosom longs for you, My Heart wishes
for you passionately. A Stone which in Turkish is called Tach, will be
interpreted Koyalum bir yastuga bach, that is to say, let us lay our heads upon
one and the same Pillow.

This is also Explained by a Phrase, whose first Syllable is like to the first
of the Name of the thing which one sends, as Mavi, which signifies Blew, will
signify Mail oldum, I am fallen in Love. Karenfil, which is a Pink, or a
Clove-Gilliflower, will signify Karenfil sen Kararung yok, ben seni tchoktan
severem meyer benden hbaherung yok; Which signifies you are a Pink, a Beauty
not to be paralleled; a long long time have I loved you without daring to let
you know it. A Plum in Turkish called Erik will give to understand Eridik,
which is as much as to say, We are dissolved away in grief, and the like of
others, which custom authorizes rather than any certain Rule; for the Turks do
not only take the just Explication literally; but also sometimes
Metaphorically, and by helping on a little for the Connection of the sense. For
Example, they are minded to Express these words.

I am Extremely in Love with you, the Torment my Love makes me suffer makes me
faint away and almost run distracted. My Heart breaths after you with passion,
wishing you to bring it the necessary Remedy, etc.

They wlll take a Grape, Blew Silk, a Plum, a Pea, a bit of Sugar, and a little
Aloes Wood, which is common in Turkey, and they will observe to range all these
things well, and bind the Silk in such manner, that each thing may gradually
discover it self, and be orderly Explained as the following Table will let you
see.

Selam, Or a thing that is sent. Aloes Wood. Sugar. A Pea. A Plum. Blew Silk. A
Grape.

All this is called in Turkish

Names. Eud Agadgi. Cheker. Nohoud. Erik. Mavi. Usum.

Whose Signification is

Signification. Iladgi. Seni madem tcheker. Bachimung Derdunden oldum beihoud.
Eridik. Mail oldum Iki giaizum

Which in English is literally

Construction. Physiciaen, Remedy of my head. My Bosom longs after you. My
torment makes me mad. We dissolve away. I am fallen in Love. My Eyes.

All these Phrases joined together frame a Letter by tacking them a little for
the Connection of the Sense. Thus when you write,

My Eyes, I am fallen in Love, We are Disolv'd away, My Torment makes me Mad,
My Inclinations, My Bosom attracts you, Physician Remedy of my head.

This is as much as to say, My Heart, My Dear, I am fallen in Love with you,
and the Torment I am under from my Passion, makes me sometimes faint away and
then again almost run distracted. My heart passionately desires you to bring it
the necessary Remedy.

Though there are Selams to which the Turks give several Significations, of
which they ever take that which suits best with the Other things that go along,
I have only applied my self to give them one simply, that so I might not
occasion a Confusion that could be only unravelled by long practice; But it is
to be observed that as the Turks have no Gender, and that they equally say with
us, a handsome Man and a handsome Woman, the same Terms and Phrases serve for
Lover and for Mistress.

This way of Expressing a Passion, as Extravagant as it may (...) has,
nevertheless, it is prettinesses, and that it only proc^^^s from a great want of
Liberty, and from the ignorance of the most Common Science which is that of
Reading and Writing; Yet is it so Gallant and Ingenious that those who know how
to read and write, do not disdain to make use of it. They Fancy these Selams
to have more efficacy, and to make greater Impressions upon the mind, then the
Characters that are formed in a Letter; which besides, being liable to
interception, would endanger the two Lovers secret, which is but too usual in
Amorous Commerces.

The Persons that are wont to make use of Selams have ever a little Cabinet
full of all the things that compose them, and they know their Significations so
well by heart, that they use them with great readyness, either in Writing or
making an Answer. Perhaps you may object to me, what I my self sometimes said
to the Turks, that with these Selams one cannot act so freely in the search of
some quaint turn of Phrase, or of some new Expression which the Wit and Hearts
of Lovers may Suggest, so to distinguish ones self with the beloved Object, and
to insinuate our selves into its Affections after a more agreeable manner. And
indeed, these Selams being common to all sorts of Persons, The Woman of the
least Ingenuity may say as fine things as the most Understanding Man in the
World. In answer to this I shall quote what the Turks retorted upon me. Though
that the reason I have alleged may be destroyed, since the Wit does not in
some manner leave to employ it self, and express it's-gallantry and politeness
in the Choice and ranging of the Selams that one sends, though it were
absolutely true, what necessity is there of spending time in needless words?
This is good for Infidells, say the Turks, who have only windy flourishes of
Discourse; but for their parts they go directly to the point in all things,
particularly in a matter, wherein they hold that all Discourse is Superfluous.

For this reason is it that without making use of Circumlocutions or
Equivocations, they make no difficulty as well Women as Men to explain their
minds freely and express things as they think them, believing (saving some
Rules of Decorum) that there is no more harm in the one than the other, since
the Sin consists in the Intention. It suffices them that with these Selams they
give to understand all that can be said and written in a Commerce of Amity and
Correspondence as is very feasible, as will be made manifest in the Series of
this Discourse.

But that we may the more delightfully introduce the usage of those Selams or
mute Characters, and give a more perfect understanding of the Turks manner of
interpreting them, I will relate a little History that has happened in my time,
which I learnt from an old Jewess called Boul-Ester, who was the Principal
Actress in it, to which I will add a Character of all the Phrases that may be
employed, and a little Dictionary of Flowers, Fruits, Stuffs, and other things
that serve instead of these same Phrases, such as I had at Constantinopie in
Turkish Terms and Characters: I have here retrenched them that so I might not
perplex the Reader by words of a Foreign Tongue, wherein he would not be bound
to believe me, having only contented my self with faithfully Translating them,
and with instancing the Approbations thereunto annexed, and which I took upon
the places, as well as to my History, which he will allow Credence to if he
thinks fitting.

As to the Turkish proper names that may be met withal in this Book, they are
to be pronounced exactly in the same manner as they are writ in English
Characters, and not by Corrupting them, as most of those do, especially the
French, who read these sorts of things, out of a mere Fancy of strange
Difficulties in pronouncing a Language, against which they are unjustly
prejudiced. From thence is come the error of Pronunciation, which is committed
when one is obliged to read in English proper Names, and other Turkish words,
which it would be much more easy to pronounce naturally as they ought to be
pronounced, than after the manner People do pronounce them. For example the
name of Murad, as it is pronounced in Turkish is much softer and easier to be
read and pronounced in English than is Mourat or Amurat. Sarai which is the
true word, would be much smoother and easier than Serraglio. Ahmet is easier
than Akhomet, which is often taken for another name than Ahmet, though it be
the same. It is the like with a world of others, which People seem to have
taken delight in maiming and guelding. This would be very blameable, if a too
ancient usage, and a Complaisance for the Public, which I my self have had,
did not render those excusable that have written in this manner; but they too
often commit a fault, in which it is convenient to give an explication that
will not bevoid of use for those that daily read Gazettes, and the most
considerable matters that concern Turkey.

In speaking of the Pacha's, some will absolutely call them Bachas, others read
Pacas, or Bacas, others write Bassas, and none of all these speak right,
confounding together the words of Pacha, Bacha, and Bachi. Certain it is that
all the world is not bound to know the difference there is between these three
words, but those that write concerning them ought not to be ignorant in this
point, that so they may make them to be well pronounced, and understood in such
manner as they ought to be understood and pronounced.

Pacha, which imports Viceroy, is a Diminitive of Padichah which signifies
Emperor. This Title is conferred on the Governors of Provinces, as Pacha of
Aleppo, Pacha of Cairo, Pacha of Candia, etc. It is likewise given to
Lieutenant Generals; to the High Admiral Capoudan-Pacha, derived from the word
Capitano; to the Controllour General of the Finances Defterdar-Pacha; to
several other great Officers of the Empire, and to those that have stood
possessed of the Dignities to which that Title is annexed. Pacha is subordinate
to Vesir, not Visir or Vizier, which in its Arabic Etimology signifies Porter,
as if one should say the Person in whose Prudence and Conduct is confided the
whole weight and Government of the Empire.

Bassa was never said in Turkish; It has been borrowed from the Greeks, who not
being able to pronounce the Ch otherwise than as two ss, say Passa instead of
Pacha, and the change of the P to the B is made by Corr^p^ion or mistake (...)
the word Bacha, which is a very mean Title, and that of (...) which is annexed
to very Honorable Employs, nay ar(...) that are the Principal of the State.

Bacha and Bachi do both derive themselves from the same word Bach, which
signifies Head, Chief; But they are extreme different in Application: Bachi is
bestowed upon seve^al very considerable Officers of the Empire, and to all the
Chief Commanders of any Body, Company, Brigade, or Party.

Bacha is commonly taken for the J^nizaries, and for all sorts of People of the
lowest Condition whom they call Ibrahim Bacha, Osman Bacha, Eumer Bacha,
Mustapha Bacha etc. As if we should say in English to People of the lowest
Rank, Master Peter, Master John, Master Thomas, etc. And as it would be very
ridiculous to confound Master Peter, Master Thomas, Master John, with Master of
Accounts, Master of Requests, Master of the Wardrobe, etc. so it is no less
ridiculous in regard of the Turks, that one confounds the word Bacha with that
of Pacha, which signifies Viceroy Governor of a Province, or with that of
Bachi, which signifies Master, Chief, Superintendant, or Commander, as the
Topchi Bachi Grand Master of the Artillery, Chief of the Canonniers; the
Bostangi Bachi, Master Gardener, Lieutenant of the Policy of Constantinople,
and Superintendant of the Imperial Gardens and Houses; the Capidgi Bachi who
are as it were the Grand Signiors Gentlemen in Ordinary. The Tcha^uch Bachi,
Commanding the Companies as it were of Gentlemen-Pensioners, and Sundry other
considerable Officers of the Port. After this petty Observation which does not
ill become the Character of the Turkish Secretary, since it concerns the
speaking and Writing well, I proceed to the History of the Old Jewess.

THE HISTORY OF YOUSSUF-BEY and of GUL-BEYAZ.
IT is the Custom of the Turks in public Merriments to spend the three days of
the Bairam, which is their feast, of all the year the most Solemn, after a Fast
of thirty Days, as is that of Easter among the Christians. The Turkish
Princesses and Ladies of the first Quality that have their Palaces and Abodes
in the City of Constantinople, and in the Neighborhood, repair to the Grand
Signiors Seraglio to visit the Sultana's, that are not to be seen at another
time, and there they spend those three days in sports and Gallantries. The
Slaves that are not Employed in Singing or dancing, which makes up the
Principal Divertisement of the Princesses, withdraw into some By-Apartment
where they contribute to each others Mirth and Recreation.

Upon a certain Day that Bournaz Hatidge Sultan, Sister to Sultan Murad, went
to the Seraglio to visit the Sultana Valide, Mother to the Grand Signior
Mahomet the 4th, now lately Deposed, these two Sultana's meaning to be private,
dismissed for a time all their Slaves, out of their Presence. Some that were
most Intimate struck off from the rest, that they might discourse with the more
freedom, and went to sit in a great Kiochque, or House of Pleasure to take the
Air. This Banqueting House looked upon the Gardens of the Seraglio, and upon
the open Sea, that washes the great Front of the City of Constantinople, on the
sides of the Isles of Princes.

Their Discourse happened to fall upon the Amors of Gulbeyaz, which signifies
White-Rose. She was the Sultana Valide's Principal Slave, and had some Years
ago been taken out of the Seraglio to be given in Marriage to the Son of a rich
Pacha, through adventures as Whimsical as they were propitious for her.

All the Slaves Mutually entreated their Companions to tell that Story; but as
one of them called Fatma, was better acquainted with it than the Rest, through
her having been concerned in it, and by Gulbeyaz having made her her Confident
without Reserve, they earnestly entreated her to relate it, which she did in
these terms.

Gulbeyaz had reached to Fifteen or Sixteen years of Age, without being
acquainted with Love, though she had daily heard the other Maids her Companions
discourse of that Passion, which produced such strange effects, that it made
them at the same time proceed from joy to sadness, and from Love to Jealousy
and Despair, Insomuch that their Countenances changed as often as their hearts
were ruffled with different Motions.

So pitteous an Estate had made Gulbeyaz afraid of such like Engagements, and
she had shunned them as much as was possible for her; but at length Love being
provoked by the resistance of so beautiful a Person, constrained her to buckle
to his Power, and inspired her with Sentiments of tenderness for a Young Turk,
the Neighbor of a Jew, at whose house she had been boarded with several other
Slaves above her Age. She was placed in that Family to learn to Read, Write,
Sing, Dance, Play upon Instruments, and the other Exercises that are commonly
taught us, so to polish and render her worthy of being introduced into this
Seraglio, where Gulbeyaz remained for three years, after which she went out
hence, with a fortune equal to her Merit, and the greatness of her ove.

This Turk called Youssuf-Bey, the Son of Mehemmed Pacha, Seraskier, was the
Neighbor and much the friend of the Jew, at whose House Gulbeyaz was placed,
and he frequently went thither to hear her Sing, and play upon a Psaltery,
which she did incomparably better than any Body in the World.

She was then in her Sixteenth year, and Youssuf conceived so much Love for
her, that to see and hear her the oftener, he spent Days and Nights in his
Garden, which was contiguous to that of the Jew, or at Windows that looked upon
a Place where Gulbeyaz was wont to walk: Nay one day he would needs discourse
her upon the Passion she had produced in his heart, but his Amorous Cajolleries
made so little Impression upon her mind, that as then she had not the least
Sentiment of tenderness.

Some time after, the Person that had placed her at the Jews House finding her
sufficiently instructed, presented her to the Sultana our Mistress. Absence
which is a great Remedy against Love, instead of stifling Youssuf's Passion,
did only serve to augment it, while that Gulbeyaz lived very peaceably in the
Seraglio, where Love as yet had not disturbed her Repose.

Youssuf tried all manner of ways to have some Account of the Dear she he
adored. All his Endeavors were in vain; the Doors of the Women's Apartment are
inaccessible Places. The Eunuchs that keep them being peevish, and vexed to see
themselves deprived of what might render them agreeable to so many Beauties as
they have under their Charge, become jealous of them even to fury, and have
piercing Eyes that discover their very least steps.

So many Difficulties had almost pawl'd Youssuf, who had spent near three years
in Abortive Endeavors. He gave himself up to Grief and Complaints, when that
one of his friends, who shared in all his Afflictions, informed him that a
Jewess, called Boul-Ester, had a free Access into the Seraglio, where she sold
a World of Toys to the Sultana's.

Youssuf who had Wit and Money, availed himself of his Friends advice, and
thence conceived good hopes, both for that he was prodigiously rich, and that
he knew with Money the most Difficult Enterprises are brought about, He
resolved to entrust his Passion in this Jewess, and to make her his Friend,
wherein he found no great Difficulties, because that considerable Presents, and
the promise of redoubling them in case of good success, immediately engaged the
Jewess to serve Youssuf in his Amor.

He encharged her with a pair of Pendants, which were two Emeraulds of the Pear
Cut, with a pair of Diamond Bracelets and with a Girdle garnished with Rubies
enchac'd in enameled Gold. He accompanied this Present with a Letter written
with his own hand, and with a Selam, contained in a Gold enameled Watch Cover
enriched with Diamonds.

He conjured this Toy-woman to use her utmost Industry to make Gulbeyaz
sensible of the excess of his Love, and to represent to her the Disorders which
this Passion had occasioned in his Bosom; the State challenging pity to which
it had reduced him; that Gulbeyaz had been now near three years in the
Serraglio, without his having been able to find out an occasion to have the
least tidings of her, and that he was ready to dye if all he had suffered for
her sake was incapable of inspiring her with some Compassion and Acknowledgment
for him.

The Jewess, who was extraordinary Sly and Cunning, coming to the Serraglio,
after her usual manner, watched the time that the Sultana Valide was not
visible, and seeking for an occasion to speak conveniently to Gulbeyaz, she
entreated her to give her leave to rest a little in her Apartment, which
Gulbeyaz could not civilly refuse her, being of all the Maids this Toy-woman
was the most familiarly acquainted withal, by reason of her employ of the
Sultana's Treasuress, to which she had attained in a very little time by her
merit, and by that Princess's most peculiar esteem.

Women are naturally curious; Gulbeyaz immediately asked the Jewess what she had
new to show that day, and having told her that she brought Jewels, she
extolled their Beauty and Perfection, and taking out of her Bosom a Box wherein
they were contained, she showed them to Gulbeyaz.

The fire and luster of these Precions Stones which Gulbeyaz eyed attentively
and with a wishing look, put her upon decking her self with them for a moment,
and the Jewess did not fail by her flatteries and praises to engage her often
to consult her Table-Glass, which she found by Chance, and which made her
observe an Extraordinary flushing in her face, occasioned by Vexation and
Spite, for that fortune had not favored her with the like Treasure.

Boul-Ester who plainly perceived all that passed in Gulbeyaz heart, and that
she was falling into the snare, judged that all Moments were precious, and
fancied it to be now time to play her part, and to discover to this fair one
the subject of her Commission; by delivering her Youssufs Letter and Prefent.

Charming Gulbeyaz, (said she to her) I must own to ye that I cannot but wonder
that the Sultan is not taken with so many Beauties, and with so many
Attractions as I observe in your Person. There is nothing in you, but what is
capable of inspiring Love, and if his Highness had seen you thus adorned, the
Sultana would be jealous, and I can easily persuade my self of the Truth of
what has been affirmed to me of the passion which a Young Turk, called Youssuf
had for you.

Though since Gulbeyaz had been in the Seraglio, she had neither heard talk of
the Jew, at whose house she had been boarded, nor of Youssuf-Bey, yet that name
made her change Color. This young Man's Passion was not unknown to her, since
he had discoursed her upon the torments she made him to endure. She did what
she could to dissemble her surprise, and conceal the Disorder of her mind, but
the poison that had so long been shed therein, without her perceiving it,
discovered it self in spite of her, by a sigh that broke forth from the bottom
of her heart, and which she could not keep in.

Boul-Ester availing her self of the Disorder she knew Gulbeyaz to be in, did
so lively represent to her Youssuf's Passion and Merit, that she perfectly
insinuated him into her heart, though this fair one durst not yet however declare
her self openly. The Jewess presented her at the same time with the Box of
Diamonds, and as she fancied it to be a thing that she only showed her,
Curiosity made her open it; but instead of a Watch-movement, she found a letter
in it, which obliged her to shut it again immediately to restore it to the
Toy-woman.

She pretended to be vexed, though she would willingly have been informed of
the Contents of the Letter, not doubting but that it was a Declaration of
Youssuf's Passion, who began to, please her. The Jewess who had too much
Experience to be a stranger to and not understand this feint, pressed her so
earnestly to take the Box again, that she could not decline it, but she
protested to her, that it was only out of Complaisance, and to free her self
from her Importunities.

In taking out the Letter Gulbeyaz found underneath a little Packet, which
contained a Selam, but as she was impatient to read, she immediately opened the
Letter, which was conceived In these terms.

To see and Love you, Divine Gulbeyaz, were to me but one and the same thing.
Heaven that made you so beauteous, ought to have made you more sensible, or not
to have inspired me with so much Love with so little hopes. My Passion is as
old as the knowledge I have had of your merit, and time which consumes all
things has only served to augment it. Now for several years have I not been my
self; and only live for you. I spend both days and Nights in that part of my
Garden, whence I heard you Sing, and Play upon Instruments, and whence I some
times discoursed you. That Place which was the Confident of my Pleasures, is at
present of my Torments; and will be quickly that of my Grave, unless you cause
my destiny to be changed, being no longer able to live without seeing you. I
know the difficulty of this Enterprise; but, incomparable Gulbeyaz, if you
would have a little Compassion of him that languishes away for you, and grant
him the happiness of throwing himself at your feet, leave all things to the
Care and Contrivance of the prudent Boul-Ester, she will know how to manage both
my good fortune and your Reputation.

The reading the Letter gave Gulbeyaz the Curiosity to open the Selam; It was
composed of Ginger, with Yellow-Wax, a bit of Cloth, of Coal, Alum, Cypress,
wrapt-up in Pearlcolour Silk, whose Signification is;

Feign would I, My Eyes, that you were fully informed of the Love I have for
you; It robbs me of my self, and if you do not take pity of the Condition I am
in, I shall dye while you enjoy a happy Life. Honor me with an Answer, and put
a period to my torments.

Though Gulbeyaz pretended the not being well pleased with this Declaration
which she found 100 free, yet was her heart Extremely well Satisfied with
Youssufs Constancy. This Heart of hers spoke to her in his behalf, and there
needed no great Endeavors to persuade her that he loved her, and inspire her
with tenderness.

The Jewess, who studied Gulbeyaz's Countenance, perceiving the effect of the
Letter and Selam, offered her at the same time the Jewels with which she was
already decked. Her reason which was not as yet wholly prepossessed, made her
refuse them flat and plain. She gave her to understand the injury that this
would do her Reputation, if the Sultana discovered it, and that she ought not
to accept a Present, much less embrace an Intreague that might be the occasion
of her ruin. At the same time she took off those Jewels, and restored them
with the Box, only keeping the Letter and Selam.

Boul-Ester, whom long Practice had rendered a Person of large Experience, was
persuaded that an overgreat Earnestness does sometimes hinder the success of
what one most wishes: wherefore without insisting longer to make Gulbeyaz take
the Jewels, she contented her self with min^ing her of the acknowledgment that
is owing to Persons that have favorable Sentiments for us, and that the Law of
Nations required that she should at least return an Answer, without which there
would be occasion to doubt of the fidelity of her Message.

Gulbeyaz fell happily into the Trap, and fancied she should gain a mighty
Victory over her self, by returning Youssuff an Answer quite contrary to what
her thoughts were for him, nay and to what she had newly done in keeping his
Letter and Selam: For her Answer was as now follows.

I know you to be a Romancer, and think to expose me to your Raillery,
Recollect your self, and remember that I am very angry at your temerity, and
that I will never consent to your fond Pretensions. This was expressed by a
Pepper Corn, a little bit of Parchment, of Velvet, a small Splinter of Box, a
Pistacho, a piece of Glass, and all these things made a small Packet in a
piece of Cloth, by which forsooth she would feign let Youssuff know that
Gulbeyaz was weary of his Importunities.

She was too high and arrogant both in Language and Action to continue so long.
And this Consideration did in a great measure comfort Youssuff, for otherwise
Spite and Vexation would have sent him to his Grave, if his Mistress's
overgreat Affectation to oppose his Addresses, had not made him guess she
would yield in a little time.

Thus, far from being pawl'd, he grew more and more fortified in his
Resolution. The Jewess did more than a little contribute thereunto, by giving
him a faithful Account of all the Circumstances of her Conversation with
Gulbeyaz, and by encharging her self with a second Mute Letter, which he gave
her for that beauteous Person. He was not willing to make use either of Ink or
Paper, for fear of some Accident, and besides he perceived by experience that
she performed but too well in the other way of writing. He contented himself
with justifying himself after a modest sort of manner, 'till such time as that
he had answerable Returns from Gulbeyaz, who he foresaw would not be long in
Debt to him.

Some days after did Boul Ester return to the Serraglio, and in entering the
Sultana's Apartment, she Embraced Gulbeyaz in the presence of her Companions
who were there, and told her I give you the good morrow and this also. At the
same time she put into her hands a very little Box of Gold, that contained Tow,
and a bit of a kind of Coverlet, and took out of her bosom a pair of Cizars
very curiously wrought, and a pocket Looking-Glass, which she pretended to make
her a present of. As Gulbeyaz was the she of all the Slaves, who stood the
Jewess in most stead with the Princess, this present gave no matter of
suspicion to the Rest; on the contrary, they would have been suprized if
Gulbeyaz should not have accepted it. Now she interpreted this new Selam in the
manner following.

If it is possible, My Dear Mistress, that I have been so unhappy as to
displease you, pardon me, I beseech you, that fault, or command me to dye. I am
just ready to sacrifice my Life to Express to you the Excess of my Love and of
my Obedience.

Boul-Ester staid a long time in the Chamber with the Sultana, who consulted
her upon the Quality of certain stuffs for a furniture, and in putting up an
Extraordinary fine Herons Top which she had showed her, she entreated Gulbeyaz
to order a Glass of Water to be brought her into the Antichamber, for her to
drink at her going away, which was as much as to say that she desired an Answer.

The obligation of being always with the Princess, had hindered Gulbeyaz from
getting a Selam ready as baughty as the first. This Constraint occasioned her
entertaining a secret joy, though otherwise she labored under an extraordinary
impatience to discourse Boul-Ester. Yet had she not the opportunity of doing it
that day, by reason of the world of Maids that flocked from all parts of the
Lodgings to see what the Jewess had brought.

All that Gulbeyaz could do was to give her hastily a Selam, in bidding her
Adieu in the same manner as the other had bid her good morrow. This Selam was
more succinct and much less severe than the former, in which Gulbeyaz has told
me several times that she pretended so much rigor only on the account that she
thought Honor and Decorum engaged her thereunto, that so she might not yield
otherwise than in form, and that she might charge to time and the perseverance
of her Lover the excuses of a Passion, which she had been but too sensible of
from the first Declaration.

Wherefore Gulbeyaz told Boul-Ester just as she was going away that she had
several Commissions to encharge her with, but wanting the opportunity of
unfolding her mind to her, she entreated her only for that time to take a A
Current Piece in Turkey of about a Groat or five pence value.
Themen, and with it to buy her Pens to write, like to one she gave her in
pressing her hand, to which she added that this was all that time and her
Devoir to her Mistress did permit her to tell her; as, indeed, was true.

Her Eyes and the tone of her Voice gave Boul-Ester much more to understand
than did the Themen and the Quill, which signified however, that as she had not
any proof of the Sincerity of Youssuff's words, she did not advise him to
suffer any longer for the love of her.

This was for all the world like casting Oil into the fire, and does plainly
manifest the blindness of those that love. Gulbeyaz would not have her Lover
think of her, and yet could not forbear thinking continually of him. In short,
there was no resisting Destiny, which treated them both in the manner you are
going to hear.

The more Youssuff and the Jewess grew sensible of Gulbeyaz weakness, or rather
the violence of her Love, the more did they push things to extremity; though in
the up shot, Youssuff was found to deal upon the square. They contrived so well
together the means of persuading his Mistress of the truth of this, that she
could no longer decline owning that she was convinced of his Sincerity, and
that she should willingly and delightfully make suitable returns to it, as far
forth as her good Fortune would allow her the occasions.

Youssuff redoubled his Presents and his Promises to Boul-Ester, and engaged
her so far in his Interests, that she resolved to watch her opportunity to go
to the Serail in the same manner she did the first time, that is to say, when
she knew the Sultana not to be visible, that so she might have an occasion of
speaking freely to Gulbeyaz, and of using her utmost endeavors to satisfy
Youssuff's Love by bringing him some favorable Declaration from his Mistress,
which accordingly fell out three days after.

While that the Sultana did, after her usual rate, take her Repose, all the
Slaves went into the Gardens to gather Flowers therewithal to adorn their
Apartments, saving two, who according to Custom staid in the Princess's
Chamber. During that time, Gulbeyaz out of a kind of foreknowledge would needs
remain alone to take the fresh air in a Balcony that looks upon the Court of
the Serrail. There was she pensive and musing upon the Jewels which Boul-Ester
had shown her from Youssuff, and on the Disorder she was brought into by being
acquainted with his Passion. Nay she began to repent her having shown her self
so scornful, when that she perceived the Jewess coming into the Court of the
Serrail, and directing her steps toward the Valide's Apartment.

Gulbeyaz went down immediately to meet this Toy-woman, and having asked her
without thinking on what she said, through what malice on her part, and through
what fatality for her heart, she came just at a time they might have the
leisure to continue a long while together, and discourse in her Chamber;
Boul-Ester knowing, by the hurry and quality of this Discourse, what past in
the Bosom of that Lovely Person, answered her that she was in hopes of gaining
that day a great Victory. Being both got into Gulbeyaz Chamber, the Jewess
represented to her all that Cunning and Fancy can suggest to bring about what
one has undertaken; and as it was easy for her to perceive the Progress that
what she said to her made in her heart, by Gulbeyaz fond and hasty way of
asking her whether she had a Selam to give her; Yes, answered the Jewess,
taking out the Jewels she showed her the first time, accompanied with a very
large Diamond which Gulbeyaz had not yet seen, and with a little Box made of
one sole Emerauld. Here Is the Selam I have orders to give you with an absolute
prohibition of carrying the least part of it back.

Gulbeyaz was agreeably surprised, and beginning to open the Box, she found it
to contain a Letter, which she tell immediately to u^cifring, being much more
eager to know what concerned Youssuffs Person and the Sentiments of his heart,
than to view the Jewels, which, however fine they were, much less affected
her. This Ticket was the Kernel of a Nut, Sea-green-Colour'd Silk, a Grain of
Corn, a little Plum, a bit of Corrail, Cherry-Colour'd Silk, Jessamin, and a
little Tobacco, wrapped up in Peach-Colour'd Silk: All this was as much as to say,

I ever was in hopes that you would at the long run put a period to your
rigours and my torments; but since I see the Impossibility that is met withal
in this matter, and that you are inflexible to my Entreaties, not withstanding
the piteous Estate to which you have reduced me, I abandon to you all I have in
the world with my Life, after Swearing to you that I act with the utmost
sincerity, and that you are the only cause of my Death.

This Ticket's tenderness and sincerity, which were sufficiently proved by
Youssuffs Magnificence and Generosity, afforded Boul-Ester a free Field to tell
Gulbeyaz all she was minded. At last after many replies and great Contests on
both sides, she fully convinced her by a means she could not resist.

This Toy-woman represented to Gulbeyaz that her Beauty being set off with the
Stately Attire and Luster which these Jewels gave her, she might chance to
please the Grand Signior, and, perhaps, come to be Sultana. The pretext which
Gulbeyaz used of the Desire of reigning at least in the heart of an Emperor,
was a mighty help to her, to cover the Complaisance she had for Youssuff, and
this reason having prevailed over all her own, she consented to receive the
present, and began at length to declare her self for him that sent it.

Boul-Ester could have wished that she would have become as easy to have
received him himself in her Apartment: She mentioned it to her, and employed
her whole Address to make her consent to it. Gulbeyaz heart indeed, was not
altogether averse to this Proposal, but the greatness of the Undertaking and
the dangers she should have exposed her self to, did absolutely hinder her from
thinking on it, and whatever endeavors the Jeness used to gain her Compliance,
she could not as yet obtain any thing further from Gulbeyaz, save that the
would place her self at the Windows to see her Lover in the Gardens, provided
he could come thither without too much hazard. She allowed him three days to
contrive the means of it.

Boul-Ester would needs have this Permission in writing, that so she might show
it to Youssuff; But though Honor and Reason made Gulbeyaz refuse this, Love
engaged her on the other side to make known to her Gallant by a Selam the true
Sentiments of her heart, and that his Passion had nothing that displeased her.
This Selam was put into a Silk Handkerchief Embroidered with Gold, wrought with
her own fair hand, after which the Toy-woman went her ways, pretending before
the other Slaves who had caught them in Discourse, that she lest those Jewels
with Gulbeyaz to show them to the Sultana. Youssuff being impatient to learn
the success of his Enterprise, waited his Confident's return, who gave him a
full Account of what had passed, as also the Handkerchief sent him by his
Mistress.

The joy he had in receiving this Pledge of the allowance of his Passion,
transported him in such manner, that without minding what it contained, he
kissed it a thousand and a thousand times, and watered it with his Tears with
the softest Expressions that Love can inspire.

When he was a little recovered from this Ecstasy, Boul-Ester made him view the
Selam. It was of Isabella Silk, a little bit of Sponge, Myrrh and Mint.

I cannot express to you the excess of joy this afforded Youssuff. It was so
great that it robbed him of Speech, and this Ravishment had lasted much longer,
if Boul-Ester, as curious as he was satisfied, had not pressed him to give her
the meaning of this Ticket, which she guessed to be very propitious. He did so,
and it was as much as to say,

I accept of your Vows, and be persuaded of my fidelity, provided you be
constant. I pray to Heaven that it would bestow you upon me, and that our Souls
may be inseparble.

Is it possible, most Lovely Gulbeyaz, did Youssuff then cry out, that my
Passion is pleasing to you? Is it not to amase me, and to laugh at my torment,
that you study to ensuare me and engage me further? And kissing the
Handkerchief, he said, Dear Pledge of the fidelity of her I adore, will you be
also of the Sincerity of her heart? Then addressing himself to the Selam, And
you, Mute Mouth, do you assuremt of the Continuance of her budding Passion?

That Wish of his Mistress's put him into a sweet Fit of Resvery and Musing,
whence he would not have quickly recollected himself, if the Moments had not
been precious to him to prepare for the intended Interview. The Difficulty of
this Enterprise made him more than a little fretfull. He despaired of being
able to find in the Serrail a Friend so faithful as to entitle him to be made
a Confident in his Amors, and his Impatience augmented sutably as it drew near
the so much desired term.

After having tormented himself extremely about the means of bringing his
Design about, he remembered that there was an Old Chief of the Ga^diners called
Ousta Mehemmed, who had great Obligations to his Father, and hoping that this
consideration would dispose him to serve him, he resolved to go find him out.

Ousta Mehemmed, who had a natural Inclination for Youssuff, received him with
great estimonies of kindness, and expressed to him a large Sense of Gratitude
and Acknowledgment for the Benefits he had received from the Pacha his Father.
Though Youssuff was persuaded of Mehemmed's Fidelity, and that he knew that if
he could not grant him the favor he meant to ask of him, he would, at least,
keep his Secret, he, nevertheless, exacted an Oath from him by the head of the
Prophet, that he would never reveal what he had to impart to him. Then he
discovered his flame to his Friend, and did it in such melting terms, that
though Mehemmed should not have had a desire to serve him, he could not without
much ado have declined it.

I Love, said he to him, but what avails my Love, since I may not speak to her
I love? My heart is inflamed by a beauteous Prisoner. The Inside of the Serrail
which is the Guardian of this Treasure, is almost impenetrable, or at least the
access of it is so difficult, that there is no attempting it without great
perils. Yet this is not what witholds me; My Passion which is boundless would
make me attempt the utmost, if the Person I love would suffer it. I have only
obtained to see her from a little Garden of Flowers, which is under the
Sultana's Appartment. My Dear Mehemmed you must facilitate my Entrance into it,
It is on you alone that the Success of this Enterprise does depend: I have
built my hopes on your Friendship, and if you were formerly in Love, you will
know the importance of the Service, and the greatness of the Obligation I shall
have to you.

This Discourse affected the Old man, and the Impression it made upon his mind,
with the remembrance of the Disorder which the like Passion had formerly
wrought in his Bosom, made him easily consent to Youssuff's Request, without
considering the danger to which he exposed himself in case the Intrigue came to
be discovered. He promised to introduce him in the Habit of a Gardener, and
told him that he needed only to take the time which his Mistress should
prescribe to him.

Youssuff immediately dispatched Boul-Ester to the Serrail. He did not encharge
her with any Letter, the joy he felt being too great to permit him to write,
and to hazard his Enterprise by confiding it to Paper. He only sent Gulbeyaz a
little Selam composed of a Pomgranate Kernel, of a little bit of Bread, with
Lilly-Convally and Cinnamon. Of which the Sense is this.

The Flame which your Love has kindled in my heart, has imposed an absolute
necessity upon me of seeing you. I will do all that is requisite for that
purpose, and surmount all the Difficulties that may interpose in this Design.

Though Gulbeyaz had a great share of Love, yet had she Reason also. She was
detained by the fear that if the Intreague came to be discovered, the Sultana
would cause her to be rigorously punished, thus she would and would not. But
this notwithstanding there was no help, way she must give to what her Passion
exacted. Gulbeyaz promised that the next morning at half an hour past nine a
Clock, she would repair into a low-Room which looks upon the Garden, and which
is only parted from it by a Wooden Trellis like a Lettice, whence she would
open a little Wicket which should be the Signal of her being come; that this
was the most convenient time, for that the Sultana took her Repose after
Breakfast, as well as all her Maids, and that the Eunuchs were at the outward
Gate for fear of making a noise.

After this Declaration Gulbeyaz immediately dispatched away the Jewess giving
her a Box containing a bit of Radish, a Grape-Seed, a little of Brick, twisted
Third, a Pear, Myrtle and a Flower of Narcissus, of which the Signification is
as follows.

My Eyes, it is too difficult for me to repair to you, but come to morrow and
take the place which I design you in my heart. I beseech Heaven that the
Enterprise may succeed, and that I may be free to express to you upon all
occasions that I am wholly yours.

Youssuf was ready to dye of joy upon receiving this Selam. He was nevertheless
uneasy through the Apprehension that his ill fortune might make him lose so
favorable an Occasion. He spent the Night in cruel Agitations occasioned in
him by Hope and Fear.

At the hour prescribed he repaired to the Serail. His friend Mehemmed made him
shift the Sumptuous attire he had on, for that of a Gardener, which was of
Coarse Red Serge, and a Cap a foot long, of a stuff of the same Color. He put
a Spade into his hands, and led him to the Garden, ordering him to dig the
Earth, and to work upon a Bed that is under the Windows of the Apartment.

At each stroke he gave with his Spade, the Young Gardener lift up his Eyes, to
see if the Wicket of the Lettice did not open, but Unhappily the Sultana
falling asleep a little later than ordinarily, our pretended Gardener had the
leisure to digg almost the whole Bed, before that Gulbeyaz could come to the
Assignation.

You may judge, my Dear Companions, pursued Fatma, how horribly Youssuf was
racked with impatience. He sometimes heard certain great Flies, that seeking
passage beat against the Lettice. He Phancy'd his Mistress viewed him, and that
she laughed to see him in that Equipage, and at the Martyrdom she made him
suffer.

When that Gulbeyaz drew near the Window, and that through the Trellis she
perceived Youssuf with the Spade in his hand, she no longer doubted of the
force of his Love, and though she could not without a great deal of trouble see a
Man of his rank digging the Earth to have a Minutes Satisfaction of seeing her,
this afforded her joy, and without considering what the delay of this happiness
made him suffer, she took delight in viewing him for some time before she
showed her self.

As he had been already at work above an hour, and that so harsh an Exercise
for so delicate a Body as his, did often oblige him to rest himself upon his
Spade, and to cast his Eyes from time to time to the place where his Mistress
was to appear, she opened the Lettice, and plainly perceived her Lovers pain to
redouble. The Spade fell from his hands, and he remained motionless like a
Statue; but happily he was not taken notice of, by reason Mehemmed, who had
foreseen the Consequences of this first Interview, had sent out of the way the
other Gardiners that were to work in the same place.

No Torture greater than to be in the presence of what we Love, without being
suffered to discourse the Party. What Youssuf endured in being deprived of that
Consolation, by reason of the nearness of the Sultanas Apartment was no less
sensible to Gulbeyaz, and what ever scornful carriage she thought to have
affected, she partak'd in all the Vexation that besieged him. Luckily the
Language by signs, which is much used in that Court, and which they both
perfectly understand, did so well supply the failure of the voice, that they
parted very much satisfied with their Interview.

The Eyes, Motions of the Face, the Finger signs and gestures of the two
Lovers, said more than the most Eloquent tongue could have done, which is often
Mute in such like occasions, and says nothing by reason it finds too much to
say. They so very much delighted in this mute Conversation, that it would have
lasted much longer, if Gulbeyaz had not heard a walking in the Sultanas
Apartment, which obliged her to tip the Wink upon Youssuf to be gone, and she
immediately shut the Wicket.

During all these Intrigues which I was not then acquainted withal, Boul-Ester
who was become the Mutual Confident of their Amors, made many and many a
journey to the Serrail. Gulbeyaz took no less delight in hearing from her Dear
Youssuff, than he from his lovely Mistress. He was extremely rich, and promised
her to use his utmost endeavors, and set all his Friends to work to get her
out of the Serrail and marry her, as accordingly happened at the long run,
after they had both exposed themselves to trials of Love, which the more
dangerous they were, the more they rendered those two Lovers worthy of each
other.

The Jewess came twice or thrice a week to the Serrail, though she sold but very
little, but she was abundantly rewarded by these Lovers, whose Presents were
sufficient to enrich her. Their Passion became boundless. Youssuf being ever
impatient and restless that he did not see his Dear Mistress, would needs
attempt a second Interview, wherein he might freely and not by Signs, express
by word of Mouth the excess of his Love. He laid his Design with his Confident,
reiterating to her great promises if she so ordered matters as to accomplish
it, and at the same time he gave her a Purse of two hundred Sequins, worth
about five hundred Crowns. Gain thus inviting the Toy-woman she promised to
omit no manner of endeavors for the making him successful in his undertaking.

She came to the Serrail. and gave Gulbeyaz a Selam contained in a Cup of a
most perfect Agath. It must be owned that as Love gives wit, it borders also
upon folly. Youssuf was minded to engage his Mistress by a rich Present. This
Cup was garnished with Circles of Gold enriched with Diamonds, and he
endeavored to persuade her of his Passion by a Selam composed of the hair of
his The Lock which men wear on the Crown of their head.
Pertchem, of a little Rose-colour'd Silk, Aloes wood, Antimony, Nutmeg, a
sprigg of Broom, a little bit of Cloth, of Coal, of Pearl-colour'd Silk, and of
a little Alum; which is as much as to say,

Precious Crown of all my wishes, Nightingale whose warbling Notes are alone
capable of charming the anguish of my Soul, true Remedy of the evils I endure,
consider the tears that flow from my eyes, while that, perhaps, you laugh at my
torture; take pity of me, and mind but the Condition you have reduced me to.
Dye I must if you do not bless me with a Letter and afford me a certain Answer.

This Selam and the Account Boul-Ester gave Gulbeyaz of Youssuff's piteous
Estate, whom she described to her languishing and dying for her, affected her
so very much, that being egg'd-on with Love and Compassion, she consented to a
second Interview; but the place and Maiden Garb for Youssuf which the Jewess
proposed to her perplexed her cruelly. She could not well so far comply with
Youssuf's Disguise, as to introduce him into her Apartment, which was next of
all to the Princess's. This was a ticklish matter, and which staked no less
than Honor and Life upon the venture of this Intrigue's being discovered. All
these Considerations were sufficiently prevalent to have broken off such a
Design, if Love which was still more prevalent had not absolutely crampt them.
In short, Gulbeyaz without further pause gave her self to Boul-Ester's
Persuasions, and permitted her to bring Youssuf disguised as a Maid. She even
gave him the assurance of it by a little Selam composed of a little Cucumber,
Barley, twined Silk, a bit of Latin-wire, a Grape, Millet, a little Tabby, and
a little Bean; of which now take the Interpretation.

Whatever apprehensions I may harbor that you will tumble us into strange
Misfortunes if the least Suspicion be conceived of your Enterprise, yet do I
hope that Fortune will not abandon us. Come, my Eyes; I am too sensible of your
torments, my heart is yours, be persuaded of my Eternal Constancy.

It was requisite to deferr it, for five or six days, because that too frequent
visits might have been suspected. These wereas so many Ages to the Enamored
Youssuf, for whom they fitted a very neat Habit, that so his Garb answering the
Beauty of his Face, whereon hair did not as yet appear, they might the more
easily deceive all the Guards.

On the seventh day Boul-Ester and Youssuf disguised as a Maid repaired to the
Serrail. The Toy-woman, who was well known, having said that she who
accompanied her was her Daughter, though she was not wont to bring any along with
her, she deceived the Eunuchs who suffering them to enter, they were conducted
to Gulbeyaz's Chamber.

It would be a hard matter for me, my Dear Companions, to express to you
Youssuf's concern and trouble when he found that beauteous Person almost dying
in Bed, wherein she had been for two days attackt with a Pestilential Feavour,
which is so common in that Country. You may judge whether the surprise of so
unforeseen an Accident as this was not capable of breaking all the Measures of
this Disguise. Little did it want but that he had made himself known; But
Gulbeyaz who kept her judgment entire in the midst of her illness which was of
three days standing, entreated her Companions to leave her for one moment alone
with this Jewess, to dispatch some business they had together.

When Youssuf saw himself alone near Gulbeyaz, he abandoned himself to his
Grief, and forgetting the place where he was, he snatched off his Veil, and
planting himself at his sick Mistress's Beds-head, he bathed her with his
tears, without being able to utter a word. Gulbeyaz on her part received such
pressing onsets of Love, besides the violence of her Distemper, that having
made a general Revolution throughout her whole Body, it gave her a Crists that
saved her Life, and little did it want but that she had been Youssuff's Death,
who being in no wise to be prevailed with to forsake her Pillow, drew in the
air of a Malignant Sweat, which struck him to the very heart and made him fall
into a Swoon.

Boul-Ester being much perplexed at her pretended Daughter's swooning away, and
so much the more through fear of the Consequences that must redound from the
unravelling of this Intrigue, if Youssuf's Malady augmenting they should have
been sorced to have put him to Bed, called me to help her.

When I entered Youssuf began to breath again, and to sigh, turning his eyes
toward Gulbeyaz, whose name he uttered with so melting and so Amorous an
Accent, that I wonder I did not take notice of the Disguise. I made no
Reflection either upon giving the Sigh or the uttering of Gulbeyaz name, and I
attributed to an Amity of a long date, what was only a pure effect of Love.

It was not so with Boul-Ester. She was so surpised that all her Senses having
forsaken her, and her face having changed color she fell into a Fit. I was
alone and in a very great perplexity. I left the Daughter near Gulbeyaz Bed,
and I ran to the Mother, who was not long in that condition. After both of them
were come to themselves again, I went to prepare a Cordial for them.

The amorous Youssuf improved that moment to the entertaining of his Mistress,
which he did with a very weak and languishing voice. Death that pursues me,
said he to her, is much less sensible to me, adorable Gulbeyaz, than the grief
for your sufferings; I should with pleasure embrace it if I thought to ease
you. This you may be persuaded of, and that I should dye a thousand times
rather than abandon you, if in staying here I did not expose you to a much
greater peril than your Malady. I go, and I go to die, being no longer able to
stand up under so many Griefs.

Gulbeyaz being dejected by the force of her Distemper, concerned at heart for
Youssuf's torment, and weakened by the vehemence of her Crisis, could no
otherwise answer to such soft assurances save by tears, which made her faint
away. Then was it that Youssuf had occasion for all his Reason to resist so
many evils at a time, and do nothing to betray the Secret. Gulbeyaz was a long
while in that condition, and having begun to breath again, Boul-Ester, who was
afraid of some new Accident, endeavored to get Youssuf away from the sick fair
one and take him along with her. He could not resolve upon so harsh a
separation, which he had a dread might become eternal; fain would he have
expired before the eyes of her he loved. However he could do no otherwise than
obey his Mistress's Orders, who not being able to speak made a sign to him to
be gone, and presented him her hand, which he kissed, protesting to her that he
would not long survive her.

All the Accidents that had newly accompanied so perilous an Interview, were
not sufficient to counter-ballance the happiness of these Lovers. For as ill
luck would have it upon passing through one of the Gates of the Serrail, where
there are Baltadgi's, who are the Servants without, one of them suspecting by
the Gate of the feigned Maid, which she no longer studied to make answerable to
what she represented, by reason of her grief and weakness, that it was a
Disguise, stopped her by the arm. Boul-Ester who had ever a ready wit, said
nothing to the Baltadgi for fear of drawing others thither, but making up to
him she gave him a Ring which she took off her Finger, and slipped it secretly
into his hand to oblige him to open the other that held Youssuf. Thus she set
that poor Lover at Liberty, who thought much less of the present danger than of
Gulbeyaz piteous condition.

As soon as Youssuf was returned to his Palace, he went to Bed, where he was
seized with a violent Feavour. He was so circumspect in all that concerned his
adorable Mistress, that he durst not send for Boul-Ester, out of fear of giving
a suspicion of their Correspondence, and he could not trust in any of his
Domestiques. Four days were spent in this manner, during which our two Lovers
suffered incomparably more by having no tidings of each other, than by the
pangs of their Distemper; but at the long run that of Youssuf coming to
Extremity, he would needs make use of the time he sancy'd he had to live, to
bid a last farewell to his Mistress, and without thinking of ought else, he
caused Paper and Ink to be brought him, being not in a Condition to do
otherwise. Now this is what he wrote,

I dye for you, Incomparable Gulbeyaz, and Death is so much the more Welcome
to me, for that I hope its Cause which is your Crisis, will be the Prolongation
of your Days. If I had a certain assurance of this, I should dye without
Concern. My Malady is hastening me away, and I employ the little time I have
left, in giving you testimonies of a Love I shall carry with me to my Grave;
happy if that last Moment can better convince you of it, than years of sighs
and tears have done. Adieu, Most Lovely of all your Sex, Live and remember that
the same Love, which restores you to Life gives me my Death.

As soon as he had finished his Letter, thinking he was at the last moment of
his Life, he sent it to Boul-Ester with the ring he wore on his finger, whereon
was Engraved her Name and his own, upon a very neat Ruby, and he was seized
with new Convulsions and Redoublings of his Feavour, which deprived him at the
same time both of his Reason and Speech. He continued two days in this
Condition, which having occasioned a General Report of his being Dead, this
made Boul-Ester to carry this false and killing News to Gulbeyaz. That Amiable
Person whose Crisis had freed from Danger, the sweat having dispersed the
tumors of the Pestilence, was Sicker in Mind than Body. Youssuf's silence, and
Boul-Esters deferring to go and give her an Account of all that passed since
their parting, put into her sad forebodings and mortal Disquiets. She wept all
the Day, and spent the Nights either in restless tossings, Dreams or Visions,
which seemed to prognosticate to her the misfortune she dreaded. She had chosen
me out for her Confident since Youssuf's Interview. I endeavored to divert her
so to drive away the fatal thoughts that tormented her. Nothing was capable of
giving her Comfort, but it was still worse with her when that Boul-Ester came
to the Serrail to acquit her self of the Commission given her by Youssuf. As
soon as Gulbeyaz saw her, she with Extreme Earnestness inquired how he did; but
the Jewess's silence, and the tears she could not keep in, gave that Impatient
Fair-One to understand what she had to say to her. Ah, cried she, Youssuf is no
more; and at the same time she swoon'd away in my Arms.

After she was come to her self, Toussufs Letter and Ring, which Boul-Ester put
into her hands, without being able to utter a Word, seemed a certain
Confirmation of the misfortune she had dreaded. Gulbeyaz did several times kiss
those dear Pledges of her Lovers Affection; she watered them with her tears,
and hung the Ring at her Neck, to show that she devoted her self to the Manes
of what she loved. Then she remained for a while without speaking. Her face
became red, and she burst out into such touching Complaints, as would have
moved the most insensible to Compassion. And God knows how long she would have
continued them, if they had not been interrupted by the coming in of her
Companions, and which obliged Boul-Ester, to withdraw. The Constraint she put
upon her self in curbing her transports, cast her into a new fit of a Feavour
and that too so violent, that she could never have recovered it, but for the
happy News. I brought her the next day. Boul-Ester was no sooner got out of the
Serrail, but that she ran to Youssufs Palace, where she expected the
Confirmation of the Account of his Death. Joy succeeded to Sadness; they told
her that he not only breathed but that he was perfectly recovered from the
Condition she had left him in, and that the Pestilence having made its way
through a great tumor under the Armpit, he was held to be out of Danger; It was
impossible however to speak to him as yet, but the Zealous Jewess without
staying for that, returned the next Morning as soon as she could, to impart to
me this happy News. I failed not to acquaint Gulbeyaz with it, who would needs
see Boul-Ester for certainty's sake. When she had no longer any reason to doubt
of it, she put on a smiling Countenance, and we began from that Moment to
perceive in her Eyes all the tokens of an approaching Recovery.

Youssuf on his side no sooner saw his health so well restored as to permit him
to bestow his Cares upon his Passion, but that he set his thoughts wholly upon
securing to himself the Possession of his Mistress. In order to this he made
his Address to Gulistan Kadun his Mother in Law, a Woman of Extraordinary
Beauty, and an infinite Deal of Wit. She was the Daughter of Sultan Ibrahim,
and by Consequence the Grand Signior Regnants Sister, but by another Mother
than the Valide; and his Highness according to his Custom of thus disposing of
his Sisters and Daughters, had given this for a Second Wife to Mehemmed
Seraskier Pacha, the Father of Youssuf, on the score of his vast Riches. She
was still very young, and dwelt in a Serrail, in the Country since the Death
of her Husband Mehemmed Pacha; and as she had ever very much valued Youssufs
Merit, and always retained a most peculiar regard for him, she immediately
became affected at the Confidence he put in her, by imparting to her his
Adventures, and promised to spare no manner of means that might tend to render
him happy.

She so earnestly besought the Valide, and the Grand Signior himself to bestow
Gulbeyaz upon her as a Slave, for whom she had a mighty Inclination, without
telling them her Design or Youssufs Passion, that she obtained her. Thus
Gulbeyaz left the Serrail to go to Gulistan Kadun. This Generous Princess to
show the Grand Signior, and the Valide her Gratitude and Acknowledgment for
their Present, and the Esteem she had for it, gave Gulbeyaz, as of her own
accord, and with a rich Portion, to Youssuf-Bey, her Son in Law, who, as you
may believe, found no reluctance in himself to give his consent to it, and thus
did she take delight in uniting those two Lovers, whom we now know to enjoy all
the Sweets and Comforts of a perfect Affection.

Fatma thought she could not better end her History than in telling all her
Companions that she wished the like happiness might befall them. They
unanimously answered, Amin. This Cry having been heard by Tacham Sultan, and
Bournaz Hatidge Sultan, made them send to inquire what was the matter. Fatma,
who had with an admirable readiness of Wit a facetious jocund humor, went to
tell them that having tuned out a lay to their Prosperity, as it is commonly
practiced in the time of great Festivals, her Companions had answered all
together, and with a zeal equal to her own, Amin. This Extremely pleased the
two Sultana's, who to reward them distributed among them several pieces of
Stuffs, Jewels, and other Gallantries.

This is what the Old Jewess told me of the Adventures of the Beauteous
Gulbeyaz. 'Twas she who gave me an Exact Memorial of all the Selams I have made
Fatma to rehearse in the relation of the foregoing History. What is left for
me to do is to impart to the Reader the Testimonials I brought from
Constantinople, both of the Common use of Selams, and of the Truth of the Story.

ATTESTATIONS.
HAving seen and Examined the Work of the Turkish Secretary, I have found
nothing therein but what is conformable to the things whereof it treats, which
I affirm through my having practiced them my self, and seen them practiced by the
most Intelligent Persons in that matter. At Pera, lez Constantinople the
Eighteenth day of April, 1681.

Bekir Tchelebi, the Son of Hassan.

Another from an Officer of the Artillery.
AFter that the Merciful Creator of the World had blessed me so far as to
suffer me to return from the Campaign of Cheherim, in company of many
innumerable Legions of Soldiers faithful to the Law of God, and Slaves, like
me, of the Sovereign Emperor of Lands and Seas, King of Kings, Distributer of
Crowns, Refuge, Azilum, and Protector of all Nations, who with the Dreadful
Mohammedan Spear, whose Conduct he had confided to the piercing Eye and
invincible Arm of the most High and most glorified Lord the Supreme V^zir Cara
Mustafa Pacha, comes from tumbling into the Abyss of Hell, and from dethroning
the Infidels from the Throne of Pride and Blasphemy, which they had
scandalously erected to themselves in the inexpugnable Fortress of Cheherim,
which we have subdued and reduced to Dust, putting to rout and in Confusion all
the Infidels that had the temerity to go about to oppose the Exploits of the
Tryumphant. After, I say, having seen with my own Eyes all these Prodigi^s
which appertain only to the sole Nation of the True Believers by the Mercy and
infinite Graces of the Almighty, and by the Merit of the Chief of the Prophets,
I have recreated my self after the fatigues I underwent during that severe
Campaign by an abode of near two years in the Center of Happiness and
Pleasures, I mean the Excellent and Ancient City of Constantinople, which is at
this day, as it was at all times, the Principal and most worthy Subject of the
Admiration of Mortals, and the Place of Residence of the most August and
ever-victorious Family of the Ottomans, Head, Foundation, and Formidable
Support of the Mussulman Law. I have employed my self in several Exercizes as
well of the Body as of the Mind, but as among these latter I have m^t with none
that have been more sensible to me than in the practice of the things of which
the Turkish Secretary gives an Account as well real as succinct and diverting,
I have found my self obliged without otherwise knowing the Author's Person in
any manner, to give my Approbation to his Work, and to the History of
Youssuf-Bey, which he has added thereu to, and which has made too much noise in
this Country, for any Doubt to be harbored of it. This is what I affirm and
certify by the Impression of my Seal. At Tophana of Constantinople the twenty
nineth Day of March, One Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty.

The Servant of those that fear God, Osman-Chorvadgi the Son of Cara Eyub,

Another.
We have examined the History of Gulbeyaz and her Lover, and the rest of the
Work of the Turkish Secretary, according to the Report and just Interpretation
that has been made to Us thereof. Wherefore We give it our Approbation.

The humble Hatidge, the Wife of Hassan-Aga dwelling at Constantinople in the
Quarter of Comcapi; the poor Emine, Daughter of Suleiman Bey, in her House at
Tophana; the indigent Salhe, Wife granted to Mustafa Tchelebi, Son of
Emir-Bektach, lodging at Scudaret, near the Grand Mosch; Aiche, the slighted
Wife of Abtelrahman-Bey, Son of Hussein, dwelling at Cassompacha, behind the
Arsenal of the Galleys; Alime, Nourou, and Rabbie, Wives of Kieur Ibrahim Pacha.

The following Catalogue contains the Phrases which the Turks express in
sending or in giving themselves the things that signify them. They would for
example note to a Person, that he has the Power to dispose of them as he
pleases; they will find this thought in the Number 19. of the Catalogue, and
then a Pear which is the Selam, or the thing which they must send to give to
understand that one has the Power to dispose of them. Or if you send them Coal,
they will seek in the Dictionary which is after the Catalogue for the word
Coal, whose explication will be marked to them in the Catalogue by the Cipher
83. and they will find that it signifies, I consent to dye provided you ever
enjoy a most happy Life. And the same with all the other things that may be
sent or received, whether that there be but one alone or several together
according to the more or less of what you have a mind to make known.

It is also to be observed that to supply the things of which they shall have
need, having them not at hand, they may write and send upon a bit of Paper just
as many Ciphers as are in the Catalogue, as they would signify thoughts that
should suit with them, which they would interpret in the usual manner of
decyphering Letters, provided that each have a Book at his Elbow.

CATALOGUE.
1. TO give to understand, We are both of the same mind, I approve very much of
what you say, they must send an Ambrette Flow, 2. I weep continually, but you
make a mock of my tears. A Rose, either the Leaf or bit of the Rose-Tree. 3. I
Swear to you that, etc. Jessemin, either Flower or Leaf. 4. You are a Flower, a
Beauty beyond Compare; a long long time have I loved you, without daring to let
you know it. A Pink or the Stalk of a Pink. 5. The torments you make me suffer
are the occasion that my Body is become as dry as a Tooth-pick. A Tulip. 6. Let
me partake of your Carsses. A Violet. 7. You must surmount all the Obstacles
that may interpose in your Designs. Liricumfancy. 8. I will in all occasions
give you proofs that I am your Slave. A Narcissus. 9. Have a care that God do
not punish you for the evil you may wish me, as I wish he may reward you for
your good intentions. A Hyacinth. 10. I will do for you things which you your
self shall be Witness of. A Lilly. 11. I Will Answer to you for all Events. A
Wind-Flower. 12. You must be perfectly Discreet. A Dazy. 13. The more pains we
shall have, the more we shall relish Pleasures. A Tuberose. 14. We are crossed
by many People. The Flower Paunsy. 15. Let nothing trouble you. A Mary-Gold.
16. My Constancy is weakened by your InfidelIties. An Orange-Flower. 17. I know
that you have sufficiently deceived me. A Peach. 18. Don't think on me. An
Apple. 19. You may dispose of me as you please. A Pear. 20. Pish! Your making
so much ado is but mere Fooling. A Quince. 21 Why do you torment me at this
rate? A Wallnut. 22. We are broke off. A Hasel-nut. 23 I was always in hopes
you would have some kindness for me. The Kernel of a Nut. 24. Why are you so
scornful? A Gallnut. 25. I am angry with you. A Pistacho. 26. Bestow some
small favor upon us. A Cherry 27. I am quite spent with Anguish and D jection.
A Plum. 28. I know how matters stand with you. A Pome-Citron. 29. May all the
Mischiefs in the World over-whelm you. An Orange. 30. None has Compassion of
Me. A Fig. 31. It is impossible to find any one that Excells you in Beauty and
Goodness. An Apricock. 32. I am intoxicated and distracted with my Love. A
Chessnut. 33. I very much fear that the Suspicion which People may have of our
Concerns, will occasion their being fully detected. A Cowcumber. 34. You Will
never attain your Designs. A Date. 35. My Heart burns with Love. A Pomegranate.
36. Draw a little near us. A Sorb Apple. 37. I begin to perceive that if you
grow Lukewarm, I shall grow indifferent. An Almond. 38. You have made me
endure sufficiently. An Apple or slip of Cyprus. 39. Let your Inclination for
me follow its own Dictates. A Jujube Plum. 40. I hope to see your Funeral. An
Olive. 41. My Eyes, (as one says my Heart, my Dear Soul) A Green or Dry Grape.
42. Change abode to see us the more conveniently. Rosemary. 43. May God bestow
you upon me. Mirrhe. 44. If you act sincerely, so much the better for you.
Marjerom. 45. Leave off those ways of yours. Wild Time. 46. I will bring you up
in my Bosom. Sweet Bazile. 47. Let Us Love with as much passion as sincerity,
and let our Souls be inseparable. Mint. 48. Do you dwell by your self? Parsley.
49. Your Slaves, Your Servants, are not they to be suspected? Sorrel. 50.
Inconstancy must be punished. Fennel. 51. If you study silly Evasions, you will
find Numberless Difficulties. Lettice. 52. I assure you you are the most in the
wrong in the World. Beats. 53. Let Us have Condescension for each other. Nettle.
54. Leave me, Perfidious Wretch. Ivy. 55. What reason can you have to authorize
all you do against me? Colewort. 56. Do but so much as once glance upon the
unhappy Condition I am in. Woollen-Cloath. 57. I grow weary of your
Importunities. Linen. 58. Tell me where your House is? Glaz'd-Callicoe, or
Coarsc-Cloth. 59. We shall be together to morrow. Canvas. 60. Methinks you have
droll'd sufficiently upon me. Velvet. 61. No Body vouchsafes to look upon me.
Satin. 62. My Heart is theirs I Love. Tabby. 63. This Cheat suffices us.
Taffety. 64. Your Love has fettered me. Cambrick. 65. I leave my Concerns to
Destiny. Twisted Silk. 66. You have robbed me of my very Senses. White Silk.
67. Agreeable Nightingale of my Bosom, who charms the Melancholy of my Soul.
Rose-Colour'd-Silk. 68. Write me a Letter. Pearl-Colour'd-Silk. 69. I consent
that you have your Revenge, your Turn. Issabella Silk. 70. We are fallen out.
Grass-Green-Silk. 71. There Is no doing what is impossible. Seagreen-Silk. 72.
You have chosen a Convenient Place. Gall-green-Silk. 73. You have taken my
Liberty, take also my Soul. Cherry Colored Silk. 74. Know that you are the
cause of my Torments. Peach-Flower Colored Silk. 75. Rid your self of all ill
People. Sulphur-Coloured Silk. 76. You must not think to use me so scornfully.
Crimson-Coloured Silk. 77. Is there any Conscience in using us as you do. A
Crimson-Violet Silk. 78. I am fallen Extremely in Love. Blew-Silk. 79. Since
that I love you I am hated and envyed by all the World. Violet-Silk. 80. Let Us
Embrace. Yellow-Silk. 81. There Is a great Difference between your way of Loving
and Mine. Musk-Silk. 82. I am ready to sacrifice my self for you. A Mirror or
piece of Glass. 83. I consent to dye provided you ever enjoy a very happy Life.
A Coal. 84. Let Us lay our heads upon one and the same Pillow. A Stone. 85. I
shall cost you a great deal. A Pistol or other piece of Gold. 86. I have not
any proof of the sincerity of your Words. A Piece of Money of 5 pence value.
87. Take all due Courses to have me, and come to me. A piece of thres Aspres,
or a three pence. 88. Keep always a good Understanding. An Aspre, or a Penny.
89. Don't engage us in a Difficult Business. Barley. 90. Precious Crown of all
my Wishes. Hair. 91. Do not slight those that submit themselves to you in all.
The Twig or Wood of a Vine. 92. My Face is like the Earth which is at your
Feet; my Submission to you is infinite. A Vine-Leaf. 93. You are a Treasure of
Youth and Beauty. A Grape. 94. All my Riches are at your Disposal. Corral. 95.
Let Us not let slip any occasion of improving our Pleasure as far as we are
able. A Spoon. 96. Summons all your Wit together in your Head; Recall all your
Senses: do but reflect upon the Course you take. Box. 97. You kill me with
laughing. A Pipe. 98. I love you even to Madness. White Wax. 99. Do You consent
to what is just and reasonable? Aniseed. 100. Send me a certain Answer. Pepper.
101. Know that I love you. Ginger. 102. My Heart passionately desires you.
Sugar. 103. Though you be cruel to me, I Will be faithful to you. Sugar Candy.
104: I suffer much, while you have only Pleasure. Nutmeg. 105. I Will be at all
the necessary Charge. Cinnamon. 106. Do You find in your self any kind
Disposition for me. A Clove. 107. The Bow of your Love cannot draw, you are
inflexible to my Entreaties. Wheat. 108. You are a perpetual inconstancy: You
go from fair one to fair one. Bruised Wheat. 109. I am sensible to your
Torments. Millet. 110. I have lost my Senses by loving you too much. A Pea.
111. Keep me in your Bosom. A great Bean. 112. Come to our house this Evening,
I am wholly yours. A little Bean. 113. Will not all the Service I have done you
in any wise avail? A Leek. 114. Have a care how you expose us to Peoples
railleries. Rice. 115. Answer me sincerely and without Affectation. Alum. 116.
I desire you to pass a day at our House. Incense. 117. You Will ruin us if you
push on your Design. Sulphur, or a Match. 118. We go to the Bath to morrow. A
Sweet-Ball. 119. Give me your Soul. Amber. 120. The Difficulties I start are
the better to fix our concerns. Musk 121. You are the true Remedy of all my
evils. Aloes Wood. 122. The Sun of my Life. A Sugar Cane, or Powder Sugar. 123.
You are an Inconstant, you never keep your promise. Common Wood. 124. I in no
wise consent to what you propose to me. Glass. 125. I suffer much for that we
are at a distance from each other. A Comb. 126. I grow daily leaner and leaner,
but your Plumpness does visibly augment. Iron. 127. Come to me. Copper or
Lattin Wire. 128. It Is easy for you to deceive me. Pewter. 129. I must by all
means have the honor of seeing you. Bread. 130. I only breath Revenge. Meal.
131. Come and see us when you have an opportunity. Porcelain. 132. I have
undeniable proofs of your deceiving me, and of your Infidelity. Bone. 133. How
do you do? Carpet-Work. 134. Think no more of your former Inclinations. Earth.
135. Come and see me to morrow. Brick or Tile. 136. I act with all possible
Sincerity. Tobacco. 137. Is It possible I Am so unhappy as to have displeased
you. Tow. 138. You have afforded me mighty satisfaction. Ivory. 139. I Would fain
speak with you. Cummin, a small black Grain. 140. I shall ever pride in being
your Slave. Matt. 141. I desire nothing of you, and I abandon you to your
Destiny. Straw. 142. Take me and carry me along with you. A Tooth-pick. 143.
Wherein have I failed? Packthread. 144. Have you need of Illustration? Raw
Third. 145. Take place in my Heart. Common Third. 146. I Will stick to ye as close
as the Button to your Vest. A Needle. 147. The more violence you use, the less
will you prevail upon my mind. A Pin. 148. Submit to no Body. A Button. 149. I
advise you to suffer no longer for the Love of me. A Pen to Write. 150. Get at
a distance from those that may perplex you. A Musket Match. 151. I beg of you
to pardon me. Marble-Paper. 152. As long as I live I shall wish for nothing
else. Linen. 153. Don't trust in so many People. Paper. 154. All you urge to
me as good Reasons, seems to me a mere Imposture* Parchment. 155. If you have
several Mistresses, it is better to quit them all than to enjoy but one of them.
Lime. 156. Turn not your Eyes from me, do not forsake me. Gold-Wire. 157. You
are a Person that wears two Faces, you betray me. Gold twisted upon Silk. 158.
Command me to dye and I am ready to do it. Cizzars. 159. If you reduce me to
Despair, I shall commit some mad thing A Knife. 160. What reason have you to
laugh so? Soot. 161. You are a known Liar. Spanish- Leather. 162. I have not
yet sufficiently seen you, and I cannot sat my self with seeing you. A Spiders
Web. 163. Come and dwell with us. Cotton. 164. Your Absence kills me, and the
Difficulties of seeing you plunge me into Despair. Wool. 165. I should never
have thought this of you. Wadd. 166. My Eyes dissolve into tears. Antimony.
167. You have reduced me into a perpetual Languishment. Soap. 168. Come hither,
Fair Maid. Mastic. 169. Let Us see one another sometimes. Garlic. 170. Never
speak to me, you appear hideous to me. Onion. 171. It Is a very hard matter to
find you. A Radish, or bit of Radish. 172. Remember to keep your word. Sponge.
173. Pity me once at least. A Sprigg of Broom. 174. Rustical, Inhumane,
Salvage, Cruel. Humain Nail. 175. You Have forgot those happy Moments, when you
took delight in listening to my Addresses, and in indulging them. Marble. 176.
If Fidelity dies in you, I Will produce Inconstancy in my self; If you change me,
I Will change you. White Iron. 177. In giving my self to you, I have robbed my
self of my-self. Yellow Wax. 178. I could not find out where you dwell. A Nail.
A Dictionary of Flowers, Fruits, Stuffs, and all other things that may be sent
to express the thoughts that are contained in the foregoing Catalogue.
A
AN Almond. 37. Aloes Wood. 121. Alum. 115. Amber. 119. Ambrette-flower. 1.
Anis, 90. Antimony. 167. Apple. 18. Apple of Cyprus. 38. Apricock. 31.
B
BRoom, or bit of a Broom. 174. Button, 149. Brick. 135. Box-Wood, 96. Bean,
Great Bean. 111. Bean, Little Bean, 112. Barley, 89. Bone, 133. Bread, 129.
Brimstone, 117. Brimstone-Match, 117.
C
CArpet, 133. Cambresine, 84. Canvas, 59. Corn, 107. Corn, Beaten or Malted,
108. Cinnamon, 105. Cherry, 26. Coal, 83. Chestnut, 32. Colewort, 55.
Cyprus-Wood, 38. Cizars, 159. Cowcumber, 33. Colors, see Silk. Corral, 94.
Cotton, 164. Cloth, 56. Cloves, 106. Comb, 125. Cobweb, 163. Crows-toe, or
Jacint. 9. Cummin, 140.
D
DAce-fruit, 34. Dazy-flower, 12.
E
EArth. 134.
F
FEnnel, 50. Fig, 30. Franckinsence, 116.
G
GOld-Wyre, 157. Garlic, 170. Gall-Nut, 24. Glazed-Callicoe, 58. Glass, or
breaks of a Glass, 124. Ginger, 101. Grain of Raisin, 93. Gold and Silk Thread,
158. Gold Money, See piece of Gold.
H
HAir, 90. Hirse, or Millet, 109.
I
IVory, 139. Iron, 126. Iron, or Lattin-Wire, 127. Jacint, or Crows-Toe, a
Flower, 9. Jasmin, 3. Jujubes-fruit, 39. Ivy, 54.
K
KNife, 160.
L
LIne of Flax, 153. Line of Tow, mixed together, 138. Lilly, 10. Lime, 156.
Lemond, 28. Lettice, 51. Looking-Glass, 82. Liricumfancy, 7. Lentil, 113.
Linen Cloth, 57. Leafs of Vine, 92.
M
MArble, 176. Marjerom, 44. Marygold, 15. Marbled Paper, 152. Mastick, a
Sweet-Gumm, 169. Mint, 47. Mat, 141. Match, 117. Meal, 104. Millet, or Hirse,
109. Money of Gold, See piece of Gold. Musk, 120. Myrtle, 43.
N
NAil, Finger Nail, 175. Nail, or Spicker, 179. Narcissus, 8. Needle, 147.
Nettle, 33. Nutmeg, 104.
O
OLive, 40. Onion, 171. Orange, or bit of Orange-Tree, 29. Orange-flower. 16.
Ordinary Wood, 123.
P
PAck thread, 144. Paper, 154. Parchment, 155. Parsley, 48. Paunsy-flower, 14.
Peach, 17. Pear, 19. Pearl, 93. Pease, 110. Pen, or Quill to write with, 150.
Penny, See piece of a Penny. Pepper, 100. Perry, Drink. 52. Pewter, 128. Piece
of Gold Money, or bits of Gold, 85. Piece of 5 pence, 86. Piece of 3 pence, 87.
Piece of a penny, 88. Pin, 148. Pink-flower, 4. Pipe, 97. Pistacho, 25. Pistol,
a Gold Pistol, 85. Plum, 27. Pomegranate, 35. Porcelain, 131. Powder-Sugar,
122.
Q
QUill to Write with, or Pen. 150. Quince, 20.
R
RAdish, 172. Raisin, 41. Raw (or Undyed) Thread, 145. Rice, 114. Rose, 2.
Rosemary, 42. Running (or creeping) Thyme, a Sweet Herb, 45.
S
Satin, 61. Scent (or Sweet) Ball, 118. Silk of Blew Color, 78. Silk of
Cherry Color, 73. Silk of Crimson Purple Color, 77. Silk of Gall green
Color, 72. Silk of Isabella Color, 69. Silk of Musk Color, 81. Silk of
Peach-flower Color, 74. Silk of Pearl Color, 68. Silk of Red Color, 76. Silk
of Rose-Colour, 67. Silk of Seagreen Color, 71. Silk of Sulphur (or
Brimstone-Colour, 75. Silk, that is twisted, 65. Silk of Violet, (or common
Purple) Color, 79. Silk of White Color, 66. Silk of Yellow Color, 80. Silk
of Young-Grass-green Color, 70. Small-nut, 22. Small-nut, without shell, 23.
Soap, 168. Soot, 161. Sorb Apple, 36. Sorrel, 49. Spanish-Leather, 162. Spoon,
95. Sponge, 173. Stone, 84. Straw, 142. Sugar, 102. Sugar Candy, 103. Sulphur,
117. Sweet-Bazil, 46.
T
TAbby, 62. Taffeta, or Sarsenet, 63. Thread, 146. Thread, undyed Thread, 145.
Tile, 135. Tin, 177. Tobacco, 136. Tooth-pick, 143. Tow, 137. Tow and Line-Wax
mixed together, 138. Tubereuse-flower, 13. Tulip, 5. Twigs, Vine-Wood, 91.
Twisted Silk, See Silk.
V
VElvet, 60. Vine-Leaf, 92. Vine-Wood, 91. Violet-flower, 6.
W
WAd, 166. White-Wax, 98. Wind-flower, 11. Wood, Common Wood, 123.
Y
YEllow-Wax, 178.
After having shown you in Gulbeyaz History, the strict manner of confining
Women in the Serrail, I thought that the Turkish Secretary could not well
dispense himself from giving you some knowledge of the place where they spend
their Life, though it is no easy matter to attain to such knowledge of it as
is certain. For indeed people never go thither to make their Court, nor do they
attend at the Sultana's Toilets. Nevertheless I cannot but flatter my self that
I have got very exact Instructions as well from the Eunuchs and Bostangies that
were my Friends, and showed me the accessible parts of the Serrail, as from
several Jewish Women, and others that have been in its most impenetrable parts,
or who have exactly learnt what is there done from the Sultana's themselves
that had been taken out thence to be put into the Old Serrail after Sultan
Ibrahim's Death. As I as well sifted as frequented these various Acquaintances
with more ease and convenience than any other could have done during seven
years continual abode in Constantinople, and having the Turkish Tongue in
pretty good perfection, I would give an ample and large description of all I
could be informed of even to the least circumstances, if I was not willing to
spare the Reader the repetition of what so many others before me have written
upon the matters of Turkey, and particularly Monsieur Tavernier, and Monsieur de
la Croia, formerly Secretary of the Embassy at Constantinople in his Memoirs.
Wherefore I shall now only dwell upon the secrets I could attain to, concerning
the Sultana's and Women that serve them.

Of the Women Of the Serrail in general, and of the Sultana's that have
partaken in the favors of the Emperor.
THE Harem, or Women's Apartment, is divided into several Chambers, where they
are separated and kept with extreme Regularity. All the Maidens, there
confined, ought to have been taken in Countries Enemies to the the Ottomans, as
Poland, Russia, Moscovy, Circassia, Mingrolia, and others. The Turks, Greeks
and Armenians, Subjects of the Grand Signior may not be confined there, and His
Highness cannot without Adultery admit them to the Imperial Bed, unless he has
married them, which is contrary to the Laws of the Empire, which forbid the
Sultans to ally themselves, or in any wise share the Sovereign Power with
Women, but permits them to have as many Slaves as they think convenient. Those
Emperors have rather chosen to take this course, and this reason is said to
have obliged Sultan Murad to cause an Armenian Woman to be strangled, with whom
he was desperately in Love, because that she being become with Child, he was
obliged to execute through a Devoir of Religion what the Law of the Empire
forbad him. And thus was he constrained to make his Love give way to Reason, so
to avoid a popular Commotion, which might have drawn on his Ruin.

The Dorters where those Unvoluntary Virgins dwell are long and spacious
Chambers. There are great Scaffolds on each side, and separations of Curtains
that are drawn by day, and by night form a kind of Bed. They are two and two in
each little Apartment, lie by themselves, and their Beds are parted by that of
the Eunuch who looks to and serves them. The Mattresses, Cushions and Quilts,
which are very fine do by day make the Ornament of the place: At their rising
they are obliged to range them in form of Sofa, where they work in the day
time. Besides the Eunuchs, there are ten or twelve old Women in each Chamber,
who have an eye to the Conduct of these young Women, who are watched as exactly
as if they were Nuns.

These old Women are called Boula', their Functions consist in instructing the
New-comers in the particular Exercises, and all the good Grace and Breeding of
the Serrail. They have their Sofa at the further ends of the Chambers, whence
they see all that passes there. They rigorously chastise those Maidens upon the
least fault, and have no more Indulgence for this fair Sex, than the white
Eunuchs have for the Pages. Each Chamber has its particular Officers. The
Odabachi commands all the rest; she wears three Poniards at her side, which
distinguish her, and show her Authority. The Bulukbachi's are a sort of Female
Brigadieres, and govern a number of Maidens, and wear a Heron's top in their
Head-gear which denote their Character.

All these Maidens are Virgins; and generally perfectly well taught before they
are introduced into the Serrail. The Jews buy them very young, have them
learned to Dance, Sing, Embroider, and other things capable of pleasing, and
sell them for considerable sums to the Pacha's and other Lords who present them
to the Sultan. He sees them all at their coming in, and appoints them what
Chamber he pleases, or sometimes he sends them to some one of his Favorites.

It is the greatest Misfortune that can befall a Maiden to enter into the
service of a Sultana; not but that their Mistresses Love and Caress them: They
raise them up to Places about them, and bestow great advantages upon them: But
unluckily the more they render themselves worthy of the Sultana's kindnesses,
the less worthy are they of those of the Grand Signior; the years they consume
in acquiring the favor of the Ladies, wear out the brightness of their Beauty,
and all that might render them recommendable to the Sultan.

His Highness maintains them; They have two Habits a year furnished by the
Treasury, and their food comes out of his Kitchen. Besides this they have
twenty five Aspers Pay a day for their small Expenses, and Liberalities from
time to time. Their hours are regulated as well as those of the Pages. They
rise very early to pray, they go not to the Mosch, One of the ancientest of
them says Prayers. These old Women are Otourak or Veteranes. They are Maidens
that being past the Age of Marrying, devote themselves absolutely to the
service of the Serrail, and renounce going thence; their Pay is augmented, and
they mount to the Places of the Chamber.

Their daily Occupation after Prayers and Breakfast, is teaching to Read and
Write; which they do with great success. The other hours are appointed for
Handy-works, Embroidering, Sowing and Spinning. They are not suffered to talk.
They eat with as much frugality and modesty as silence. They are ten to each
Dish. One of them has the care of laying the Cloth, of going to receive the
Meat from the Eunuchs hands, to whom the Zulufli Balt adgis give them, and to
wash the Dishes; this is the Office of the Last-comer. They have no other
pleasure than that which they take at the Meetings and Assemblies which the
Grand Signior causes to be held for his Diversion.

If this Emperor goes to any of his Palaces either by Land or Sea, he ever
takes along some Favorite and Maids. They hang Cloths eight foot high on each
side the way, from the Door of the Women's Apartment to the Coaches or
Galliotts: The Bostangi's hold them behind, and the Women pass without being
seen. The Eunuchs are very careful to shut close up the Boots and Doors of the
Coaches, and to keep at the Cabin Doors of the Galliots, to which the Rowers
turn their backs. The Grand Signior does very often go out with them into the
Gardens, and in that case a Halvet is made, that is to say, Prohibitions
against any Man's coming as near as sight can distinguish an Object. If it be
at Constantinople, Guards are placed both by Land and Sea. Nay, even those are
forbidden that cry in the Moschs near that place where the Halvet is to mount
into the Minurets for fear the height of those Towers might occasion the
discovering of something; and if through imprudence any one should mount them,
and that he was perceived by the Eunuchs, who with Prospective-Glasses look on
all sides, there would be no Pardon for him.

While the Sultan reposes in some Arbor or Grotto with his Favorites, the
Maids run, leap and play a thousand Apish Tricks, to divert him, and inspire
him with Love. They horribly plague the Eunuchs, who are armed with Bows and
Arrows to shoot at the first unhappy wretch that should have the curiosity to
peep: They pull off their Turbants, which they throw into the water, and often
tread them themselves under foot, as well out of Revenge for the severity of
those Monsters, as to make the Sultan laugh.

A Maid having been for several years in the Serrail, and seeing no likelihood
of Fortune for her with the Grand Signior; or the Sultanesses, may request the
favor of going out and marrying; she presents a short Petition to his
Highness, who does not refuse it, and if the Sultaness bears her any good will,
or that the Maid has, as we say, Friends at Court, she has a Dowry given her;
they make her her Bundle, they give her Jewels, which she joins to all she had
been able to get during her abode in the Serrail by her Pay, her Industry, and
the Emperors Liberalities. Till then they keep from the Maids all the precious
Stones and other Jewels which they have been able to purchase, and leave them
only what pleases the Sultan; but they precaution themselves by sale, and by
sending them underhand to some one to keep them.

If any one on the contrary is so unhappy as to have displeased the Grand
Signior, or any Favorite, or that she has committed some other fault, they
turn her not away as they do a Page, but they banish her to the old Serrail,
where the has leisure to deplore her misfortune. The Turks call this
Chastisement Surgan, Banishment, Exile. Those who die in the Serrail without
Relations, which is common, since they are Slaves from all sorts of Nations,
have for their Heiress the Sultaness they serve, if not, their things are sold,
and the money thence arising is put into the Treasury of the Chamber.

The Accession of an Emperor to the Throne is immediately followed with
Presents from all the great Lords, who amongst other things choose out the
handsomest Maidens they can find, that so if happily some one should have Charms
sufficient to engage their Sultan, He that presented her may have a powerful
Protection, and a continual Advocate with him. The generality of those great
Officers do extremely want such a Protection to shelter themselves from the
Tempests, which the Complaints of their Justices do often bring down upon their
heads.

All those who partake in the Grand Signior's Favors, and are admitted to the
Imperial Bed; are not thereby Hasseki or Favorites: This is a Title which is
only conferred upon those that have had Children, the others are barely styled
Odalik, Chamber-Maids or Concubines. The Hasseki and the Odalik have all their
Trains, and as many Slaves as they need to serve them. Their happiness is
annexed to the Emperor's Life, and the Quality of Mistress procures them
considerable Offerings and Presents, but after his Death they are sent to the
Old Serrail, where they bewail the loss of their former Fortune. The
Sultaness-Queen only who is become Valide, stays in the Serrail with the
Emperor her Son.

If these Sultanesses, who are confined in this honorable Prison have
Male-Children, they remain perpetually with a double Anguish occasioned by the
absence of their Children, that are kept in the Serrail, and whom they are in a
continual fear of losing, through a cursed Custom, which, however, has begun to
be more moderate since Sultan Ahmet. There is but one sole thing which flatters
their Ambition, and which a little mollifies the Anguish of their Exile, that
is, the hopes of seeing their Son mount the Throne by some unexpected hit, and
to become Valide.

The Daughters of the Emperor Dead or Deposed, that are not married, follow
the Fortune of their Mothers, whom they accompany to the Old Serrail. This
change of Residence neither changes their Quality nor Train: The manner of
Living is equal, they keep their Eunuchs and their Slaves, and the Grand
Signior takes care to marry them and give them Portions. If the Sultanesses
that have no Children are still so-so young, and that having had the sense to
avail themselves of His Highnesses Liberalities, they have scrap't up Wealth,
they are at liberty to Marry again, so to free themselves from that perpetual
Prison; nay, and the Sultan obliges the Pacha's to Marry them, which they avoid
as much as they can, by reason that the like Matches render them the Slaves of
those Princesses who pretend that the Quality of Widows of an Emperor renders
them Mistresses, and that they do such men a great deal of Honor, whom a harsh
necessity of obeying has made their Husbands.

Of the Valide, Mother of the Grand Signior Mahomet the 4th. A Story concerning
her.
VAlide Sultan, Mother of the Grand Signior, is a Quality which makes that
Princess to be considered both within and without the Serrail, and all the
Sultanesses Honor and Respect her, by reason she has commonly a great
Influence over her Son. She has a separate Apartment where she is served by the
Eunuchs, and by her own Slaves, and a Palace in the City where her Intendant
Lodges, and a world of considerable Officers, who are encharg'd with the
gathering in of her Revenues, and with her Expenses, both within and without
the Serrail.

Haznadar Boula, the Principal Officeress of this Sultaness, is her Treasuress,
taking care of her Money, Jewels, and most precious Attire; she commands five
Maids that are appointed to help her. Okomich Boula is she who reads and
writes, and she holds the second rank among the Sultaness's Maids. Tchamachir
Boula is the Laundress, she has the Direction of the Linen, and those Maids
under her. The Intendant of the Bath, the Rubber, the Dresser, the Mistress of
Ceremonies, whose Function is to serve at Table, the Intendant of the Offices,
the Keeper of the Gold and Silver Plate wherein the Sultaness eats, and she who
prepares the Coffee, and gives to wash, are the most considerable of all the
Maids that are Attendants of this Princess. They are ever with her, and compose
the Haz Oda, that is to say, the Chamber. The others endeavor to render
themselves worthy to fill the Places that fall.

As soon as the Sultaness is awake, they throw over her shoulders a Furred
Nightgown, and they give her to wash in a golden Basin and Ewer. She says her
Prayers and Dresses. Her Winter Cloths and Drawers are of Broccard of Gold,
those for Summer are of Musseline: She wears a Girdle and Bracelets of Massy
Gold enriched with Jewels: Her Head-gear called Selam Takie, is a round thing
of Past-board in the form of a Plate covered with Cloth of Gold, beset with
Pearls and Jewels; it is placed upon the top of her Head, sloaping a little
upon the front. Her Hair is hid under a Musseline Scarf, embroidered with Gold,
and adorned with a Garland of Jewels, with which they surround her Head.

Pearls are not used about the Neck, they make them accompany the Face, they
hing on the sides of the Cheeks in the form of a Demy-Circle, and they are
fastened by Roses of Diamonds and Emeraulds. Her Shooing is of white Spanish
Leather, enriched with Gold; the little Slippers are of the same Matter and
Work.

The Sultaness Breakfasts after she is dressed. The great Basin, the little
Dishes, and the Banquette on which they rest, are of Gold. The Repast consists
of new laid Eggs done in a Chaffindish, Pitty-patties, and boiled Chickens
served up in their Broth.

The Grand Signior does in the morning send the Treasuress with a How do you to
the Sultana; then he visits her himself, (at least this was Mahomet the
fourth's Custom) she affects such a Gravity, and the Sultan so great a Respect,
that he does not sit till his Mother has entreated him three times so to do. He
mounts upon the state, and takes his place upon the Carpet that is spread. He
sits upon his Knees and Heels without any Cushion, having his Vest close wrapped
up, which is the mark of the greater submission. He informs her of what he is
to do that day. Coffee is brought, the Sultaness takes it first, and when the
Emperor is upon withdrawing, he kisses his Mothers hand* asks her Blessing,
and she accompanies it only with a nod of her Head.

After the Grand Signior's gone, the Kizlar-Aga asks leave to come in, and
though he has full power in the Women's Apartment, he would not dare to show
himself if he were not introduced by the Treasuress. He informs this Sultana
Dowager of all that passes: He presents her the Requests with which he is
encharg'd concerning that Princess's own Affairs, about the Disposal of Places
that are in her Appanage, the renting of her Lands, or the Complaints that are
brought against her Officers, on which she consults with this Black Intendant,
who sends back the Requests with the Sultaness's Deliberations to the Kiahia to
have them executed.

This Kiahia, or Intendant abroad, is a great Lord considered by his Mistress,
and though all his care be to look after the receiving the Revenues, and to pay
upon the Sultaness's Orders, yet is he in great Credit with her. For the most
part they choose some powerful Man to officiate this Place. His Household is
composed of an Intendant, a Secretary, a Treasurer, sixty Itchoglans or Pages,
ten Aga's or Gentlemen, of a Hodgia, a Preceptor, Chaplain, a Steward, and
twelve Blacks for his Women's Guard. These Aga's and other Principal Officers
have each of them three Servants. He has thirty Grooms, and three hundred
Horses for his own service, and that of his People. He is obliged to give four
Meals a year to his Mistress at the end of every three Months: She presents
him, besides the Charges of the Household, with 1200 Sequins for each Meal,
which are about three thousand Crowns.

This Occupation for the Regulation of her Affairs, employs her till Dinner,
which is dressed in the Grand Signior's Kitchen. The Zulufly Baltadgis goes to
take the Dishes, and carry them to the Eunuchs, who put them into the Female
Officers hands. These Dishes of green Porcelain, with great Covers of White
Iron covered with Red-Spanish-Leather, are wrapped up in Clothes and sealed.

The Sultaness does never in eating put her finger to the Dish, her Carver does
it, and serves it to her in golden Plates. Her Principal Female Officers eat
after her what comes from her Table, and the other Slaves live on the Remnants
of these former. The Sultanesses Repast is seasoned with the Divertisement of
She-singers, Dancers and Buffoons, who continue it till after Dinner, and with
that of reading some History or a Chapter in the Alcoran.

The Sultana-Queen does commonly about that time go to pay her Devoirs to her
Mother-in-law. This Visit is as full of Ceremony and Respect as is that of the
Sultan: They are not wanting however to divert themselves in Songs and Dances;
Coffee, Sorbet and Perfumes are given to the Sultanesses, being the common
Entertainments, but they very rarely eat together. It is the Custom to sup
betimes, and they reserve their fruits to eat them before they go to Bed; they
eat them pill'd and cut into pieces.

The Sultaness's Bed is a Cotton Quilt, and Musseline Sheets: The upward one is
sowed to a Coverlid of Gold-Broccard, more or less heavy according to the
season. This Bed is surrounded with Cushions and Curtains fastened to the
Cieling, which they raise or let down like to a Field-bed. A great Flambeau of
Wax burns all the night in the midst of the Chamber in a Candlestick of
Massy-Gold, enriched with Jewels. Eight Maids are on the Guard at the foot of
the Bed. There are as many at her Chamber Door, who lie upon Carpets and have
only a plain Coverlet over their backs.

The Valid^ has eight female Itchoglans clothed like Men with Vestments
buttoned from the neck to the waste, and Sleeves close at the wrist: Their
Head-gear is a long Bonnet bordered with Sable: They have a Poniard by their
side like the Grand Signior's Pages.

This Princess's settled. Revenue is four hundred thousand Crowns, the casual is
much more considerable. The Presents which the Tributary Princes continually
make, as also those who are willing to share in the Imploys of the Empire by
the Credit of this Princess, do extraordinarily augment her Income, which she
cannot exhaust by the Subsistence and Maintenance of those that serve her
within and without* seeing it is the Grand Signior who is at all these
Expenses. Thus it is only Extraordinaries, and little petty Expenses that draw
her Purse. These Princesses most commonly heap up Treasures to be employed in
Pious works, if not, all these Riches return to the Emperor.

Tachan Sultan, the Mother of Sultan Mahomet the 4th. who lately was deposed,
died about five years ago, but before her death caused a magnificent Mosch to
be built. She had almost an absolute Power over her Son, who respected and
honored her really: She was a Muscovite, a little lean, and marked with the
small Pox, her Eyes blew, her Complexion fair, and her Hair, which the Turks
love best, inclining to reddish: Her Wit was nice and piercing, and she made
good use of it for the keeping the Empire to her Son during his Nonage. The
Tartars took her when she was but twelve years old. But she had the good luck,
that having been sold and presented to the Serrail at Sultan Ibrahim's
Accession to the Empire, she pleased him. He lay with her, had Sultan Mahomet
by her, and she was declared Hasseki.

It happened some time after that Tachun Sultan, who was then Sultana-Queen,
passing by a Fruit-man's shop in Constantinople, and curiosity putting her upon
viewing through the Lettice of her Coach what passed in the Street, she by
chance cast her Eyes upon a young Boy of thirteen years old, handsome enough
that was in that Shop: His Master, who had a very great love for him, and had
bought him for a hundred and fifty Crowns, had at the very first taken care to
have him Circumcised, and to Cloth him pretty neatly according to his
condition of a Slave: Nay, he left to his care the Management of his Traffic.
The sight of this young Slave, called Youssuf, did so very much affect the
Sultaness, that having caused her Coach to stop on pretense of buying fruits,
she caused him to approach, and having viewed him nearer at hand, she ordered
the Kizlar-Aga to carry him to the Serrail.

Youssuf was in no small peck of troubles, and did more than a little regret
his being taken from that shop, where he lived very well satisfied with his
Slavery, and in that he had gained his Patrons good will. He was extremely in
pain to think what they meant to do with him, and whatever he could imagine, he
thought of nothing less than of what was to befall him. I tormented my self,
said he one day to one of his Friends, who told me the story, I was afraid, I
entreated them to let me go; I asked pardon, thinking I was accused of some
great Crime, and I should have rather chosen to have been in my shop, than in
the Serrail. In short, he confessed his having been much more grieved at his
being thus taken away, than at his having been made a Slave.

The Sultaness was no sooner returned to the Serrail, but that she had him
brought into her presence, questioned him about the place of his Birth, the
name of his Parents and his Age, and asked him particularly if he had not a
Sister, and a mark in his Body; He answered pat to all these questions, that he
had a Sister that had been taken by the Tartars some years before him, and that
he himself was marked in the side by having been bitten by a Wolf. Joy
interrupted the course of these Interrogations* The Sultaness found him to be
her Brother, and Caressed him to the highest Degree imaginable. This news was
immediately spread about the Serrail, and came to Sultan Ibrahim's Ears, who at
the same time sent him a Vest of Samour, which is as much as to say Sable. The
Empress caused him to be clothed; and gave him in charge to the Kislar-Aga.

He continued some days in the Serrail, during which they prepared one for him,
adorning and providing it with all things necessary to while away Life
pleasantly. All the great Lords made him Presents to please the Sultaness, and
He that but a little before was a Slave, and had bounded his Fortune in having
a little Fruit-shop, saw himself in a stately Palace surrounded with
Domestiques, Slaves and great Men, who make their Court to him, and throng him
with Offerings. The Sultaness procured him an Arpalix, or Appanage of five and
twenty thousand Crowns Revenue, which is the recompense of those that having
done good services to the Empire, are become incapable of continuin^ them by
being deep stricken in years.

This wa^ the most stable settlement for Youssuf Aga, and the most suitable to
his Inclination, and the Tranquillity of his Spirit. His Sister could have
raised him to the highest Dignities of the Empire; but she had then exposed him
to the jealousy of the Viziers, who endeavor to ruin those who have over much
credit with the Sultan, whereas Youssuf is cherished by all his Ministers, who
respect him, and pay him the same honors as to Pacha's, though He has not any
Place nor other Quality than of Aga, which barely signifies Lord. Besides this
Revenue, the Grand Signior furnishes him with all things necessary for his
Maintenance, and that of his Domestiques, and the Sultaness while she lived
gave him fifteen Purses a Month, for fear that after her Death some Sultan out
of Caprice might withdraw his Revenue, and deprive him of the means of
subsisting. The Sultaness rewarded her Brothers Patron. Besides the Price of
his Redemption, she sent a Gift of a thousand Crowns, and caused a Pension of
forty pence a day to be assigned him upon the Customs.

Youssuf Aga often saw the Grand Signior during his Nonage, but has not seen
him since. He frequently visited his Sister Incognito, and secretly. Not but
that the Sultaness was permitted to see her Brother when she pleased, and the
Law authorized it, but they took this course rather out of Policy, and not to
give a scandal to the people. He lives as a private Person, at least if he be
not dead within these two years, and his greatest pleasure is to spend the
Summer and Autumn in Tents in a great Meadow full of Springs, which terminate
the Port of Constantinople. He employs his time in Reading, and diverts himself
with seeing his Itchoglans Mount his Horses, and Dart the Javelin.

One may by this Adventure observe the Caprices of Fortune, which in various
manners show themselves throughout the whole World. It Is most surprising
effects are seen in Turkey where we find Country Girls become Queens,
Princesses; Slaves, and Men of the lowest Birth raised in a moment to the
highest Dignities of the Empire.

Of the Sultana-Queen, Hasseki-Sultan.
THE Quality of Hasseki-Sultan, Sultana-Queen, is commonly conferred on Her
that brings forth the first Male-child; all the rest, though they have
Children, are barely called Hassek Favorites, and the addition of Sultan is
only due to the Queen, and makes a particular distinction of the Mother of the
Presumptive Heir from the other Favorites. Nor does any besides her wear the
Diadem and Imperial Badge. It is a little Crown enriched with Jewels, fastened
upon a Velvet Bonnet, faced with Sables.

The Hasseki-Sultan is not only considerable because she represents the
Empress, but also because that being the Mother of the Presumptive Heir of the
Empire, she is looked upon as a future Valide. All that I have said of the
Valide, is to be understood of the Sultana-Hasseki, only the Revenues are
somewhat less. This Sultana-Hasseki did in the late Reign much balance the
others Credit, which occasioned Jealousy in the Valide, but the Sultana-Queen
was obliged to dissemble, that she might not displease the Grand Signior, who
would have taken his Mothers part against his Favorite.

I have not yet heard who are the Sultanesses of Soliman the third, who was
lately proclaimed Emperor, but his Brother Mahomet's Principal Hasseki, called
Guveche Sultan, was a present of the deceased Valide; she was given to her by
Bournaz Hatidge Sultan, Sister to Sultan Murad: She is thirty six years old or
thereabouts, beautiful, and prettily shaped, though little, fair complexion'd,
though her visage is a little long, blew Eyes, and Chestnut colored Hair: She
has a great deal of Wit, with an extraordinary gay and jocund humor, which
gave her an inconceivable Ascendant over the Grand Signior, whom she governed
absolutely, and often through her Intrigues were the most considerable Officers
of that Empire made and destroyed. She has had four Children, two Princes, and
two Princesses.

Guveche Sultan was jealous to the highest degree of his Highness's favors.
She loved rather he should caress his Male Minions, than his Female Darlings,
for fear they should ravish her of what she carefully cultivated, and she
hindered, as far as in her lay, Amors prejudicial to her Credit and Repose. And
of this I will here give two Examples which have made sufficient noise.

The Valide could in no wise bear with Guveche Sultan's Arrogance, as aiming to
stand Candidate with her for the Authority. She was afraid that the Absolute
Empire which the Hasseki had over the Grand Signior, might occasion some
disaster to the Princes his Highness's Brothers, the design of whose Ruin she
might have insinuated into him, the better to secure to her Son the Succession
of the Empire, and to her self the Quality of Queen Mother, which might have
happened in these last disorders of Constantinople. This apprehension induced
the Valide to contrive the preservation of the two Princes whom the Soldiery
had committed to her Guard, particularly Soliman at present upon the Throne,
for whom she was suspected, to have a little too much affection. She judged
convenient to counterballance the Love the Emperor had for the Sultana-Queen,
that so she might lessen her Credit, and by this means divert the storm which
menaced the Head of the two Sultans.

A Present had been made her of a Circassian Slave, very beautiful, well
educated, and well instructed in all the exercises that a Maid is capable of.
The Grand Signior going one day, after his usual manner, to pay a Visit to his
Mother, she told him, that a Maid had been given her equally beauteous,
graceful and knowing. The particularizing so many merits forthwith inflamed the
Sultan, and gave him the curiosity to see her. The Valide, the better to cover
her Intention, opposed this desire of his, on pretense that he would, perhaps,
deprive her of a Maid, that was her whole diversion, but pretending compliance
upon the Assurance he gave her, that he would not take her away, she had her
called into the presence.

The young Slave being well instructed by the Valide and the Old-woman, and
egged on with Ambition to see her self raised in a little time to a station
which all others aspire to, and for which they sigh in vain almost all their
life long, made it her whole study to inspire Love into the Emperor by her
gayety, facetiousness and gallantries. Happy was the success, the Sultan fell
into the Trap, and nothing perplexed him so much as the promise he had passed
to his Mother of not depriving her of her Slave, whose Charms and Merits he so
highly extolled; so that the Valide seeing the Affair at the point she had
desired it, offered her to her Son, who expressed to her a large sense of
gratitude, and thus she satisfied the desire she had of traversing the
Sultana-Queen's repose, she knowing nothing of all that passed.

The change of Apartment, and the preparing a Train for a new Mistress, gave
the Sultana-Queen no small matter of disturbance, Jealousy forthwith possessed
her, she made great complaints to the Sultan, cursed the Valide, and her
Passion proceeded so far as reproaches of the Love the Valide had for Sultan
Soliman, to the prejudice of her own Son. She said the Valide's design was to
dethrone him and introduce another in his stead, whose Mother she was not, and
to enjoy at the same time the favors of him she loved, and the pleasure of
seeing him Reign. The Sultaness after this caused the young Slave to be brought
to her, and cruelly misused her, which put the whole Women's Apartment into a
Hub-bub; but the Grand Signior having had notice of it, caused his new Mistress
to be removed to the Serrail of Chataldge; which is in the Neighborhood of
Constantinople, and went thither to recreate himself with another Pleasure
after the Fatigues of Hunting.

The Empress perceiving it to be a remediless mischief* feared lest the
increase of the Sultan's new Passion might make her totally lose her credit,
which was already much diminished. She fancied it her best course to sooth the
Emperor in his new Inclination, and let him know that her extravagance was an
effect of the passionate Love she had for him; that, nevertheless, she was
minded to Sacrifice her private Interest to his Highnesses Pleasure, and that
she should be fully satisfied did she but know that Prince to be content.

The Artifice sped. Whether that the Sultan's Passion that had been augmented
by the Sultaness's jealousy, was diminished by her feigned indifference, or
that really he very little minded all these Women, which is most likely, he
went again after his usual rate to the Hasseki Sultan, whom the news of her
Rivals being with Child did strangely torment. Yet was she forced to dissemble,
and curb her Spirit for fear of spoiling all, and wait the success of the
others lying in, who happily for her had a Daughter at Baba in Bulgaria while
that the Grand Signior was in his Carminiek Expedition, and this did more than
a little solace her. She was very much afraid of her having a Son, which would
have confirmed her in the Grand Signior's Affection, who had designed this
young Sultaness his Daughter for the Grand Vizier Cara Mustafa Pacha. He was to
have married her at his return from the Siege of Vienna, if he had taken the
Place, and if it had not been his ill fate to have perished at Belgrade.

The other example of the Sultaness's jealousy is fresh, seeing the thing
passed within these four years. Custom will have it that the Grand Viziers at
their Accession to the Ministry make Presents to the Emperor. Cara Ibrahim
Pacha, the Successor of Mustafa, who had been newly strangled, among other
Oblations he made to his Highness, presented him with a young Polish Slave
called Hatidge; the most perfect that could be found among the Jews who Trade
in that Merchandise. She was culled from out a vast number. She had an
advantageous Shape, round Visag'd, blew Eyes, large, well cleft, her Nose a
little turning up, her Mouth and Teeth beautiful to perfection, her Complexion
of a dazzling brightness, and her Hair of an admirable Ash Color. She was then
in her eighteenth year.

The Jew got considerably by Hatidge's Charms, selling her for fifteen hundred
Crowns, and the Vizier sent her to the Kislar Aga, to present her to the
Sultan, who falling in Love with her, ordered the Keeper to observe secresy by
reason of the Sultana-Queen, and that she should be brought to him the night
following. It is to be believed that this new Mistresses secret Charms
completed what a bare sight had so much advanced.

His Highness knowing the Sultaness's Spirit, and fearing the sallies of her
Temper, caused her to be removed from the Grand Serrail to another upon the
Channel of the Black-Sea, to see her with the more freedom. She continued there
for some time without the Guveches Sultans seeming to take notice of it, or
manifesting the least concern or trouble, but she was brooding very different
Designs in her Head, and meditated a fatal and cruel Revenge.

Upon a certain time that the Emperor was a Hunting at a days Journey from
Constantinople, the Sultaness commanded the Galliots to be made ready to go
take the Air upon the Canal of the Sea. The chief of the Eunuchs having given
the necessary Orders, she stole on board with a small number of her most trusty
Slaves, and being come near Kandil Bakhtchei, so is the name of the Serrail,
where this new Odalik was kept she would needs go on shore on pretense of going
to divert her self in some one of the Grotto's of the Gardens; when that
Hatidge, who loved Fishing was in a Pleasure-House upon the Sea enjoying that
innocent Pleasure. The Maids that were about her went to meet the
Sultaness-Queen, and joining with their Friends, conducted her to the finest
Place of the Garden. She staid there with two of her greatest Confidents, the
others struck into By-places, to be at the more Liberty.

This Sultaness whom jealousy and the desire of revenge did cruelly torment,
lost no time. She stole from the Grotto whence she was followed by two
Accomplices of her wicked Design, and went directly to the Pleasure-house of
the Unfortunate Hatidge. They surpised her, threw her into the Sea, and went
their ways without being perceived, at least so is the Account the Eunuchs give
of that matter. Hatidge's Death extremely startled and afflicted the Emperor,
who nevertheless dissembled it, and thought fitting to seem to believe it to
have happened according to the Gloss they gave it in their relating it, though
he had been fully informed of the contrary, and that he did not doubt but that
it was a trick of the Sultana's, but there was no remedy. He caused the Body to
be sought for, that he might not lose with a Mistress he loved, a vast quantity
of Jewels he also valued.

Of the Grand Signiors Daughters and Sisters; of their Marriages, and
Ceremonies therein observed.
THE Sultaness's condition is much happier than that of the Sultan's, the
Emperor's Sons. His Highness is ever careful to provide for the Daughters, and
the greatest favor the Princes can hope for from him, is the preservation of
Life, to pass it, as the Emperor now reigning did, in a perpetual Prison, to
be brought up and fed like Women, and served by Old-women, who take care to
give them often a certain Conserve proper to extinguish the flames of
Concupiscence. The Sultanesses on the contrary are married in their greenest
years, and have sometimes had three or four Husbands before they have attained
to the Age of Wedlock. Nay, this is a stroke of Policy, and a piece of
Husbandry in the Court to rid it self of them betimes, and to encharge some
rich old Pacha with the keeping of a Princess, who is most commonly the
occasion of his Downfall; they are not wanting to find Pretenses to take away
his Life, and give the Confiscation of his Estate to his Dowager.

When the Grand Signior is minded to rid himself of a Daughter or Sister, and
that he chooses her a Husband, he signifies this his Intention to the Party by a
Hatcherif or Royal Command, that he should prepare himself for the Honor he
means to do him, and he regulates the Sultana's Dowry, which consists in all
sorts of Jewels, Vests of rich Stuff, Furrs of great value, Cushions, Quilts,
Carpets and Tapestries of admirable work, a world of Plate, and a bundle of
Linen, Sheets, Shifts, Handkerchiefs embroidered with Gold. The Pacha on his
part sends Presents, not only to his future Bride, but to the Grand Signior, to
the Sultanesses, to the Princess's Nurse, and to the Maids that are about them.
If the Bride be the Sultan's Daughter, the sending of these Presents is done
with great Pomp, which is also practiced at the removing of that Princess to
her Husband's Serrail.

The Mufty makes the Contract, and settles the Dowry Nekia. Formerly it did not
amount to above twenty five thousand Crowns, it now sometimes reaches to a
100000. The day appointed for the Nuptials being come, the Pacha does with his
Friends attend in his own Apartments till notice is brought him to enter into
that of the Sultaness. As soon as he sees the Kiahia Kaden appear, she being
the Intendant, encharg'd with this Care, he rises, goes to meet her, kisses her
hand, and follows her while that his Friends make Vows for his happy Marriage,
and for his Prosperity.

The Sultaness being covered with a Veil of Red Taffety, which hides her quite,
is seated upon a Stool at her Chamber Door: As soon as she perceives him she
rises, and withdraws into a corner of the Sofa. The Eunuchs take away this
Bridegroom's Slippers, and make him stay a while upon the Threshold of the
Door, as a mark of Supremacy, and then introduce him into the Chamber. He makes
three low Bows at three several times; he falls upon his knees with his face to
the ground, and says a short Prayer, which being ended, the Intendant conducts
him to the Sultana's feet, joins their hands, and utters some words which make
the Marriage. He sits down upon the Sofa near his Bride, and entreats her to
unveil her self: She makes no semblance of hearing him, and affects a haughty,
arrogant, scornful Carriage, which nothing is capable to make her recede from,
save the considerable Presents he promises her, and she asks for Drink to have
a pretense to take off the Veil which hides her face.

The Husband starts up, takes at the same time a China-Cup full of Water that
is set there on purpose, and continues standing till such time that the Bride
nods to him to draw near. He kneels down at her feet, and presents her the Cup
She takes off her Veil, and drinks a little out of Ceremony. The Slaves
immediately bring a Basin, on which there are two Plates garnished, the one of
two roasted Pigeons, and the other of Sugar Candy.

The poor Husband is here forced to undergo another Fatigue, so to oblige the
Sultaness to sit down to Table, and to taste those Meats which are of the
essence of the Ceremony. She redoubles her disdainful Carriage, and nothing can
sweeten it but the sight of the Presents. Then she suffers the Pacha to take
her under the Arms and conduct her to the Table. He serves a Pigeon to her, to
let her know by that Bird, which is the symbol of Fidelity and Union, that they
ought to live together like two Turtles. She eats, and presents him with
Sugar Candy to express her sweetness, which is not over great, seeing that most
commonly those Sultanesses continue in their insupportable airs of Arrogance,
and availing themselves of their Birth, and the Grand Signior's Authority,
treat those Husbands like Slaves, without their having the liberty to complain
of their usage.

This Repast ends almost at the same time it begins. The Sultaness goes again
to her Place, and the Pacha by her. All the company withdraws, and leaves them
at full liberty, though not to consummate the Marriage: It may, indeed, be the
season, but it is not the mode. The Husband employs those precious moments in
expressing to his new Bride the Obligation he has to the Sultan for the honor
he has done him in choosing him for the Husband of so charming a Princess. He
assures her that he will use his utmost endeavors to render himself worthy of
this Blessing by extraordinary Assiduities and Respects, that she is his
Patroness, and he her Slave. Those Complements are slightly enough received,
and if any returns be made them, it is only by a nod of the head, I do not say a
kiss; the Pacha would be happy were he but permitted to touch her fingers end,
if she has not yet been married. And though she have already been married, yet
he thereby finds but little more Indulgence, the fashion being to spend all
that time in merriments till the morning.

After the Pacha has discoursed a while with the Sultaness, his Friends come
into the Hall, where they set the Instruments a playing, to let him know that
they expect him; and this is the signal of the Bridegroom's coming out, and of
the Lady's return to the Sultaness. The whole night is spent in Feasts, Sports,
Musical Divertisements, Dances, and Puppet-plays each apart. The Bridegroom
diverts himself with his Friends, and the Bride with the Ladies.

Two hours before Day, they prepare the Nuptial Bed. The Intendants undress the
Sultaness, they put her to Bed, and the Ladies withdraw into other Rooms. None
stays with her save the Yengue Kaden, Mistress of the Nuptial Ceremonies, who
instructs her in what she is to do, that so she may not derogate from her
Quality or the Customs. An Eunuch goes to acquaint the Husband that it is time
to leave the company, and this is done after a manner pleasant enough, since it
is without speaking to him. He only presents him his Papoushes, a kind of
Slippers; then gets up, and withdraws into his own Room, and leaves his
Friends, in nodding to them with his head. The Music leaves off, the Pacha
undresses, and goes in his Nightgown to his new Wife.

He does not presently flounce into Bed; he kneels at the Sultaness's feet,
kisses them, and scratches the sole, and then steals gently under the Quilt; he
lays himself at the side of her, but out of respect he would not dare to
embrace her; it is she must make all the Advances, and kiss him, to give him the
boldness to caress her.

If she is a Virgin, he contents himself with these Caresses, and attempts no
farther without having a supreme order for his so doing. This is a privilege
which the Grand Signior reserves to himself. One must by a Request let him know
that the Princess his Daughter, or Sister, will not consent to the consummation
of the Marriage, and ask his permission to constrain her to it. His Highness
gives a Hatcherif, by which he orders the Pacha to consummate the Marriage, as
soon as he shall have received the blessed command: These are the very terms.
He reads this to his Wife, entreats her anew, and if she does not obey, which
is very rare, he has the power to act as Master in the case.

After the Consummation of the Marriage the Husband goes to the Bath, and an
Eunuch on behalf of the Sultaness brings him a Shift, a pair of Drawers, and an
Handkerchief. At his coming out of the Bath, he returns to his Friends in his
own Apartment: They wish him joy upon his new Marriage, and a Meal is served up
all of Sheeps Petty-toes. Thus the Day by us called the Weddings Good Morrow,
is by them called the Day of Petty-toes, Pacha-guni. The Sultaness gives the
same entertainment to her Friends. The Diversion of this Day quickly ends by
the drinking of Liquors, and taking of Perfumes. The Guests take their leave of
the new Married Couple, and the Pacha shuts himself up for eight days with the
Sultaness to accustom her to him, and render her familiar.

Of the Grand Signior's manner of spending His time, and of his Highness's
secret Pleasures.
THE Daily Occupations of this Prince are pretty well regulated. He rises an
hour before day in Winter, and at break of day in Summer, and sometimes
earlier. He washes his Face and Hands, then says his Prayers. This was Mahomet
the Fourth's Method.

On the days when the Grand Signior Bathes, he rises an hour sooner than
ordinary. If he has lain in his own Chamber, he goes into the Bath of Men, and
it is the Hammamdgi-Bachi, Master of the Bath that rubs him; If he has lain at
the Sultaness's, He goes into that of this Princess. At his getting out of Bed,
she puts a little Quilt over his Shoulders, she accompanies him with the
Treasuress, the Laundress, she who makes the Coffee, and a Female Buffoon for
their diversion. It Is the Sultaness who rubs and washes his Highness; the
others prepare the Linen perfumed with Amber and Aloes-wood, and at his coming
out of the Bath they put upon his head a great Veil of Goats-hair, finer and
more curious than Silk. They call it Chal, and instead of returning to the
Ladies Lodgings, he goes to his own Apartment.

After Prayer they serve up Breakfast, consisting of Eggs of all sorts, Sheeps
petty-toes, boiled Chickens and Fruit. Then he assists at the Divan, if it be
one of the days appointed for Justice, or confers with the Vizier about Affairs
of State; if not, he reposes an hour or two, or else takes Horse. At nine a
clock he goes again to Prayers, which is followed with a walk in the Gardens,
or some other Divertisement till Dinner time.

Before he sits down to Table they spread a great Indian Carpet of Silk
Embroidery, and upon that another smaller one of Gold Broccard, to cover two
Cushions between which the Emperor sits. They cover his Knees with an
Embroidered Toilet, and they set before him a Banquet garnished with Plates of
Gold, on which they place a very large silver Basin, which is at least four
foot in Diameter. The whole is set out with all sorts of Sallads, and the midst
of it is empty to receive the Dishes.

The Grand Signior eats always alone in the Hazoda, or in the Gardens. All the
Dishes are covered and wrapped up in Toilets, and sealed with the Clark of the
Kitchens Seal; and are not unsealed again but in his Highness's presence. They
serve him up but one Dish at a time. During the Repast, the Mutes and Dwarfs
make a thousand pleasant postures to divert the Emperor, who throws Morcels to
them to have the pleasure of seeing them scramble and snatch 'em from one
another.

It is an error to say, that the Turks neither eat in Gold nor Silver, and
it is rather an effect of their Policy than a prohibition of the Law. They are
afraid lest an overgreat use might diminish a Metal, the Mines of which are
not over-abounding among them. The Grand Signior has Dishes of Gold and Silver
which he makes use of in his Progress both in the Field and Army, by reason
that the green Porcelain Mertabani, wherein he commonly eats, cannot without
danger be carried up and down. There is another reason which induces the Turks
to make use of this green Porcelain which comes from Tartary; they fancy that
it cannot suffer any poisoned thing without breaking. Their Spoons are of some
precious Wood, or of the Beak of a Bird, by reason that Gold and Silver growing
hot keep their heat too long, but it is not the same with Wood, whence it is
easy to conclude that the little use of Gold and Silver Plate, is less a
Superstition than a very wise Reason. The Grand Signior eats with his Fingers
which he cleans at each mouthful; he does not drink while he is at Dinner.
After they have washed his hands with very fine Soap and sweet scented Waters,
they serve him up a great Porcelain Cup, full of Sorbet. The Coffee and sweet
things follow this Beveridge. After his Highness rises from Table, he reposes
again for a while, and then takes the Divertisement of Hunting, Walking, the
Exercise of the Itchoglans, Wrestling, Buffoons, Mutes and Dwarfs. He goes very
often to eat in the Gardens of the Pachas, and of other considerable Persons,
who, besides the Treat, are obliged to make him great Presents of Jewels and
Money, which they put under a Cushion by that Prince's side, and which the
Selictar is careful to take along with them upon their going away.

Every Tuesday the Grand Signior's head and face are shaved amid the sound of
Instruments and Voices. This is practiced with great Respect. Two Itchoglans
hold the Linen on which falls all the hair which they burn. Formerly they put
it into a Gold Box, and the Emperor made a Present of it to his Barber. This
Custom was introduced by Sultan Murad, for the abolishing the Barber's
Privilege, who might demand what Boon he pleased, while he had the Razor in
his hand, without fear of being denied.

In case the Grand Signior should not go to the Bath all the week long, he is
by Religion obliged to go into it on the Friday, the better to sanctify the
Day, and to wipe away by this solemn Ablution, in washing extremely all the
parts of the body, what may have sullied the soul.

His Highness sups about five a Clock, and goes to Bed about an hour and half
after it is night, and after the last Prayer is performed. They make his Bed
when he is ready to lie down. It is composed of three Quilts lined with a very
rich Stuff, and in Winter the last is garnished with Sables. They spread a
Sheet of extraordinary fine Cloth, and the second is fastened to the Coverlet
of Broccard, or Embroidered Satin. There are a world of little Pillows stuffed
with Cotton, and covered with Musceline Embroidered with Silk. The Bed is
surrounded with great Cushions. In the midst of the Chamber are two great Gold
Candlesticks with two huge Wax-lights, that burn all the night long, as well as
a Perfume of Amber and Aloes wood. The Sultan sleeps with a little Turbant on
his head, a Wast-coat and a pair of Drawers. There are always two Old-women
watching by him.

If the Grand Signior means to visit the Sultana-Queen by night, he signifies
his Intention to her by the Basch Mascara Beula, the chief Female Buffoon, that
diverts her, and prepares her for the Imperial Visit by Stories and Discourses
befitting to make her expect that honor. She comes to receive the Sultan at
the door of her Apartment, kisses his hands, which she lifts to her forehead,
leads him under the arms, undresses him her self, and goes to Bed after him.
The Slaves, who commonly lie in the Sultaness's Room, withdraw; there are only
two upon the Guard at the outward door, to enter upon the least signal. His
Highness only goes to the Sultaness's Apartment, the others go to him in his,
which so much the more confirms her Preheminency, and her Quality of first
Hasseki.

When the Sultan means to make a new Mistress, he orders the Kiahia Kaden to
assemble the Maids. This order is sufficient to create an Emulation in all
those lovely Prisoners, each of them would please, and fits her self out the
best she can, to gain the Grand Signior's Affections by displaying all the
beauty and finery afforded her by Art and Nature. He goes to the place where
they are, and if there be any one has the gift of pleasing him, he throws her
his Handkerchief. This most happy creature immediately prostrates her self upon
the floor, takes the precious Pledge of her future happiness, kisses it and
puts it up safe in her bosom.

In this Court, as in all the others of Europe, the Caresses of the Prince
invite the Complements of those that are sometimes the most jealous of the good
fortune of those they congratulate. All the other Maids come to partake in the
joy of this new Mistress. The Old-women repair immediately to her, lead her to
the Bath, dress her up gorgeously, deck her with Jewels, and conduct her at the
usual hour to the door of the Imperial Chamber amid the sound of Instruments.
The Eunuch on the Guard goes to give notice to the Grand Signior of this new
Mistress being come, and to receive his Orders for her introduction. If his
Commands be for her to enter, as soon as she is over the threshold of the door,
she runs to the feet of this Emperor's Bed; the door shuts, and the Music
continues to sing and play Tunes suitable to what is to pass behind the Scenes.

This fair one does not content her self with falling on her knees at the Bed's
feet, she lifts up the Coverlet a little, kisses the Sultan's feet, and
continues in this posture till he commands her to come to Bed; which she does
by stealing in at the feet, and slipping up softly by his Highness's side, who,
upon his dismissing her, puts a Handkerchief over her face, for a mark that he
has tried her, and that this Maid's Modesty does not permit her to show her
self before she be purified.

Nevertheless this Ceremony is only a mere Grimace, since she takes off that
Handkerchief as soon as she is got out of the Grand Signior's Chamber, where
the same Old-woman waits her coming, to conduct her to the Bath. She has then a
Place given her in the Ouz^un Odes, long Chamber; It is the Apartment of those
that have had the favors of the Emperor without having Children, and whom
they call Odalick. She has Eunuchs appointed her, and some other Maids for her
Attendance. If she proves with Child, and is brought to Bed of a Son, they
confer upon her the Quality of Hasseki, first, second, or third, according to
her rank. The Emperor lately deposed made but two Hasseki's; The Sultana-Queen
did dexterously divert these sorts of Intrigues, to which he was not
over-prone, his Inclinations being, indeed, somewhat faint for all things save
Hunting, that was his predominant Passion, and he spent the finest Days of his
Life in that Recreation with so great an Avidity, that it frequently made him
lose his Repose and Eating. In all likelihood Soliman the third, his Brother,
will not be so wedded to that Exercise, as well through his Humor and
Inclinations, which are very different from those of Mahomet, as through the
necessity of his Affairs.

There was formerly in the Serrail a Chamber of Falconry with Eighty Pages;
commanded by the Grand-Falconer called Dongandgibachi. They governed, fed and
cleaned the Grand Signior's Birds. They alone had the Privilege of walking in
the Serrail, under pretense of looking to their Birds, and, indeed, they were
obliged to carry a Bird upon their fist, if not, they would have been
chastis'd. After the suppression of this Chamber, there has ever been an
Arsagalar, who out of honor bears the name of Grand-Falconer.

The Birds are at present in the hands of three Officers, who no longer dwell
in the Serrail; they are called Dogandgi, Tchakirdgi-Bachi and Chakindgi-Bachi:
The difference of these three names comes from three different species of Birds
which the Turks make use of, namely, of the Dogan, which signifies a Spar-hawk,
Tchahir, a Merlin, and Chahin, which signifies Falcon, each Officer governs
those whose name he bears, and has a world of Servants appointed to look to,
air and exercise them. When the Grand Signior means to fly, these three
Officers carry the Bird, and are followed by all their servants in the same
equipage.

These Officers have considerable Incomes, which they derive from the
Haz-arpalick assigned them for their subsistence, and for the maintenance of
their Equipages, Birds, and the servants that have them in keeping. There are
several Villages that pay not any Tax, on condition to furnish annually a
certain number of Birds for the Falconry. They are bound to teach them, and to
put them into the hands of the Officers, from whom they take a Receipt, which
exempts them from all sorts of Impositions.

The Grand Signior has above 1200 Greyhounds, Hounds and Mastiffs, or
Bull-Dogs, the last are for Bull-baiting. They are all fed differently
according to their species. They give the Mastiffs Bread and a Goat's-head a
day, half the head in the morning, and as much in the evening. The Greyhounds
have two loaves a day, and a Goat's-head a week boiled, without fleaing it,
taking off the hair, or taking out the bones, by reason that this purges them.
The Turkish Greyhounds are the most beautiful Dogs of their kind: Their Tails
and Ears are like those of Spaniels, principally those of the Isle of Cyprus;
nay, there are some that quest and have a very good Nose.

Sometimes wagers are laid upon the fleetness of these Dogs. The Masters for
three days only feed them with the yolks of Eggs. They must be carried evening
and morning, and walked out to empty them. The Turks have a great value for
this kind of Dogs. The Hounds and Beagles are fed like the others. The Grand
Signior has a vast number of Poland-Tygers, which are beautiful, but worth
nothing. They have all housses that are of Broccard when his Highness marches
in Ceremony.

There are a sort of little Tigers, by the Turks called Ch^par, which they make
use of in Deer-hunting. It is so fierce an Animal, that if it does not take its
Prey in three Leaps, it is pawl'd; and if he that governs it does not caress it
to comfort it, it would burst with rage. The Falconers that have the care of
them, carry them behind them on Horseback, and notwithstanding their fierceness
they are so-so docible.

When the Emperor is minded to make a general Hunt, after he has appointed the
place, he issues out a Command for the raising of the People that are to beat
the Country; this Command specifies the number. The Hasseki's of the Bostandgi
Bachi, who are encharg'd with the Execution, appoint the number which each
Bailywick of the Province where the Hunt is performed is to furnish. They
sometimes get together full forty thousand, and there would be many more, if
the Bostandgis, made the Leavy exact, and did not exact money from those they
exempt.

The Grand Signior does not give any maintenance to these Hunters, those that
are obliged to furnish them, feed them. They surround a vast Country, and
these Hunters who still march in a Circle, drive all the Game that is within
the compass, and which retires into a Wood wherein they shut it up. There they
make a number of Glades, which end in a vast empty space, which is in the midst
of this Wood, and wherein they erect a little Amphitheatre, whence his Highness
views the whole Chase according as it is roused and started. Sometimes the
Grand Signior does not mount upon this Amphitheatre, he continues six or seven
hours on Horseback, spurring on all sides during an excessive Cold, without
taking any nourishment, saving some mouth-fulls in passing from one place to
another, where Men are set with Basins, which they put upon their heads as soon
as they see his Highness appear.

They take Hinds, Fallow Deer, Staggs, Wolves, and particularly, a world of
Hares, which they knock on the head, according as they would make their way
through the Circle. The hooting of these Hunts is very pleasant, when they are
performed in a good season, and it is diverting to see Men, Dogs and Animals
Pell-mell within about a Leagues compass, with the shouts of those that form
the enclosure to hinder the Game from going out. The manner of tossing Hares in
the Plain of St. Dennis is a slight Image of it.

FINIS.
An Advertisement. MODERN HISTORY, OR, A Monthly Account Of all considerable
Occurrences, Civil, Ecclesiastical, and Military.
With all Natural, and Philosophical Productions and Transactions.

Printed at London, By J. B. and Sold by Joseph Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball
over against the Royal Exchange, and by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall in
Ludgate Street.

AS Curiosity is natural to Mankind, it has been likewise the Care and Business
of This Age to furnish Novelties and Entertainments toward the gratifying of
that Humor: But many People are so hasty, or so heedless in the discharge of
this Office, that they do not attend as they ought to do, either to the Dignity
of the Subject they are to work upon, or to the Truth of what they Report: By
which means a Thousand Fables and Falsities are imposed upon the world: Matters
of moment, promiscuously confounded with things of little worth; and for want
of separating the True from the False, the Good from the Bad, and useful
Notions or Curiosities from matters unprofitable, men are at a loss what to
take, and what to leave.

Now for the preventing of these inconveniences for the future, there is Order
taken for the drawing of all Memorable and Notable Events and Relations out of
the several Fragments that have been published concerning them into one entire
Collection: That is to say, in the regular Series of a Monthly Account. This to
be done in the most succinct and faithful manner possible; and nothing to be
inserted, but what is of weight, and verified from the best hands.

And for the perfecting of this work, there is such a Correspondence settled
abroad, that very few Occurrences of any kind will escape us, whether Civil,
Military, or Ecclesiastical, beside Philosophical Transactions and
Emprovements, which we suppose will be as well beneficial as delightful to the
curious: And as we shall on the one hand be very careful not to let any thing
slip within the compass of our pretensions, so on the other hand not to
intermeddle in the secrets of any Church or State-matters beyond our Province.

The reason for Publishing this Relation once, and but once a Month (as that is
the course resolved upon) is this; First, that the notices of things to be made
public may be carried-on Methodically upon equal distances of time, and
without wracking peoples expectations by any longer Intervals. Secondly, That
matters may be delivered with as much caution for the certain truth of matters
as such an undertaking will bear: But if any mistake of what kind soever shall
happen (this care and industry notwithstanding,) the Publisher of these Sheets
will take it very kindly to be informed; and that whatsoever is amiss shall be
constantly rectified in the Account ensuing to the said Information: And we
shall give further to understand, that this Collection (God willing) shall be
constantly published the second Wednesday of every Month.

Eight of these Monthly Accounts have already been Published, and the Ninth is
in the Press, and they are to be had for Sixpence a piece, and once in a Year
they will make up a Bound Book in Quarto, of a considerable Volume; besides,
their containing (as we have already said) the whole History of all Modern
Occurrences they will be intermixed and beautified with Tracts of Geography,
Criticism* and generally, all that falls within the Commonwealth of Learning;
as for example the foregoing Turkish Secretary being to be bound up with them:
All which advantages joined with their certainty will recommend 'em not only to
the Cabinets of all the curious, but to all Public Houses, as Coffee-Houses
and others, where the Entertainment they afford must of necessity invite great
resort.

FINIS.

