[Monday 23 of December 17^^.] Dr. Davenant's OPINION Anent the Salt and
Malt-Taxes IN ENGLAND.
THE Doctor in his Essay, upon the probable Methods of making People Gainers in
the Balance of Trade, Printed Anno 1700, after enumerating several Taxes, and
giving his Opinion anent the dangerous Consequences of heavy Impositions on
Trade, says page 95, 96. and 97. That, during all the War, there has been
levied here great Sums every Year, and many of the forementioned Funds are to
continue so long, that it will be several years before our Annual Payments can
be considerably diminished, and there is such a Difference between a Twentieth,
and an Eighth or indeed a Twelth Part (which yet we shall not come to in some
time) as must inevitably affect the Nation's Trade and the whole Body of its
People.

When their was raised no more than about a Twentieth Part, there were great
Sums of Money to circulate in Foreign Traffic, and to Employ in enlarging our
Home-manufactures, which two Fountains of our Wealth must be dry, when the
Springs, which hitherto fed them, are diverted and let into another Channel.

There is scarce any of these new Revnues which do not give Trade a desperate
wound; the Additional Duties on Beer, and Ale, and the Tax upon Malt, are
apparently a Burden upon the Woollen Manufactures, affecting the Carder,
Spinner, Weaver and the Dyer, who all of them must be raised in their Wages,
when the Necessaries of Life are raised to them. The Consequences of which will
be, that our Woollen Goods must come at a Heavy and Disadvantageous Price into
the Foreign Mercats.

There is no Man will pretend, that high Customs are not pernicious to our
Commerce Abroad. A Nation is not Gainer in the general Balance of Trade, by
the Dealing of a few, who are able to Employ in it great Stocks, such may make
to themselves an immense Gain, but they go but a little toward Enriching the
whole Public, which seldom Thrives, but when in a manner the Universal People
bend their Thoughts to this Sort of Business, when every one is ready with his
small Stock and little Sum, to venture and rove about the World; of these some
prosper and others are undone: However in the way of Merchandise, Men who do
not Thrive themselves, may yet contribute very much to make their Country Rich,
which gets by the Dealings of all, and does not suffer by the unfortunate
Conduct of here and there a Merchant. But when the Customs are high, all these
Undertakers, who all along in England have made up the chief Bulk of our
Trading Men, must hold their hands, tho in Skill, Industry, Intentive Parts,
and Wit, they may exceed Merchants of more Wealth and of a higher Rank. Nor is
it indeed practicable for Men of but a Moderate Fortune to deal at all, when
more than triple that Sum is necessary to have ready now to pay the King, which
formerly would have set up a Substantial Trader, and maintain him in sufficient
Business.

But of all the new Impositions, none are so dangerous to the very Being of
Trade, nor so hurtful to all its Parts and Members, as the high Duties lately
laid upon Salt. First, They affect the Common People in the whole Course of
their Living, whose chief Nourishment is Bacon and other Salted Flesh, so that
this Excise has an universal Influence upon all Manufactures whatsoever. But
the general Prejudice it may bring to Navigation, is yet of a higher
Consequence.

Page 100, he says, Reckoning long and short Voyages together, the principal
Expense of fitting out a Trading Vessel, is Drink and Meat. The Excise and
Duties upon Malt, without doubt, make Drink sufficiently Dear to the Fraughter.
And the Duty upon Salt, makes Victualling a very heavy Burden upon him; all
which must end, in lessoning our Navigation from time to time, for undoubtedly
Foreigners observing, how dear Freight is with us, will Trade in their own
Ships as much as possible.

In Barrelling up Beef and Pork, we heretofore made Use of St. Martines's, etc.
or Oleron and English Salt mixed together; and with these Materials the Flesh
was best prepared, both for Wholsomeness and long Keeping, our own Salt without
Mixture being Fiery, Corrosive, and very Scorbutic. As we are informed, the
St. Martins and worser sort of French Salt, from 1676 to 1688 was delivered in
London at about 2 l: 5sh: per Tun, and forty Bushels to the Tun, and that from
Oleron from 2 l: 10sh: to 2 l: 15 sh: per Tun. But now the very Duty for 40
Bushels of Oleron Salt amounts to 13 l: 6 sh: 8 d: beside the 25 per Cent ad
valorem, of which formerly the Prime Cost came to but 2 l: 15 sh: at highest.
The Duty likewise upon 40 Bushels of Lisbon Salt comes to 13 l: 6 sh. 8 d. of
which the Prime Cost was formerly at highest but 3 l* 10 sh: And as to our
Newcastle and Limington Salt, which is now generally made use of in Salting
Beef and Pork for Trading Vessels, the very Duty for 40 Bushels amounts to 6 l:
13 sh: 4 d: which before the War the Prime Cost came but to 3 l: at the dearest
Market. In so much, that we are credibly informed, that a Merchant can Store
himself in Ireland with Salt Beef and Pork ready Packed up, almost as cheap, as
he can Buy the Salt in England.

So that for long Voyages, the Merchant will either victual in Ireland, or salt
his Beef and Pork on some Foreign Coast, as he sails along, where Provisions
shall be cheap: which must be a great Damnage to the Landed Interest here: Or
if he does not so, Victualling will be so Expensive to him, as to make Fraught
much dearer than ought it to be in a Country that expects to thrive by Trade.

The Consequence of all which will be, That the Body of our Merchants must ly
under a general Discouragement, they will neglect looking after National Gain,
which English Merchants have perhaps heretofore as much considered in their
Dealings, as any Trading Men in the whole Commercial World. They will have an
Eye to nothing, but their own temporary Profit, and suffer Strangers to go away
with those Gains, which England was wont to make by Freight. From whence it
will follow, That we must decay in our Stock of Shipping, and decrease every
Year in the Brood of Seamen; and when this happens, we must no more pretend to
such a Naval Strength, as hitherto has made us terrible to all our Neighbors.


