ZENON


THE Moral Philosophy OF THE STOICS.

Written Originally in FRENCH by that Ingenious Gentleman Monsieur du Vaix,
first President of the Parliament of Provence.

Englished by Charles Cotton, Esquire

Ea Philosophiae vis est, ut non solum students, sed etiam conversantes juvet.
Sen. Epist. LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the sign of the Phoenix in
St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door. 1664.

Perlegi ingeniosum hunc Libellum, cui Titulus (The Moral Philosophy of the
STOICS,) quem non indignum censeo qui

Typis Mandetur.

Joh. Hall. R. P. D. Humf. Episc. Land. a sac. Dom.
April. 13. 1664.
To my Honored Friend and Kinsman John Ferrers Esquire
Honored Cozen,
IT is so long since I writ to you, that I am now ashamed to appear before you
any other way then this, where this little mark of my respect, may something
pretend to your pardon for what is past, by showing you, That however I may
have neglected, I can never forget you; and although I am sensible, that I
repair an unkindness by an injury, whilst I impose this Trifle upon your
Patronage; yet I cannot much consider that, when I call to mind how kindly you
have ever entertained my friendship, and how unapt you are to interpret your
friends to their disadvantage. This little thing that I present to you, and to
the world in your name, I translated seven years ago, by my Fathers command,
who was a great admirer of the Author: so that what you see, was an effect of
my obedience, and no part of my choice; my little studies (especially at that
time) lying another way: neither had I now puhlished it, but that I was
unwilling to have a thing (how mean soever) turned to waste Paper, that cost me
some hours pains, and which (however I may have disguised it) is no ill thing
in it self.

For what concerns the Dedication of it to you, I must confess, that besides my
gratitude, to which I am ever bound, I had a collateral design upon your
protection, supposing that the censuring world would use me with more respect
upon your account; and although you stand in need of no Moral precept to make
you a perfect good man: yet perhaps it may not be altogether unpleasant to you,
to look back into your own practice, and to read over your own Virtues, which
are such, as amongst many others, and many worthier have particularly obliged
me to profess my self

Honored Cozen, Your most humble Servant, C. C.
February 27. 1663.
THE Moral Philosophy OF THE STOICS.
THERE is nothing in the world that tends not to some End; Even insensible
things seem to advance, and adapt themselves to their proper use, and being
applied thereto, discover a kind of consent, and seem to apprehend the
Perfection of their Being. Things that are endowed with action, move of
themselves, as we see; and all the Animals in general, and every of them in
this kind, pursues with fervency and Emulation, That for which he was born; and
is apparently delighted with the fruition of his desire. What then shall man
do, to whom Nature (above things without life) has given Sense, and (above the
Common Sense of other Animals) has given discourse and Reason to know and
choose, of things presented to Him the most excellent, and proper to his use?
May we not conclude Him to have his proper end decreed him, as the utmost aim
of all his actions? And that, as the happiness of all things is their
Perfection, and Perfection the fruition of the End; so the Felicity of Man
shall consist in the acquisition and atcheivment of that he proposes to
himself, and to which all his Actions tend? Now the End of Man, and all his
thoughts and Inclinations, is Good. And indeed, there is none amongst you that
desires not good, and flies not Ill; and who being asked, why he does this, or
that, will not answer, because he thinks to do well. And though in the Number
of our actions, the greater are found to be Ill; notwithstanding the general
Purpose, by which we are led, is ever to arrive at Good. But, as he that shoots
at a mark, if his aim be obstructed, either by the infirmity of the Eye, or the
corruption of the Air, or if he mistake one thing for another, though he
earnestly desire to hit, must err; so we, not rightly knowing in what consists
our good, and often mistaking that about it, for the thing it self, dispose our
particular actions wide of the general Intent. Good is not (truly) exposed here
to the view of all the world, Nature has strewed below but weak sparks of its
light, which nevertheless purely applied to our minds, breaks out into a
glorious flame, and makes a true discovery of it self. We must then seek it,
and we shall find it, and finding, know it: For, as truth, presenting it self
to the understanding, is received with great Content, and satisfaction; so
Good, presenting it self to the Will, shall, there, be joyfully embraced, as
its natural object: I think, that, properly to define Good, a man may say it is
nothing but the Essence and operation according to Nature; who is so wise a
Mistress, as that she has disposed all things to their best Estate; has given
them their first inclination to Good, and the End they ought to seek; so that
who will follow, cannot fail to obtain it. By Nature Man should be so composed,
that the most Excellent Quality should govern in him; and that, of things,
presented to his Choice, his Reason should make use of such as are most decent,
and most to his purpose. The Good, then, of Man consists in his healthful
Reason, that is to say, his Virtue; which is nothing but a constant Disposition
of the Will to pursue things Honest, and fit. There is none but will
acknowledge this for Good; but many will say, that in this, alone, the Good of
man cannot consist; but that, withal, he must have a Body sound, and well
disposed; Commodities, without which Life cannot stand; or, at the least, be
happy. But, if what we have said, in the beginning, be true, and that the end
of every thing is his Good, and his Good, his End; and, that these two so weave
themselves into one another, that the One cannot subsist without the other; a
man may say, that neither Health, nor Body are the Good of Man, seeing they are
not his End: for he possesses not them, but to serve him to a further Use: and
the most part of his Age, he is miserable with all this: unless we shall
approve them for happy, to whom wealth and strong Constitutions serve only (as
to very many) to nourish their vices, and foment their Passions. But a man may
say, They help us to arrive at that End, and they are Instruments, without
which, Man cannot reach this principal Good: and consequently (as they are
necessary to the acquisition of That) ought themselves to be reputed Goods. To
which I shall answer; That it is improper to call that good, which only serves
to acquire good, and that which is the subject and matter of good: For virtue,
which we have declared to be the true Good, is of such a nature, that she
serves her self indifferently with contrary things, and does good with Poverty,
as well as with Riches, with Sickness as well as with health: We commend him
that suffers his wants with patience, his sickness with constancy, as we do him
that liberally distributes his substance, and lives virtuously in his health:
So that if you will call Riches good, because they are assistant to virtue,
call poverty so too: for even she attends her more: But because we have no
pretense for the calling two things so contrary in themselves, by one and the
same name, let all such things rest indifferent, as are rendered good, or ill by
the disposition of man; and without which, he may arrive at his End; which is,
to be composed according to perfect Reason, to make good use of things
presented to him, and consequently to possess the fruition of his Good. If we
would rightly know, in what consists our good, we must discover what, in our
selves, adheres to it; (for it must be a good of that side) since nothing seeks
another good, then is annexed to its own. Now (without all doubt) the Beginners
and movers of our actions, in us, are the Understanding, and the Will; the Good
then, that we aim at, should be their perfection, Peace and Satisfaction. But
if we there place Health, and Wealth, and esteem them our Goods, and
consequently, what are their Contraries, Ills, why do we not presently declare,
that we can have no Felicity in this world and that our lives are, here, no
other then a perpetual Hell? For ye shall always have the Images of Death, and
affliction before your Eyes which you esteem ills; and, of which the one is
often present, and the other ever threatening, by his nearer approach. If these
be ills, Fear is just, and how happy is that man, who is always in fear? Let
us then either conclude, that man has no good decreed him in this world, to
which he can possibly arrive, or, that That Good wholly depends upon Virtue.

The end that any one proposes to himself of things, must be proportioned to
his power; if, otherwise it be impossible for him to obtain, instead of his
good, it becomes his affliction, It were the work of Danaids to fill perforated
Vessels, if among all the Sciences, there were none that designs her self an
End, to which she may arrive by her own Precepts. Can we imagine that Nature,
who is the Mother of all Arts, and Sciences, has ordained for Man (Her
chiefest work) an End beyond his Power? The Will (we say) is that which seeks
our good; and a will well governed, will nothing but what it can, nor busy it
self with things beyond our reach; as with Health, Riches and Honor: If in
these consisted our good, it were in vain to employ our Reason, and Will; we
should attempt it by wishes and vows, as a thing depending upon a thousands
accidents, not to be foreseen, or withstood; and of which Fortune is the only
Mistress. How likely is it (I beseech you) that Nature having created Man the
most perfect of all her works, should ordain Him so miserable, as that his
Good, which should be his perfection, not only should depend upon another, but
upon so many things, which he must never hope can be all favorable to him; and
that He should (like another Tantalus) be there perpetually gaping for his
longed for waters? Nature commands you, for good, to have the understanding
disposed for the use of what is presented to you, and to pass by things you
cannot have: Had you rather rely on Fortune, and expect from her falacious hand
your good, than to work it your selves? It is a Law divine, and inviolable from
the beginning of the world, that the good we would have, we must give to our
selves. Nature has bestowed a Magazine in our minds; let us there stretch
forth the hand of the will, and take what Arms we please: if that will be
reasonable, and moderate, it turns all things to good, as Midas turned all
things to gold by his touch. We can meet no accident in our Persons or Estates
so malicious, whence we should not extract Peace and satisfaction of mind: if
we can satisfy that, we have obtained our End; For though we were content so
much to slacken the severity of this Sect, as to confess, that Body and Goods
(which are but the instruments of life) make a part in Man, and have power, by
their quality, to disturb that of the Soul; we ought, notwithstanding, never to
acknowledge, that any loss which may happen either to Body or Goods should take
away the felicity of Man, when his mind enjoyes its Good, and its delight.

Of things composed of many parts the most noble gives the name, and law to the
rest; who then shall doubt the felicity of the whole Man, when the soul is
happy? So we pronounce a Republic happy, after a famous victory,
notwithstanding the loss of some Citizens; because her happiness proportions it
self in the Person of the Prince or State, to whose good, and service, all the
rest ought to apply themselves; in so much, as that every private Soldier
shall glorify himself in his wounds, love them, and boast they were received
for preservation of King and Commonwealth: shall we then allow the Body another
sense, or desire, than what relates to the satisfaction of the Soul? shall we
so chain the Soul to the Body, as that her good shall be slave to the members,
and depend upon them? that the mind shall suffer, as they are well, or ill
disposed? If Nature would that the perfection of Man should depend in Body and
Goods, she had given to all the same Body, and the same Goods: for they, making
a part in their Nature, ought to be alike in all, and to pass from the Genus
into the Individual; but having on the contrary, conferred them both in a very
different condition, both for body and goods; she has given to all an
indifferent power to make good use of such Bodies and goods as they have, that
so the Action of the Soul may render it self as conspicuous and honorable, by
one means, as another: And indeed, her Excellence shines more bright, and
merits more praise, by how much, when destitute of such instruments, she of her
self arrives at her proper End: as in my opinion, we ought better to esteem the
Pilot, who through the rage of waves and tempest, can bring a leaky Vessel,
unfurnished of Sail and Tackle, safe to the Port, than he who with a new tight
Ship, well rigged for service, with a savourable Sea, and right gale a-poop.
Let us then make this determination; that since the felicity of man depends
upon his Good, that his good is to live according to his Nature, and that to
live according to his Nature, is not to be disturbed with Passions, and to
behave himself upon all occasions with moderate Reason. We must (as necessary
to our happiness) purge the Mind from Passions, and learn how to animate our
selves against whatever may happen to us. Now that which can best instruct us
in this way, and teach us the inclinations of a right spirit, and a will,
governed by reason, is Prudence; which is the beginning, and end of all Virtue:
For that, making us exactly and truly to know the condition and quality of
things objected to us, renders us sit to distinguish what is according to
Nature, what is not; what we ought to pursue, and what we ought to fly: She
removes the erroneous opinions that afflict us, restores our natural
affections; and in her Train follow all other Virtues, of which she is at once
the Mother, Nurse, and Guardian. Oh! the life of Man were happy, if always
conducted by this excellent guide. But alas! by how much this Virtue is
excellent, by so much is it rare; and is in our minds, like the veins of Gold
in the earth, found in few places. It is in my judgment, that great,
magnificent, and impenetrable Buckler, sorged by Vulcan for Achilles; in which
he carried the Heavens, the Earth, the Ocean, Clouds, Stars, Thunder, Cities,
Armies, Assemblies and Battles, and to be short, what in this world is to be
seen, thereby intimating to us, that knowledge renders the Soul of Man more
invulnerable than a large sevensold shield can do the body. But as Achilles
went to the School of Chiron to make himself sit to bear this massy shield; so
must you come to that of Philosophy to learn the use of Prudence; which will
teach you, that Prudence is to be exercised two ways; one to advance us to
good, the other to repel evil. But as we bring not our minds pure to
Philosophy our Physician, but rather prepossessed and contaminated with froward
popular humors, we must like a skilful Surgeon (who before he make any
application to the wounded part, draws forth malignant humors) begin by
purging our mind of all such rebellious Passions, as by their smoke obnubilate
the eye of Reason: otherwise the Precept of good manners, and sound affections,
is of no more advantage to the Soul, than abundance of of food to a corrupt
body, which the more you endeavor to nourish, you offend. We call that
Passion, which is a violent motion of the Soul in her sensitive part, and makes
her either apply her self to what she thinks is good, or recede from what she
takes to be ill: For though we have but one Soul, cause of life, and action
which is all in all, and all in every part, yet has that one Soul very
different agitations, even contrary to one another, according to the diversity
of Vessels where she is retained, and the variety of objects presented to her:
In one she has her Increase, in another her Motion, in a third her Sense, in a
fourth her Memory, in a sift her Discourse; as the Sun, who from one essence
distributing his rays in diverse places, warms one, and illuminates another,
melts wax, and dries the earth, dissipates clouds, and exhausts lakes, and
marshes. When the Parts where she is enclosed, only keep and employ her to the
proportion of their capacity, and the necessity of their right use, her effects
are sweet, benign and well governed; but on the contrary, when they usurp more
motion and heat than they should, they change and become more dangerous; like
the rays of the Sun, that wandering at their natural liberty, warm gently and
faintly, but contracted and united in the Concave of a glass, burn and consume,
what they were wont to give life to, and nourish. Now Nature has given this
force and power (borrowed from the Soul) to the Senses, to apply themselves to
things, to extract their forms, and as they are fit or unfit, harmonious or
dissonant to Nature, to embrace or reject them: and that for these two Reasons;
One, that they should be as Sentinels to the Body for its preservation; the
other (and the chiefest) to the end they should be as Messengers, and Carriers
of the understanding, and sovereign part of the Soul; and to serve as Ministers
and Instruments of discourse and Reason. But in giving them this power, she
has also prescribed her Law and Command, which is to be satisfied with a
careful observation and intelligence of what shall pass, without attempting to
usurp the more high and eminent power, and so to put all things into alarm and
confusion. For, as in an Army, the Sentinels (oftentimes not knowing the design
of their Commander) may be deceived, and take an enemy disguised, for a friend,
or for enemies such as come to their relief; so the Senses, (not comprehending
the whole sum of Reason) are often abused by appearance, and take for
advantageous, what is wholly against us: When upon this judgment, and without
expecting the command of Reason, they come to disturb the Irascible and
Concupiscible powers, they raise a sedition, and tumult in the Soul, during
which, Reason is no more heard nor the understanding obeyed, than is the Law or
Magistrate in a troubled estate of civil discord. Now in this Commotion, the
Passions which disturb the peace of the mind, and mutiny against the Soul, make
their first insurrection in the Concupiscible part, that is to say, in the
place where the Soul exercises this faculty of desiring, or rejecting things
offered to her, as they are proper, or contrary to her delight, or
conservation. They move then according to the appearance of a Good or Ill. If it
be a present good, and of which they enter into a present fruition, we call
that Motion, Pleasure, or Delight: If it be of a good to come, from which we
are far distant, we call it desire: if of a present Ill, of which we already
resent the incommodity and distaste, and which we lament in other men, we call
it Hate or Horror: if of any Ill we bewail in our selves, vexation: if this
vexation be occasioned by what concerns us nearly, we call it Grief; if by
mischance in another, Pity; if occasioned by an apparent Good, in which we
pretend to share, Jealousy; if by good we have no part in, Envy: if occasioned
by an Ill to come, we call it Fear.

This is the first body of Mutineers that disturb the peace of the Soul, whose
effects (though very dangerous) are nevertheless much inferior in violence to
them that sollow: For those first motions, formed in that part by the presented
object, immediately shift thence into the irascible part, that is to say, into
that part where the Soul seeks the means she has to obtain, or shun what
appears good or evil to her; and there as a wheel already moving, by a new
access of force, falls into a prompter speed; so the Soul, already stirred with
the first apprehension, and adding a second effort to the first, is hurried
with more violence than before, and raises up Passions more powerful, and more
difficult to tame, by how much they are doubly conjoined to the former,
implicating and corroborating one another by a mutual consent: for the first
Passions, that are formed to the object of a seeming Good, falling into
consideration of the means to atchieve it, either stir up in us Hope or
Despair; and such as are formed to the object of Ill, give birth to Fear and
Anger: which four Passions are strangely strong and violent, and wholly subvert
that Reason they find already shaken. These (in my opinion) are the winds that
create the tempests of the Soul; and the Cave whence they issue (as I have
already told you) is an erring opinion, that things presented to us, are Good,
or Evil: for attributing to them the quality they have not, we fly or pursue
them with violence; and thence spring our Passions. The way then to stop this
Cave, is to secure the Peace of the Soul; and that she be not swayed otherwise
than she should, let us call to mind what has been proved in the beginning of
this discourse; to wit, That the Good of man and the perfection of Nature,
consist in a right disposition of his Will, to make use of things presented to
him according to Reason; and (on the contrary) his Ill, in a vicious and
unbridled disposition to their abuse; for with the first he shall create his
advantage, receive satisfaction from whatever can happen to him, and establish
for himself a peace of mind, firm, and unmoved as a rock in the fury of the
waves; and with the second, every accident shall be distastful to him, and turn
to his loss and affliction. When therefore any object shall present it self
unto us (that we may not trouble our selves, as with a Good or Ill that pursues
us) let us examine whether it be in our power, or no; if it be in our power, it
may be to us, either good or ill: But in this case, we ought by no means to be
transported; for in retaining the will perfect, we render it good, and preserve
it so: if out of our power, it is to us, neither Good, nor Ill; and
consequently, we neither ought to seek nor avoid it. To approve, attempt,
desire, and shun, and (in word) all our actions are in our own Power; for the
will has power, and authority to govern, and steer them by Reason to the place
where they ought to arrive for our good; and to dispose our opinions to consent
only to what they ought, and to that which stands examined by Sense and Reason;
to adhere to things evidently true, to suspend in what is doubtful, to reject
what is false; and so to govern the desire, that it only pursue what is
natural, and only fly the contrary. Out of our power are our Bodies, Estates,
Reputations; and (in a word) all that depend not on the Will; and these, after
what manner so ever they arrive, are never contrary to Nature; because,
happening either by the universal and continual order of things, and ordinary
succession of Causes, we ought not to think them strange; or if they happen by
a particular Providence that compels them, we ought to know, that Nature has
subjected us to it: Moreover, that she has given us a power in the Soul to
comply with, and make good use of whatever may happen to us from without,
shows, that she has not only made us fit for any thing, but for all: insomuch,
as we ought not to covet, or eschew any thing; as well, because it is a foolish
and vain affection to will what a man cannot do, as because in what manner
soever it can happen to us, it may turn to our good, and may be the subject of
worthy and honorable actions. Now, if we can prevail with our selves not to
desire, or fly what is out of our reach, but with a temperate affection,
entertain what accidents shall happen; we shall be clear of all perturbation,
free, and happy; never frustrate in any design, never resisted in any
enterprise; we shall hate no man, complain of no man, fear no man, be angry
with no man, for, no man can do us harm: If (on the contrary) we avoid, or
pursue what is beyond our reach, we often stray from what we hope and wish,
precipitate our selves into what we abhor, and fall into trouble and
affliction. There is no man so ill advised as not to confess, that it is better
to have, than be deprived of what he desires; to be free from passion, than to
be afflicted with it: who then shall deny this Rule to be sound and natural, by
which we obtain whatever we desire, desiring nothing but what we can, and by
which we afflict not our selves, but placing Good, or Ill in our own power,
give our selves the One, and repel the other at our own choice? In all things,
then, that are presented to us, (that we be not afflicted, or transported) we
must immediately consider, whether they be in our power, or no; if they be, let
us preserve a moderate will to guide, and conduct them to their true and
natural use, and in so doing we shall obtain our good: If they be not, let us
not disturb our selves, but have this necessary caution about us: This thing
concerns me not, that is to say, it is neither my good, nor ill; and
consequently, I ought not to seek, or shun it; but however it shall happen, fit
my self to it, and apply it to the best use I can: If we find our selves
transported beyond this, and that some of the above named Passions mutiny
within us, by the object of things out of our Power, let us weigh the Nature of
the thing presented, and to what end it is given us; Then, examine what effects
can derive from the passion to which we begin to incline; and, in the next
place seek out the opposite Virtue, and that power Nature has given us to rule
over it. For as Passion enters into us from without, and there enters with the
Image of the offered Subject, so has Nature manned us within, against this
assault, with a power to resist it, if we will use it to our defense: To
fortify which power, let us have some fair precepts, and short sentences
concerning every Passion, by which we may shield our Reason, and stop (as with
a Trench) the first precipitate motions of the Soul, that would storm it; To
render which Precepts more strong, and hard to undermine, let us Garrison them
with the beautiful Examples of such as have generously behaved themselves in
the like Occasions; for the example of Virtue in others, engages our own, and
their Glory provokes us to Imitation: If any subject then, for the delight of
the Body, present it self; (as luxuriant and delicate meats) as soon as we
perceive our selves moved, let us call to mind, that they are not of the things
in our Power, and consequently, neither our Good, nor Ill; but things
indifferent, that Nature has given for our nourishment, and of which the
moderate use supports, and renders the Body a proper and fit instrument to the
mind; of which (on the Contrary) the Riot and Excess, produce great and
malignat maladies, natural corrections of intemperance: If once we give reins
to the Appetite, to follow plenty and delicacy, we shall be in perpetual
trouble; the mind will become slave to the Body, and we shall find that we
only live to eat. We must then allay this pleasure by a moderate use; and learn
to know, that sobriety preserves the Body sound, and the Intellect entire: Let
us then prescribe our selves this Rule; to use our meat for the necessity of
nourishment, and not to accustom our selves to delicates; least being deprived
of them, our bodies become indisposed, and our spirits afflicted: but (on the
contrary) to make use of plain and grosser meats, as well because they make us
more strong and healthful, as because they are easy to be found; and it is a
favor, we are obliged to thank Nature for, that she has made the things
necessary for life, easy to find; and that those which are hard to get, are
not necessary to us. Truly, I admire the saying of Epicurus, (though I could
wish it had come from another mouth, that so generous a saying might not have
been soyled by the Esseminacy of his other opinions) My heart (says he) is
extasied with delight, and my Body springs with joy, that content with bread
and water, I despise all other dainties: If Epicurus be so exalted, what should
the Stoics do? Ought they not to honor and reverence sobriety as the
foundation of all other Virtues, and that which strangles Vices in their
Cradle, and suffocates them in their seed? The Curii, and Fabricii have
obtained famous victories: but none so celebrated as their Frugality: well did
their acts in arms, for a time, secure the Roman State from the foreign Enemy;
but their sobriety has been a Law, in which they have molded the minds and
courages of them, who since have subdued all the world: the Figs and Carrots,
which they preferred above the Samnites treasure, have proved of a better taste
to posterity, than the delicates of Apicius in his time. The same reasons may
serve to excess in Clothes, and Buildings, and such things as only respect the
Bodies use; for, if we moderate not the Content we there seek, by natural
necessity, opinion will precipitate us where we shall neither find bottom nor
shore: For example, we shall make our shoes of Velvet, next of Tissue, and at
the last of Embroidery with Pearl and Diamonds; we shall build our houses of
Marble, then of Jasper and Porphyry; Let us, in this, observe this Rule, that
our Clothes be sufficient to defend us from heat, and cold; our Houses from
wind and rain, without expecting any more from them; but, if we find any thing
we expect not, indifferently behave our selves. It should seem, the Reason has
more ado to defend it self from the pleasure we take in the sight and fruition
of beautiful things, than of these we lately mentioned; and that what bears in
the face the bounty of Nature, printed in a rare and excellent Beauty, has
some legitimate power over us; so that turning our eyes toward it, it there
(in spite of us) turns and subjects our affections: But we should also remember
it is a thing without us; a Grace Nature has bestowed on them that have it, not
on us; a thing, whose use, as soon, turns to Ill, as Good; and, above all, that
it is but a flower that daily withers, and but the Color of a fading body: If
you suffer your selves to be transported with this Passion, what will you then
be? no more your selves: the body shall suffer a thousand pains in seeking your
pleasure, and the mind a thousand hells in serving your delight, when this
desire increasing, shall become love, this love increasing shall become fury:
Let us then fortify our selves against this Passion and take heed we fall not
entangled with these baits: By how much this Passion wantons with us, by so
much we ought to suspect her, and be, in good time, advised, that she would not
embrace but to strangle us: propose license and liberty, but to subject us;
feeds us not with honey, but to glut us with gall, and present us a minutes
pleasure with everlasting repentance. Let us therefore so compose our minds,
as, that acknowledging in beauty the delicate hand of Nature, we should so
prize it as we do the Sun and Moon for its Excellence: But if the Law allow us
a more particular fruition, let it be to the end Nature desires, without losing
the use of Reason, which should always command in all things: and remember,
that the immoderate use of this pleasure consumes the Body, softens the Soul
and debilitates the Spirits: Let us not use it, if we can abstain, before
Marriage: for besides the defacing of youthful modesty, it takes way those
sweets of Marriage they find who never used it before (which is the Cement of
conjugal friendship) and nourishes in us a license to empty and unbridled lust;
but, above all, let us never do any base thing to obtain this Pleasure, but
summon before us the inconveniences many have proved who have surrendered
themselves unto it; of which some have embezled their estates, others lost
their lives, others their understandings: and (on the contrary) call to mind,
how much greater a conquest it is to overcome sensuality, than possess it; and
that the continency of Alexander has proved of a better reputation to
Posterity, than the beautiful and excellent faces of the wife and daughters of
Darius. Cleopatra's eyes triumphed over Caesar, and Anthony; and those of
Augustus over Cleopatra: and though this kind of pleasure may be accompanied
with a certain itch that takes the Body, and, in that, appears something
natural; Yet the thirst of Riches and Honor, and the delight we took in their
possession, has no other root than Opinion. I know not who has thus abused us
by the imposition of names, by calling that Good, which depends not upon us;
but he has fastened our happiness to a rotten Cable, and Anchored our felicity
in a quicksand: For what is there in this world so uncertain and inconstant, as
the Possession of such Goods as go and come, pass and slide away like a
torrent? like a torrent they come with a rushing noise, are full of violence
and trouble; their entrance is offensive, they assuage in a minute; and when
they are fallen away, nothing but mud in the bottom, remains. O Riches! could
we as well see the rust of afflictions that you breed in the hearts of men, as
the beauty and splendor of your Gold and Silver, you would then be as much
hated, as you are now beloved: and those that love you, have only this virtue,
to conceal their affliction, that they may not discover their shame; but if
their Saciety had leave to complain, how could fortune answer all the
Objections made by so many, to whom she has given so many mischiefs, under the
title of goods? sure by no other excuse than this, she only gave them to such
as were greedy of them. Let us understand then Riches for such as they are; for
present things Fortune only lends us for Goods only familiar with wicked men;
for Goods that are only so when they have a virtuous disposer; for Goods that
often pervert good, but never correct ill manners; for Goods without which many
wise men have spun out a happy life; and for Goods with which so many wicked
men have fallen under an unfortunate Death. Now let us know what gives us this
unruly desire of having. It Is a Gangrene in the soul, that with a poisonous
heat consumes our natural affections to supply their room with virulent
humors; which are no sooner lodged in the heart than that the honest and
natural affection we ow to our Parents, to our Friends, and to our selves,
flies from us; all things, compared to Profit, are of no value with us; and,
lastly, for these Goods, we neglect our selves, our Bodies, and our minds; and,
with the Proverb, Sell the horse to buy hay: Nature in the Creation of Gold
seems to have presaged the misery of her Lovers, by making the place where it
grows barren of herbs, plants and flowers, or other things of use; intimating
thereby, that, in the minds where the desire of this mettle shall take birth,
no sparks of honor or virtue shall remain. Let us then banish far from us this
furious desire, and leaving the sottish oppinion of the vulgar, (who weigh our
good in a Goldsmiths balance) follow the advice of Nature, who measures it by
the Ell of Necessity: she will inform us, that good no more proceeds from
Riches, than the warmth we feel from our clothes, which breathing from our
selves is retained by them; what evaporates not to them remains in our selves;
and though Fortune clip the wings of Virtue, she shall suffer no decrease; but,
having less motion, enjoy more repose and satisfaction. Some there are who
would corrupt our peace with soft opinions, and harness our endeavors to the
acquisition of wealth; persuading, that if we lay not up a stock of Riches, we
shall have no power to help our friends or Country: but let us wisely Answer,
that every one ought to serve the Republic of his own Trade; that of the
Philosopher, is to render Citizens modest and obedient; which done, has he not
obliged his friends and Country? moreover, I will say, point me out an honest
way of enriching my self, and I am sit to take it: for, as I am not Covetous of
wealth, I abhor it not; but if you cannot so direct me, why do you press me to
an unlawful Course? Let us learn to seek, without passion, the thing that
nature desires; and we shall find that Fortune can never deprive us of it: the
true and nearest way to enrich a man's self, is to despise Riches: to be rich,
is not to increase our substance, but to lessen our desires; to be Content, is
to be rich; and this Riches any man, that will, may give himself: So Bias made
himself rich, abandoning the Goods (which by composition with the enemy) he was
permitted to carry away, and saying, he carried all his Goods with him, which
was his Virtue: so, Diogenes not only became wealthy, but greater than
Alexander, when he refused his money, and, instead of that, only desired him to
remove from betwixt him and his Sun: and it is almost the same case with them
that offer us the Goods of Fortune, for they take from us those of Nature; and
this we evidently see in such as suffer themselves to be allured by the thing
we call Honor, and carried away by the wind of Ambition; who soon find, they
have nothing but Clouds of smoke, instead of the Suns brightness.

True Honor is the report of a good and virtuous Action, issuing from the
Conscience into the Discovery of the People with whom we live; and which (by a
reflection in our selves) gives us a testimony of what others believe of us,
and to the mind becomes a great satisfaction. Now this depends upon our selves:
and nature has so allayed this Good to us, that when or how often soever we
will, we have it; which if we abandon, we embrace the shadow for the body, and
tie the peace of our minds to vulgar opinion; we voluntarily renounce our own
liberty to follow the Passions of others, compel our selves ossensively to our
selves, to please our lookers on; our affections are hung upon another Eyes,
and we love virtue no longer, than she affects the vulgar: if we do good, it is
not for the love of Virtue, but our vainglory and honor: we are like pierced
Hogsheads, whence nothing is to be drawn without vent. But what bounds this
Passion? does age mature it? no; do dignities satisfy it? no; It Is a Gulf
without bottom, or shore; the vacuum, Philosophers have not yet found out in
Nature; and a fire, augmented by the supply of fuel, Such as would flatter
Ambition, would have her thought to serve as a step to virtue because (say
they) for Ambition we quit the other vices; and, at the last, Ambition it self,
for the love of virtue: but if Ambition cloak the other vices, she will not
dismiss them for that consideration, but rather rake them for a while under the
deceiving embers of a malicious dissimulation, in hope to fire them on a sudden
when they have got authority enough to make them rule in Public, without fear
of punishment. Serpents lose not their venom by being benumbed in the cold;
nor ambitious men, their vices, by disguising them in a cold dissimulation; but
arrived at their pitch, make themselves felt for what they are: and though
Ambition should quit all other vices, yet would she never forsake her self;
just only in this, that she is sufficient for her own punishment, and commits
her self to the rack. Ixion's wheel is the motion of desires, which turn and
return continually from above to below, allowing no repose to the mind. Let us
then fix our Souls against this troublesome motion, that so disturbs our peace;
and so moderate our affections, that the luster of Honor dazzle not our Reason;
and plant our minds with good resolutions for a breast-work against the
assaults of Ambition: Let us first satisfy our selves that there is no true
honor in the world, but that of Virtue; and that Virtue desires no larger, nor
more eminent Theater to present her self to men's Eyes upon, than her own
conscience. The higher the Sun is got, the less shadow he casts; and the
greater virtue is, the less glory it seeks: Glory like a shadow, pursues such
as fly it, and flies such as pursue it. Let us imagine we come into the world,
as into a Comedy where we are not to choose the Person we must represent, but
perform well the part that is given us. If the Poet present us in the person of
a King, we must discharge it like a King; if of a Porter, like a Porter; for
there is honor in well performing the one and the other in their kind; and
disgrace in doing either ill. We must use honors as we do dishes at a Feast,
where we only make bold with such as are placed near unto us, without reaching
over the Table and snatching them from the entertainers hands: If the testimony
of our Virtue, the benefit of our Country, or the favor of our Friends,
present us a charge of which we are capable, let us accept it modestly, and
exercise it saithfully, supposing, that God has placed us Sentinels, to the
end that others should rest secure under our care, and expect no other
recompense of our labors, than the conscience of well-doing; and rather
desire, to have that testimony graven in the hearts of our Citizens, than in
the fronts of Public Edifices. It Is sometimes a greater honor to fail of the
reward of merit, than to receive it; It Is more honorable for me (says Cato)
that every one should ask, why my statue is not erected in the Palace, than why
it is. To be short, let us take it for a Maxim that the fruit of worthy
Actions, is, to have done them; and that virtue, out of her self, can find no
recompense worthy of her; without doubt Ambition is a ravishing Passion, easily
gliding into the most generous minds, but making an unwilling retreat: we think
we ought to embrace good: and amongst the things we call Good, we have the
highest esteem of Honor, which makes us so violently pursue it: But assure
your selves, that the other Passions, bred in us by the object of an apparent
Ill we fly and abhor, sink deeper into the heart, and rise thence with more
difficulty; as fear, that is, the apprehension of an ill to come, which
continually possesses the brain, and fore-runs the threatened mishaps of
Fortune. And certainly, Fear is one of the rudest instruments with which
Opinion torments us: for, as she can effect nothing but by deceiving and
seducing us, and that we better discern in things present, than to come, she
serves her turn by the future, there shrowds her self, as in a dark and obscure
place, and chooses a season, like Thieves in the night, to assault us, without
being known; then, she torments us with vizards of ills that have only a simple
possibility, and nothing in themselves to hurt us, but our own apprehensions,
which render to us ill, what is not, and extract affliction even from our Good
it self. How many do we daily see, who, by fearing to be miserable, become so,
and turn their vain fears into certain miseries? how many have lost their
friends by diffidence, and how many fallen sick by conceit? so that we may say
of Fear, 'its an overcharging weight that bows us to fall into what we avoid
the most we can. Let us banish Fear, and we banish mischance, at least we feel
it not before it touch us, and then it shall never be so troublesome as to make
us fear it. If it were in our choice to be proof against any one Passion, there
is none (in my opinion) we ought sooner to shun than Fear; because of the rest,
the affliction lasts no longer than the Cause; but Fear paints its self
indifferently from what is, and from what is not; from what may be, and will
not; and even from what cannot be at all: O ingenious Passion! that from an
imaginary ill, extracts a true and lively Grief! like the Painter Parrhasius,
who tormented his hindes, the better, by them, to express the miserable and
sorrowful Postures of fabulous Prometheus. Why are we so ambitious in our ills,
as to forerun, and outstrip them by imagination! Let us have the patience to
expect them, and, possibly, they may not reach us; for a thousand accidents,
not to be foreseen, may divert the blow we fear: our fears are as often deceived
as our hopes. And what is it we fear? a thing within our power? no, for then we
may help it; is it then a thing out of our power? and why, because it is no
ill? In what then can this fear avail us, but in a voluntary affliction? on the
contrary, if we can confirm our minds against this Passion, we shall remedy
many things our surprise and amazement make worse, and throw upon us. Among the
many dangerous effects of Fear, I esteem it the most pernicious, that she,
commonly, makes us hate the thing we fear; and Hatred is a peevish Passion that
strangely afflicts us. Do but observe, when we once conceive a hatred against
any one thing, how this affection nourishes it self within us, how it grows up
without planting, or watering, making us to abhor the thing we hate. And what
do we hate? truly nothing we ought to hate; for if there be any thing to be
hated in this world, it is Hatred it self, and such other Passions as are
contrary to the nature of what should govern in us. There is nothing in this
world, of ill for us, but this; we hate Men, and business, either because we
fear ill, or think we have received it; or because the nature of our Senses
has a kind of contrariety and anti-passion to the hated thing. What can more
torment us than this? by such a Passion, we give those we hate a power to vex
and afflict us: the Sight stirs up our Senses, the remembrance provokes the
mind, and sleeping and waking we present it to our selves, with a spite and
anxiety, that put us beside our selves, tear and gall the heart; and by this
means we take into our bosoms the effects of an ill we wish to another. Let us
then shut the door of the soul against this tormenting Passion, and (that we
may take from it all pretense of entering into us, by the dislike of things
presented) propose to our selves in good time a true rule; which is, that all
things have two handles by which they are to be taken; if we grasp them by the
one, they appear to us heavy and intolerable; if by the other, light and easy
to be borne. Nature may say to us, as the Philosopher did to his Disciples,
What I present you with the right hand, you receive with the left; you always
choose the worst; what is good you leave, and only take what is ill. For
example, you have a neighbor with whom you are in suit; when you would think
of this Neighbor, you call to mind your Process, blame and curse him upon this
occasion; and this is the wrong handle; take him by the other, and remember
that he is a Man as you are; that God has linked you together in affection by
the resemblance of your Nature; that he is your fellow-Citizen, free to the
same Laws, the same Temples, the same Altars, the same Sacrifices; that you are
Neighbors obliged by charity to help and assist one another; and will not then
so many subjects of good will extinguish one little spark of Hatred? you have a
brother has offended you; when you think of him, you think of him as of your
offender, and not as of him conceived in the same womb, nourished with the same
milk, brought up under the same roof, and that ought to be the half of you:
Take then things by the right handle, and we shall find something to love in
every thing we hate: For there is nothing in the world that may not be for the
good of man. If there be any thing of vice in the person we hate, it is that
vicious Persons ill and none of ours; and if Peradventure he ossend us, we have
more reason to lament, than hate him, for he is the first offended; and
receives the first and greatest disadvantage, because in this he loses the use
of Reason; and what greater loss can a man sustain? Let us then in such
accidents, convert Hatred into Pity, and endeavor to render such as would
hate us, worthy to be beloved themselves: So Lycurgus, when they had abandoned
to his revenge him who had put out his eye, took him home, and the punishment
he inflicted, was sedulous instructions to virtue; after which, the Offender
being restored to his People, was by them from a rash and injurious, found
become a good, honest and modest Citizen. As we fly Hatred, so we ought to
avoid Envy, Sisters of the same complexion and shape, and whose effects are
equally pernicious: For Envy stirs up in us a pining at the good another does
possess; that gnaws the heart to our continual torment. Certainly a miserable
Passion; and such a one, whose cruelty all the Racks of the most ingenious and
inventive Tyrants have never outdone: for since she turns the good of another
to her own Ill, what end can she have of her affliction, when her ills and the
good of others are together chained to her torture? Let us fly it like a Savage
beast, that would gore our hearts, and rob us of the enjoyment of what Good
soever may happen to us: for whilst the Envious, pining, look awry at the good
of another, they neglect and lose the pleasure of their own. But to lessen this
Envy, if we well consider what we esteem Good, and what we envy in others, we
shall find, that taken all together, there is nothing we would wish our own:
For I perceive, that for the most part we envy men their Wealth, Honors and
Favor; when we should refuse any man that would offer us the same at the same
rate: to purchase which you must flatter, submit to affronts and injuries, and
lose your liberty; for a man has nothing for nothing in this world. You
pretend to Honor and Virtue, which are not to be purchased, but by the loss of
such other things as are acquired by a shameful patience. Riches, Dignities and
Favor are only conferred upon such as comply, and conform themselves to
another Passion: This is the law, at least the custom of the world, and was so
before you were born; why then should it trouble you to see it observed? Such a
one sells his liberty for an Estate or Office; why do you envy him? you that
would not make sale of yours, could be content to have the cloth and the money,
and receive the exchange he makes of his liberty, preserving your own: which is
against common equity; either choose the merchandise or the price: and let us
take heed (if we desire any peace in this life) of repining at what we esteem
another Good: If it be a true Good befaln him, we should rejoice, for we ought
to desire the good of one another: To be pleased with another good, is to
increase our own. The same Rule we ought to observe in Jealousy; for that has
a resemblance to Envy, both in Nature and effect; only Envy seems but to
consider Good in what befalls another, and Jealousy in what we our selves
possess, and in which we doubt another has a share. This is a fond and foolish
passion; the Gall that corrupts the honey of this life; which usually crowds
her self into the sweetest and most delightful actions, rendering them so sour
and bitter as nothing more; she turns Love into Hatred, respect into disdain,
and assurance into mistrust. Therefore make account, that whosoever shall live
jealous, shall live miserable. The only way to avoid it, is to render a man's
self worthy of the thing he desires; for Jealousy is nothing but a man's
diffidence of himself, and a testimony of little merit; It was in my opinion a
generous answer of the Emperor Aurelius to Faustinus, who asked him what he
would do, if Cassius who fought against him, should win the battle? I serve
not the Gods says he, so ill, that they should reward me with so great a
misfortune. Let him that fears to lose an interest in another, say the same, I
honor not his friendship so little; that he should withdraw it from me. The
confidence of a man's own desert, is a great engagement to another will; for
who pursues any thing virtuously, is glad of a Companion in his adventure, that
may serve to the relief and renown of his merit: Imbecility only fears the
encounter; because she thinks that contending with another, her own
imperfection may be sooner seen. Who would run alone to the Olympic games?
take away Emulation, and you take away glory, and the Spur of virtue. It Is of
great consequence, that all things that are in others even serve us to Good or
Ill, according as we are disposed to receive and use them. Another good gives
us jealousy, and another ill affects us with pity, and sometimes to such a
proportion, as puts us beside our selves, and deprives us of judgment: whether
it be by a secret consent that we share one another ills, or that we fear our
selves what is already happened to our Neighbor; whatsoever it is, we sigh and
suffer with him; and it is good to do so upon every occasion the better to
awake us to their succor and assistance; For the Law of Humanity commands it,
but not to adopt their griefs, nor with their clouds to overcast the serenity
of our own minds. Now the necessary remedies for this offense that we take at
another mishap and call Pity, are the same for the other vexation we call
Grief, which is the sense of a pretended ill in our selves. For those we call
ills, being arrived, immediately (if we take not present heed) flag the Soul to
a strange drooping negligence and discouragement, which take from us the use of
discourse, and render us unfit for the provision of our private affairs. It Is
in this condition, that we especially ought to remember our selves of what is
in our power, and esteem nothing ill which is not absolutely contrary to the
disposition of the will: for by this means we shall find that Pleasure and
Grief are drawn from the same source, and that it is nothing but the manner of
turning the bucket that fills it with the one or the other. We render then all
things good or ill by the use; we render Riches ill, when by them we serve our
selves to the execution of wicked Passions; we render Poverty good, when we
accompany it with Frugality and Patience; we render ease and rest miserable
when we become slothful and unmanly; and we make pains and labor sweet, when
thereby we acquire the reputation of serving our Country. Then let us take all
things as we ought, and we may make our advantage of every thing: for there is
not an accident can happen for which Nature has not prepared in us an Habitude
to receive and turn it to our content. In all things then that usually afflict
us, we must consider two things: first the Nature of the thing happened;
secondly, the Nature of what we have within us: and by this means using things
according to Nature, we can never be capable of any offense. For Vexation being
a malady of the Soul, and contrary to Nature, we ought not to permit it a
possession in us. That which most offends us is the novelty of the accident;
which we evidently perceive in that the most adverse things are rendered sweet
by custom. Slaves blubber when they first enter the Gally, but in three months
sing at the Oar; and raw Seamen are pale when they weigh Anchor though in a
calm, when Saylors laugh in a storm; Custom is all. But the effects that Custom
works in the Vulgar, that meditation supplies in the Philosopher; for by mature
consideration we render things familiar and indifferent to us. Let us then
exactly weigh the Nature of whatever can offend us, and represent to our selves
the ugliest face of malicious and insupportable mishaps, as Diseases, Poverty,
Banishment and Injuries, and examine in all these what is according or contrary
to Nature. The Body is diseased, it is not we that are offended, but the body;
for the offense lessens by the excellency of the things perfection, and
Sickness may administer an occasion of Patience and Fortitude, much more
commendable than Health it self. Where there is a greater occasion of praise,
is there less of good? by how much the mind is more considerable than the body,
by so much the goods of the one are greater than those of the other. If the
body be but the instrument of the mind, who shall complain when the instrument
submits it self to the service of him it is destined to? The body is sick,
that is no news; since from its composition it is subject to change. I but the
pains of diseases make themselves felt, and force us to roar out in spite of
the best Philosophy we have: They make themselves felt (I confess) but only
felt as to the body, and only make us cry out if we will; for pain is only
intolerable to them that think it so; and there are, who support it in its most
bitter pangs. Possidonius discoursing in Pompey's presence was surprised with a
violent fit of the Gout, which in spite of its importunity he concealed,
pursuing his discourse without any look or action to consess it. Pray tell me
what new remedies had this Philosopher found out against this pain? what
Searcloths? what Unguents against this Gout? only the knowledge of things and
the resolution of his mind. To what purpose were the Body ordained to serve the
Soul, when if the Soul were afflicted with the bodies accidents, she would
become slave to it? and if we ought not to be afflicted with what befalls the
body, by how much less at what concerns our goods? For the loss of them is
nothing so sensible as the loss of health: They are both without us, but the
body is the nearer of the two. Man comes naked into the world, and naked
returns; can he then call any thing his, he neither brings nor can carry away?
Earthly goods are like movables in an Inn, which we ought to regard no longer
than there we stay. I but (some may object and say) losing them I shall perish
for want of food: If this care afflict your mind, you were better desire to
starve with a calmness in the Soul, than live rich in perturbation and trouble.
You must make account, that the losses you sustain are the price of your peace
and satisfaction: if you esteem them so, you can never lose them; if not, you
lose both goods and mind at once. Will you know how easy these wounds are to
cure? See then the honored scars of such wounds received, and closed up by the
greatest and most generous Persons, who have laughed and given God thanks for
such petty losses. Hear Zeno, who said, the winds were favorable that day he
suffered shipwreck, for they cast him upon the shore of Philosophy where he
past the rest of his life in peace and tranquillity, free from civil tempests
and the importunate troubles that attend such as are busied in public affairs.
Will you know how losses may be supported? habituate your selves to love things
for what they are: if you have an Earthen Platter, esteem it as an Earthen
platter that may be broken, and you will not be angry when it is broken. So
pass from the least things to the greatest; from the vilest, to them of highest
price, and do the same. If you love your Children, love them as men subject to
Death; and when they come to dye, you will neither be surprised nor troubled.
Opinion often afflicts us more than the thing it self; and Opinion receives its
bulk and stature from the terms we use in accidents that befall us; for we call
one thing by the name of another, and fancy such a thing like such a thing: so
much do Images and Ideas possess us. Let us then sweeten our terms the best we
can: If one of our Children dye, let us not say we have lost, but restored a
Child to God that lent him; and so of any other loss. If peradventure we meet
an outrage by a wicked person that spoils us of our goods, let us immediately
deliberate thus in our selves, How does that man in himself do me harm by whom
God takes back what he had only lent? In the rest, observe what judgment you
make of such losses as those you suffer, when they happen to another; and
consider how much you in the same condition were moved, when notwithstanding,
you should blame, and reproach their complaints: think that the sentence you
have passed upon them is a prejudice against your self which you cannot
renounce: The judgment we make in another cause is always more just than
that we make in our own. If our Neighbors boy break him a glass, you only say
there is a glass broken: if his Son dye, why, he was mortal: why do you not so
by your own, without crying, and raging, and accusing gods and men for a thing
of course? The thing you foresaw is come to pass, what should amaze you? For my
part, I think we foresee as much as we ought, and may so far, as not to be
astonished at any thing, principally the things we call injuries; For let us
lay before us what have been, are, and ought to be the manners and humors of
persons with whom we converse in this world, and we shall soon resolve to
suffer much from their indiscretion. The common race of men are so inclined
that they delight in mischief, and only by the disdain and oppression of others
measure their own greatness; so few are they that delight in well doing. Let us
then make account, that which way soever we turn we shall meet some to offend
us, and encounter injuries wherever there are men: But that they surprise us
not, let us stand upon our guard expecting their attempts. Into what place
soever we go, or whatever we undertake, we must consider, how in that place, or
that affair we shall be entertained: Will you go to the Baths? consider what
you must there expect: One whoops, another pushes, a third dashes water, a
fourth steals a cloak; if we have foreseen, we shall but laugh at these
inconveniences when they happen. We make an address to a great Person; expect
before hand that he will make us wait; that when we would enter we shall be
locked out, and find him so busy as not to be spoke with, or when he is, that
we shall be scornfully received, and we shall neither wonder nor be angry when
all this shall happen.

There is yet another thing that serves much for the moderation of offenses;
which is, when we our selves excuse the Person offending by a presumption they
might casually commit them: for example, if you call your servant, and he
answer not, you must suppose, he did not hear you; he has not been where you
commanded him, suppose he had not leisure and the like: but chiefly in matters
of injury, we should serve our selves with the advantage they present: For
injuries are like poisonous plants; of which none are so malignant, which by
allayes and proper application may not be made of wholesome use. From injuries
we have at the least two kinds of advantage; one that we know the offenders to
avoid them; the other, that they discover to us our own weakness, where we are
to be assaulted, that we may fortify that place: insomuch, that when you meet
a Person that depraves you, he is to be concluded a malicious fellow incapable
of trust: then examine whether the report he blemishes you with all be true
wholly or in part, and correct that fault lest you give occasion to another for
the same or a worse character. What fairer revenge can a man take of his Enemy,
than to convert his injuries to his own advantage? But the best protection, and
securest Rampire we can have against such accidents, is this determination;
that we can receive no harm but by our selves; and that we are invulnerable
whilst our Reason stands in her true condition. And therefore let us say with
Socrates, Anitus and Melitus may put me to death, but they can never do me
harm. Whoever is fortified against humane injuries, is prepared for banishment,
which usually happens to the most virtuous by the injury of malevolent men: but
since it is a face of ill with which Opinion stupifies the mind, and helps to
contract this acrimony of perturbation and sorrow, let us consider it apart,
and examine, if it be so troublesome at hand as it appears at distance. Who
tells us, that we are born to live only in one place? what greater displeasure
can we receive than to be so confined? Seek throughout all the Cities of the
world, number the Inhabitants, how many are Naturals of each place, and you
will find, that the greater part of men are voluntarily banished their own
clime. All the world is a wise man's Country, or rather no one spot of earth,
any man's Heaven, whither he aspires, is his Country; only he takes a Pilgrimage
here below, and stays in Cities, and Provinces, as in an Inn; ten or twelve
leagues of earth bound our sight; but the face of the vast Heaven illustrated
with so many beautiful stars, discovers it self wholly to us by a continued
revolution. Why should we then with so much reluctance part with the little
place of our birth? it was in our Mothers choice, to lye-in elsewhere, and make
us change our Country: therefore considering the chance of being born here, or
there, the parting with this or that place should not so much concern us.
Pompey perceiving the faint courages of his Romans at the battle of Pharsalia,
who had their eyes and minds retreated to the walls of Rome, bewailing their
houses, and sighing, as if banished their Country; Friends, said he, a good
man's Country is the place of his liberty. Rutilius made that appear to Sylla,
who being called back from exile, would never return to Rome, but had rather
suffer the wildness and solitude of a strange Island, than the face of a Tyrant
in his native City. All Climats nourish men, all Lands bear them kindred; for
Nature has allied us All in Charity and blood. Every soil produces friends to
virtue, who contracts them of her self. What have we then to bewail in shifting
our abode? the same Heaven, the same Elements remain: by Banishment we lose
nothing, if the courage be preserved entire. If you could resolve upon what I
have proposed for the eschewing these first Passions, it were enough; and I
should not need a further discourse to prepare you for the rest: for if you
never receive into you such as take birth in the Concupiscible, you shall never
be attached by such as are formed in the Irascible part; for as much as these,
which are Hope and Despair, Fear and Anger, swell and move not in the Heart
till after Desire and Vexation are formed in us; As the first we mentioned take
birth by the application of the object, and the Opinion we have, that it is
favorable to us, or adverse; so the second derive from the consideration, and
diligent search the Soul makes for the means she has to obtain, or avoid what
she desires or shuns. It is no other than a motion as it were of the Soul out
of her self, made by the reinforcement of the first Passion; and therefore like
a fire, which the more it is kindled is the harder to be quenched: For they
immediately possess themselves of the greatest part of the Soul, and give a
shrewd shock to her strongest powers. Now to secure us, let us know the most
troublesome accidents by their Names and Liveries. For the first which is hope,
sweetly fanning our fond desires, kindles in our minds a fire full of thick
smoke that choaks the understanding, carries away our thoughts, hangs them in
the clouds, deprives us of judgment and makes us dream waking; whilst our
hopes continue, we never part with our desires. On the contrary, when Despair
is lodged within us, it does so torment our minds with the Opinion that we
cannot obtain what we desire, that all must give place to it, and we must lose
all the rest for the love of that we think we shall never obtain. This is a
Passion like that in little Children, who in pett when one of their
Shettlecocks is taken away, throw the rest in the fire: It Is a Passion angry
with her self, and that from her self exacts the penance of her own
misfortune. The way to secure us from such Passions, is to subdue our desires
in their infancy; if they be ill, not to permit them to arrive at a greater
pitch; if good, to moderate and mould them into a sweet and quiet affection
without expecting from the future a greater favor than the nature of the thing
and the inconstancy of Fortune will permit; always ballancing what we hope for
with what we fear: for a wise man ought to live no more in hope than fear; nor
put it into the power of Event, to take any thing from, or add any thing to his
felicity. Neither ought a man to despair of any thing, as well because his
desires should be bounded by his power, as because the uncertainty of things
equally exalts the desperate, and overthrows the hopeful.

For what concerns Fear, which is a violent alarm, that makes the Soul retire
into, and war with her self, that she cannot see the means to avoid the present
Peril; It Is a dangerous Passion, for besides the terror it brings, it seizes
us with such an astonishment as deprives us of our discourse, and even sense it
self; our eyes are open and see not; Men speak to us, and we observe not; but
would fly, and we cannot go; It is indeed begot by a certain disposition in
Nature, but much advanced by the delicacy of Education: For not having from our
youth been brought up to pains and labor, we apprehend things without all
reason. To arm our selves therefore against them, we must have recourse to
Prudence, by whose instruction we shall know the nature of things, in which we
shall sinde nothing that ought to amaze us. Let us pull from them the vizard of
Opinion, and we shall discover Nature throughout pure and friendly to us, and
withal inure our selves beforehand to what may terrify us; present to our
selves the most dreadful dangers into which we may fall, and out of a gayetie
of heart, sometimes tempt hazards to essay our Courage. To forerun
misadventure, is to disarm Fortune; and it is much more casie for us to resist,
when we assault her, than when we only defend; for we have then leisure to
occoultre our selves, we take our best advantage and provide for our retreat;
whereas when she assaults she surprises and takes us in what posture she will.
We must then in assaulting, learn to defend, and often give our selves false
alarms, propose to our selves the dangers many Great Persons have run through;
and call to mind, how some have avoided the greatest by a noble security, when
others have perished in the least for want of resolution. But above all, we
must dispose our selves from the apprehension of Death, even when it presents
it self; for that is the common object that disturbs the understanding,
deprives us of judgment, makes us abandon all office and duty, and forget our
selves. O could we make this Conquest of our selves, Death it self would not
astonish us, and we should then be happy! In this encounter, especially Opinion
bandies with Reason to fright it from us with the Vizard of Death: and though
there be but one death in this world, presents that One in infinite shapes to
our Imagination. Death certainly has nothing of formidable in it, but we have
sent forth cowardly and corrupt spies to discover it, who report not to us what
they have seen, but what they have heard and fear: We rely upon the Vulgar
inconsideration that delivers it in the quality of a great evil; and distrust
Philosophy, which informs us that it is the door of life. Let us believe
Socrates and we shall no longer fear it; Let us believe Cato, and we shall
prevent it; Let us believe Arria the wife of Petus dying to bear her husband
company, that their loves being united by so sacred and chaste a tie, might
suffer no separation, who after the first stab in her own bosom, Petus, said
she, it hurts me not, declaring thereby to the true understander, that Death is
no Ill, but the end of all theirs that dye. How should it be ill since it is
natural, or grievous since it is common? The contempt of Death is the true and
living Source of all worthy and generous actions; thence are derived the brave
and free sayings of Virtue, pronounced in the voices of so many honorable
Persons. 'Twas this spirit that possessed Demetrius, when he answered Nero who
threatened his death, Nature will do as much for thee. This was the ground work
of the invincible resolution of Helvidius Priscus against Vespasian: Vespasian
commanded him to absent himself from the Senate, who answered, That it was in
his power to cut him off from the number of Senators; but whilst he continued
one, he would appear in the Senate: He sent him then word, if he came, to hold
his peace; Let no man then said he, ask my opinion: I but says the Emperor, I
must consult him in Honor; then replied Helvidius, I must answer in
Conscience: If thou do, I will put thee to death; Why, answered the other,
did I ever tell you I was immortal? you may do what you will, and I will do
what I ought; it is in your power to make me dye, and in mine to dye
constantly. A generous saying, and worthy the ears of all such as are obliged
to defend Justice and Reason against Violence and Oppression! O lively Image of
Constancy! Thou art a brave and illustrious example to all that shall succeed
thee. Whosoever shall set themselves to imitate the lives of such Persons,
shall never have a heart surprised with apprehension, but rather with an
unconquered spirit run through flames of fire to Virtue and Honor. But
avoiding Fear we must take heed of falling into Anger, which is opposite to it,
and takes up the other extremity: For whereas Fear retires us into, Anger
crowds us out of our selves, and seeking means to repel the mischance that
threatens, or has already attached us, makes the blood boil in the heart, and
raises surious vapors in the mind, which hud-wink and precipitate us to
whatsoever may satisfy the thirst of vengeance. That which most tickles us in
this Passion is the seeming Justice, and that it seems to excuse it self by the
malice of another. We ought not however to entertain it; for to commit the
correction of an offense to Anger, were to punish Vice by it self. Reason
(which should govern) will admit no such officers as execute at their own
license without her authority: to her violence is improper, who will (like
Nature) do all by the Compass: She conceives that such violent motions only
proceed from the imbecility of such as have them; who like children and old
men, trip and run, when they think to walk. But you will say, what! shall
Virtue see the insolence of Vice without regret? will you allow her so little
liberty, as not to dare to be angry at wicked men? Virtue will entertain no
undecent liberty; she must not be valiant against her self, nor kindle her own
affliction at another Vice. A wiseman ought as well to support the injuries of
wicked men without Anger, as their Prosperity without Envy: He must suffer the
temerity of inconsiderate men, with the same Patience that a Physician does the
injuries of a Phrenetick Patient. There is no greater, nor more profitable
wisdom, than to endure another folly: For otherwise by not enduring it in
others, we make it our own: first, we lose our judgment, then offend our
selves, and stimulated with choler, are thrown headlong into the Ill we shun.
This Passion properly resembles great ruins, which break themselves upon that
which arrests their fall: she so impetuously desires another harm, that she
neglects the evasion of her own, and beside that she is rash, is usually
unjust; for to speak truth, Injury and Revenge are no other, than the same sin
under diverse excuses: they both have the same end which is another harm. Let
us then carefully obstruct its passage into the Soul; and to that purpose, so
soon as any thing pigues us, give our selves leisure to pause: for, if we can
once discover, we shall easily stop the progress of this fever of the mind: Let
us consider the indecency of wrathful actions; and on the contrary, how
graceful sweetness and clemency are; as pleasing to others, as profitable to
our selves: They are the Lovers that Court, and attract unto us the hearts and
inclinations of mankind. Let us accustom our selves to forgive all the world;
and (least the quality of the offense detain us) take it for granted, that the
greater the injury is, the more worthy to be pardoned; and that the juster
vengance is, the more laudable is Clemency. But those whom fortune has seated
in a more eminent degree of honor, ought especially to preserve their
inclinations entire and temperate; for as their actions are more important,
their faults are harder to repair: The Heavens present them every day an
Example, and teach them to avoid precipitation by Saturn, who though the
highest of all the Planets, is the slowest of motion: They say too of Jupiter
that he can of himself dart favorable and propitious bolts, but must have the
Counsel and assistance of the twelve gods when he would throw those of danger
and vengeance. It Is a great account, that the greatest of the gods, who of
himself can benefit the whole world, can destroy none without solenm
deliberation: The wisdom of Jupiter himself is so wary of mistake, that when
there is a debate of vengeance, he must call a Council to stay his arm. When
then we feel our selves agitated with this Passion, let us have recourse to our
friends, and mature our anger by their determination; for whilst we are
transported, we do nothing to purpose: Reason is of no more use to us in our
Passions, than wings to a bird that is caught by the feet. Wherefore, if we
would render the Soul capable of good and laudable actions, we must lift her
from earth into a peaccable and tranquil condition; we must conduct her to a
disposition, like that of the upper Region which is never obscured by clouds,
nor shaken by thunder, but in a perpetual serenity: she must not be darkened by
sorrow, nor hurried by wrath; and when she is once settled in this Estate,
'twill be very easy to conveigh her other actions to their proper end, for
then she traces Nature step by step, and allies her self by a sweet and
temperate affection to the other parts of the world, of which man is as it were
the knot that unites Celestial and Terrestrial things. The effects of this
temperate affection of man's toward the other things of the world are called
Offices, that is to say, the duty, and the manner how in this duty he ought to
behave himself. To govern which duty, and to inform us of its use, we can have
no better a Mistress, than Nature her self, who has established a disposition,
and an order throughout by which she has subjected things to one another,
chaining them together by the links of the respect they owe to her, which she
has graven in the foreheads of every of them as Princes, their faces upon coin
to distinguish the title and law they ought to be of. Let us then in every
thing consider the Order of Nature, and we shall presently know its estimation
for how much we ought to take it, and what we ought to return.

Good being the Object of the will of man, where it is most pure, and most
entire, ought to be of the greatest value. The chiefest then, and most firm
affection ought to be that which knits him to the Author and Principal of all
Good. This affection is Piety, by which man reunites, and consolidates himself
to his first cause as to his root, in which, whilst he continues firm and fixed
he preserves his perfection; and on the contrary dies and withers when he quits
it; the chief effect of Piety is to teach our selves to know God: for from the
knowledge of things proceeds the honor we attribute to them. We must first
then believe him to be, that by his Power, Bounty and Wisdom he created the
world, and governs it by the same; that his Providence watches over all, even
the least things: That all things he has sent us, are for our good, and that
our ill proceeds from our selves; for if we call the fortune he sends us, ill,
we blasphem against him; because we naturally honor such as do us good, and
hate such as do us harm. We must then resolve to obey him, and thankfully
receive whatsoever comes from his hand. His knowledge being most perfect, his
power most immense, and his will most charitable, how can we but conclude, that
he will send us nothing but what tends to our good? Moreover, whereas we
sometimes comprehend not the consequent benefits of what he sends us, we ought
ever to hope and conceive, that as the Physician often does things for the bodies
health, which at the first may seem harsh (as when he pricks the eye to recover
the Patients sight) so God in the conduct of our lives restores us by means
that appear troublesome and hurtful, and often penetrates the heart with
stabbing afflictions, thereby to enlighten the mind with the radiance of his
glory. Under this assurance we ought to commit and submit our selves unto him;
always acknowledging, that we come not into this world to command, but to
obey, having here found the Laws already established, by which we ought to
live: and therefore we should always have in our mouths, as a Rule of wise
obedience to the Ordinances of God, these excellent verses of Cleanthes:

My God, conduct me in thy ordered way,
'Ile follow Thee: least from a blessed Estate
Fawning temptations draw my mind astray
To lose, what I may win, pursuing that.
For what remains, we must neither address our vows or prayers for the
impetration of any thing he has not ordained. For to ask a thing against his
Providence, were to corrupt the Judge and Governor of the World. The most
acceptable prayer we can make to him, and the most profitable for our selves,
is, that he will please to contain our affections pure and holy, and so govern
the will, that it ever address it self to Good: the Sacrifice he expects from
us, is an innocent life: He desires not our goods, but that we should render
our selves worthy of His. There is no offering so mean, which to him is not
acceptable if presented by hands pure and innocent; nor no so rich or sumptuous
Sacrifice which will not offend him, if it come from polluted and contaminated
hands. Apollo being asked how he was pleased with the Sacrifice of an hundred
Oxen, made answer;

Of Hermion I liked the Corn,
Though Offered in a homely Urn.
As if he had said, The wise man is the only true Sacrificer of the great God,
whose Spirit is his Temple, whose Soul his Image, whose affections his
Offering, whose greatest and most solemn Sacrifice is his Imitation: not that
you are not to observe the ancient Ceremonies of your Country with a decent
moderation, void of excess or avarice; but that you must perform them with this
opinion; that God will be observed by the Spirit: And therefore we say, to
conclude this discourse, that the holiest manner, by which we can honor and
serve him, is, that after we have set him forth with all the titles, and most
magnificent Eulogies we can imagine, we constantly believe, and publicly
confess, that we have as yet presented him nothing worthy of him, but that the
defect is in our own impotence and infirmity, which can aim at nothing of more
dignity. Upon the honor we owe to God, depends the Opinion we ought to have
that he is present at all our actions, whether we be prostrate before him, or
in conversation among men; wherefore we ought to speak to him as in the hearing
of men, and live with men as in the sight of God. But we should (above all) be
very religious, when we attest him to the witness o a truth: For the
observation of an Oath, is the chiefest part of Piety. An Oath is no other than
the image of this universal Law, flowing from the bounty of God, to hold all
the parts of the world in their place, and preserve them what they ought to be:
It Is a band that ties men together by consent; it is the Guardian of Constancy
and Truth; it is as it were the knot of civil Society, which is locked and shut
by the reverence of the Almighties Sacred Name who overlooks the actions of
Mankind. It were (indeed) better (if you could by the testimony of a pure and
holy life, win so much belief, that your own word might assure them with whom
you have to do) to spare an Oath: but if you cannot avoid it, take heed you use
it soberly, and as feldom as you can; for the frequent use of any thing
whatever begets misprision: But especially take heed you use it for no other
end, than the assertion of a Truth, representing to your selves, that God is
seated above, Protector of Faithful, and Avenger of perjured men. Now from the
honor due to God the first mover, we must descend to that of the heavenly
powers by him constituted for the government of the world, in which we must
acknowledge an excellence and constancy in Virtue; in their perfection, admire
the greatness of their Creator; and respect their function, as an employment
for the conservation and protection of men. Thence we descend to the reverence
we owe to them, by whose means (as by Channels selected by God for that
purpose) we issue into the world. In which first Sally, we first meet our
Native Country, which under a sictitious name, comprehends a true and natural
Charity; and to it we reasonably owe more assection than to all other things in
this lower world, as she impales the rest we love, and cherish; and which stand
firm in her preservation, and on the contrary with her must necessarily perish.
From this generous affection, so many eminent actions have taken birth, of such
Heroes as have gloriously exposed their lives for the preservation of their
Country, forgot their private injuries, for fear of revenging them at the
public expense, and undertaken a voluntary and miserable life for the peace
and repose of their native soil. You must then daily represent to your selves,
that this Clime, which has produced and nourished you, claims from you in
return the Laws of Piety, exacts from you the duty of good and faithful
Citizens, and conjures you to all this, by the place of your birth, by the Laws
of your City, by the faith of civil Society, and by the safety of your Fathers,
Children, Friends and Selves. You must then be more solicitous of your Country
than of the world beside, never to prefer your particular interest to her Good,
nor repel upon her the dangers that only threaten you. Your Country thus
served, Parents succeed in the claim of Duty: For God having chosen by their
means to distribute life, and in some measure rendered them Partners of his
Virtue, will also that they share a proportion in his Honor: If God have
bestowed them wise and virtuous, we ought to esteem them as Gods upon earth,
not only appointed for the work of life, but also to bless that life to us by
good education and grave instruction; if otherwise they be perverse and wicked,
they are notwithstanding our Parents; we ought to bear it; and as they carry
that name, serve and assist them with what we only hold of them, that is to
say, with our Persons, Goods and Lives. This performed, we do homage to Nature,
and acknowledge her bounty. From our Parents we descend to our Children;
toward whom, although the affection be not so ceremonious, it is
notwithstanding of the same or a greater tenderness. For God having disposed us
together as it were upon a guard in the world, it appears that before we go
hence, we ought to depute other Ministers of this Sovereign Power in our place
to serve him in this Common Temple. The birth of Children is but ours in part;
there are many other things contribute to it, but their nature and precept is
all our own; which we owe to God, to whom we present them; to our Country, for
whose service they were born; and to our selves, who from their good manners,
are to expect the support and comfort of our old age. We ought then diligently
to watch for them, and as much as in us lies solicit their future good. After
Children, follow Wives, who united to us by the Law, and entering Society with
us under the great endearment of the Posterity they bring, have an eminent and
legitimate share in our affection: In their friendship we sweeten the
adversities of this life: by their cares we lessen our own, and repose under
their diligence. We must therefore return them a respect sit to entertain and
nourish the respect they bring, and value their good and their peace as persons
who are part of our selves. But especially, we ought to assure them that that
respect and honor proceeds not from any pride we take in their youth and
beauty (least that exalt them to sierceness, and least the sires of our own
affections lighted at such fading things, too soon burn out) but rather from
the expectation we have of their sidelity, chaste manners, and virtuous care of
our common Children: and to establish their assurance, let us show them that we
will admit no separate interest of goods, thoughts or affections; for in this
communion, goodwill and friendship have their increase; which on the contrary,
are dispersed and lost in the diversity of inclinations and designs. This
affection passes from our Wives to our Kindred, to whom Nature has allied us,
and conveyed with the blood a secret inclination, and good will toward the
Persons derived from the same stem; and as they are nearer, this affection is
more lively, and obliges us to more vigilant endeavors of service. To observe
then in this (as in all other things) the order Nature has proposed as the
chief ornament of all her works, we must discover the affection we owe to our
Kindred according to their place, and as they are nearest in blood, render them
all the offices of assistance and service we possibly can. Thus far Nature with
her own hand guides our affections: we must now come to the motion virtue gives
them, who allies us in Friendship with wise and virtuous persons: and of all
the goods that civil Society begets, there is none we ought more to cherish and
esteem, than the friendship of honest men, as the basis and pillar of our
felicity. It Is that friendship that sweetens what is bitter, and seasons what
is sweet, that teaches whom in prosperity to oblige, with whom to rejoice in
our good fortune, who in our affliction are sit to comfort and relieve us, in
our Youth to teach and instruct us, in our old age to support us, and who in
our flourishing age of man are sit to second and assist us. As the profession
of this friendship is precious, so ought we to make use of our Prudence in
acquiring it, such as it ought to be: And first, amongst men we must seek out
the most worthy; love and honor them as given by God himself to engage with us
in the society of good and laudable actions. We ought to contract them by
honest opportunities, and once acquired to preserve them to us by industrious
Offices: for all Creatures, and principally men are born with an inclination to
love whatever is advantageous to them. The virtuous man notwithstanding,
proportions not this benefit by the abundance of what we call Goods and Riches,
but by the advantage he receives by his Friends, of advancing himself in
virtuous qualities: and if it so happen, that we have any contest with our
Friends in a share of Goods, Honors, or the like, we ever ought to give place
to them, since all these can never be better employed than in the acquisition
of Friends. And there is only one excuse for our withdrawing from them, which
is, when they abandon Reason and Philosophy that unites us in that
correspondence: And when we do quit them, we must do it with all modesty, not
therefore becoming their enemies; but sincerely rip without tearing, and
without blaming their actions or opinions, seek all means to restore them by
Reason, to their deserted duty, fighting them with arguments, which are the
sacred arms of friendship; and though we lose all hope so to reclaim them, we
ought, notwithstanding, never to become their enemies; for though the good man
forsake his friends when they forsake their virtue, and renounce his
familiarity, and former intimacy, he nevertheless retains for them the
charitable affection which ought to be among men, which obliges him to wish
them well; imitating the bounty of God, who loves the good, and yet hates not
the wicked: And it is a common Proverb, The Good man has no enemies, for he
hates no man.

These are the degrees betwixt Man and the things that are without him. But
because it often falls out, that they draw us to diverse ends, and consequently
hold us suspended in doubt and anxiety; we must establish our selves a Rule, by
which we must ever prefer the first to the last. An Oath ought to be dear unto
us, but we had better violate an Oath, than offend God by observing it. Our
Parents ought to be had in high reverence; but if their wills be contrary to
Right reason, and to that which God has put into us for our better government,
we ought rather to abandon them than God and Reason; Our Kindred should be dear
to us; but if our Kindred would provoke us to things hurtful to our Parents, we
must not consent with them. Our friends have a great power over us, but after
our Wives and Children. There are indeed certain particular offices which we
owe to persons of less interest, rather than to others; to our Neighbors than
our Friends, to our Friends than Kindred: but it is ordinarily in matters of
little consequence, and where civil society something usurps upon Nature, for
the common necessity of Man.

I have thus far represented to you the respect that man owes to things that
are without him: it is now time to make him descend into himself, and into
himself to retire his affections, as lines to their Center. The wise man no
doubt pays a great respect to himself; and though it be only discovered to his
own thoughts, he is nevertheless very wary of doing, or saying any unbecoming
thing. For right Reason (which ought to sway his actions) is to him the same
with the severest Judge, and the most rigid Censurer. We must then be very
circumspect, as well in public as in private; so to compose our actions as not
to blush at them; and that Nature (according to whose rule we ought to compose
our selves) be not violated. Nature has given us a body as a necessary
instrument of life; we must be careful of this body; but only careful as of a
thing under the tuition of the mind, to which it owes a regard and not a
service; and ought to entertain it as a Prince, not a Tyrant; to nourish, not
to make it fat; and to show that it lives not for it, but cannot here below
subsist without it. It Is no little address to an Artificer, that he knows how
to prepare his tools; nor no little advantage to a Philosopher, that he can so
order his body, as to make it a fit instrument to the exercise of virtue. The
Body is to be preserved in an estate of health two ways; by moderate diet, and
seasonable exercise: for the nature of sublunary things is so gliding, that if
we continually repair not what time consumes, by little and little they waste
to nothing: we must then assist, and support the body by the use of food; and
yet so, as the excess render it not drousie, and indisposed to contemplation;
nor the two slender diet, weak and languishing; that neither Luxury soften it,
nor negligence pollute it. Exercise follows nourishment, though they seem to
follow and wheel about one another; for we exercise and eat; eat and exercise;
the one to prepare us for meat, the other to awake Nature, and keep the bodies
part in motion; and we should so use them, that the body may be the better, and
the mind never the worse. We must not follow the exercise of wrastlers, and the
like which are encumbered with measures, and observations, and of no other use
than to preserve the body in breath, debilitating the Soul and robbing her of
her true and natural motions; the search of exercise for the body, is unworthy
a man, since in all places he may find as much as is necessary for health. The
Body thus nourished and exercised, is easily modelled to civil and becoming
actions; to which we ought to have a regard, and endeavor, that our looks and
motions may by a calm gravity discover a tranquillity in the mind. We must by
no means practice affected looks and gestures; neither to simper like a wanton,
nor contract the brows like a Philosopher; for as a sweet composedness renders
a man venerable, so proud and forced austerity renders him ridiculous, and
troublesome. Now, since Speech is the Interpreter of Looks, we ought with all
discreet care to govern and moderate that; and the best precept we have for
that purpose is silence. To know how to be silent, is a great advantage to
speaking well; and to speak well and much, is not the mastery of one and the
same man. Silence is the parent of discourse, and the Fountain of Reason, and
on the contrary much speaking commits many faults. They that look at any thing
curiously, shut one eye, and twinckle with the other, to fit and re-enforce
their sight: which teaches us that the sense being darted outward, by
spreading, becomes weaker and less; so the mind thrown out in words, scattered,
and strewed in much conference loses its force and virtue; and on the contrary
being bridled, recollects, reinforces, and fits it self with Prudence and
Wisdom. The use of speech ought upon occasion to be employed for the
assistance of Truth; to bear its Torch that it may be seen; and on the
contrary, to discover and confute what is false; to praise what is good, and to
blame what is ill. Neither must it be carried on with vehemence or contention,
for they discover Passion: Neither employed about what is done at the public
place, or upon the Theater, for that discovers a great and unprofitable
leisure: Neither is it hansome to repeat your own actions, or the fortunes you
have run through, for that discovers Vanity; others take less Pleasure in
hearing, than you in telling them: and to speak of another man's is a slippery
path; since it often falls out, that you either commend them without reason, or
dispraise them without justice. But above all, take heed of fleering Drollery,
for that savours too much of the Buffoon, and lessens our esteem with prudent
men: and besides that such jestings are commonly mixed with scurrilous words
(which all ought to avoid.) The license of immodest language succeeds in
effects of the same Nature. Your discourse, if it were possible, should always
benefit the Hearers, be full of good and wise Counsels, serve to guide such as
go astray, to Virtue, and turn them from Vice. You must in common discourse,
avoid tender and subtle Questions; they are Crevices, of which, more are to be
picked out than to be eaten; their conclusion is noise; and it often happens
with those that love Controversy, as with ill stomachs which spue up what they
cannot digest. As we desire to be heard when we speak our selves, so we ought
to attend others when they speak, without interruption. Some there are who
consent to every thing another says, and some that contradict whatever is
said; of which kind, the one is servile, the other indiscreet: We ought to
yield to what is evidently true; to deny what is evidently false; and in
doubtful things to suspend our judgment, till we have found some reason to
assure us.

Since language and behavior are commonly formed by Custom and Imitation, we
should not mix our selves with people, nor frequent Theaters and Public
places, Feasts, and Balls, for a man contracts much of the Vulgar in all these
places: but if we be obliged in honor to be there, we must ever have the mind
so fortified, that nothing escape our resolution, which is to be governed as I
before have told you. And the better so to fortify us, we must call to mind
the example of wise men; Think how a Socrates or a Zeno would have behaved
himself in our place, and their Virtue will prompt us with Examples of well
doing. The most profitable instruction that Philosophy can prescribe to all
your actions, is, that you carefully examine what ought to be the Progress, and
the issue of what you undertake, and to measure the proportion betwixt your
power and purpose. He that wisely deliberates with himself, arrives at his
intended port; but he that lives without Counsel, resembles a thing floating
upon a river, which goes not, but is carried, and finally arrives at the Sea,
that is to say, a vast and turbulent incertitude. In all our enterprises, then
let us have a foresight to what may be the end, consider the means we have to
achieve that end, and prevent by expectation, whatever accident may happen.
Will you offer your selves at the Olympic games? Consider first the trouble,
that you must live by rule, only eat such meats, at such hours, inure your
selves to heat, and cold, anoint, and powder, enter the lists, be hurt; it may
be overcome and disgraced; having foreseen all these inconveniences, consider
your bodies constitution what you can bear, and as you find your selves fit,
engage. Will you profess Philosophy! you must then remember, that you are to
suffer much, deny your selves many delights, and with much patience submit to
the scorn and reproach of all the world. If you have the courage to endure all
this, undertake it; which once undertaken, you are to persevere, and pursue
your resolution, as an inviolable Law. For beside that the mutability in design
renders the mind waving, and uncertain, it moreover renders our Persons
ridiculous; whereas Constancy makes us the admiration, even of them who were
our first despisers. Be not therefore astonished at the judgment others make
of your actions; but have a care they be such as they ought; neither trouble
your selves to conceal them from such as they do not please: if they be ill,
you ought not do it; and if they be good, they are the more assured by being
the better known: Not that I would have you affect to be seen in well doing and
proclaim your virtue, like those who run to embrace public Statues for a
private refuge: as colors glitter to the light, yet go not to seek the Sun,
but rather keep themselves prepared to receive his light when he shines; so
virtue ought not to seek glory, but to make her self fit to receive it from the
testimonies of those who sincerely judge of her merit. He that is in love with
Praise and Ostentation, quits his obedience to Reason, for that of Opinion; for
he chooses rather to please another, than himself.

Nothing so much advances the success of any enterprise, as a present use of
occasion. Time carries with him certain moments which are the seasons of
business; if you lose them, your labor remains without fruit: but if to an
opportunity well taken you ad diligence, you shall rarely fail of a prosperous
issue: and therefore, whatever is naturally deliberated, must be diligently
executed, without procrastination, or leaving that for to morrow which may be
done to day. But whatever we do, with whatever prudence we undertake it,
whatever occasion we choose, or with whatever diligence we pursue, we must
know, that notwithstanding all this, Fortune has a great share in the Event.
We are only Masters of our own councils and inclinations, all the rest have
another dependence. All that we can therefore do, is to attempt with prudence,
pursue with hope, and support intervening accidents with Patience. If good
enterprises have ill success, the Persian Commanders answer will serve to
excuse unfortunate wise men; who being asked, why (He being so wise and
valiant, his affairs had no better success? Because (said he) my affairs depend
upon my own Councils, but the success upon the King and Fortune. It is enough
that we secure what is merely our own work; that we undertake nothing but to a
good end, and only pursue it by honest means.

These are the chief rules, by which the Stoic thinks he should govern this
life. But since Laws without judgment are unprofitable, and as dead words; we
must to be the better for them, shut up every of our days with an examination
and censure of our actions; sift them every night to find out which are
conformable to the rules I have proposed; plaining them, to find where they are
rough, split, or crooked, and to close and smooth them to right Reason. If we
find all things well and conform to these sacred Laws, we shall feel a secret
joy in the Soul, which we gather as the sweet fruits of our innocence. This (in
my opinion) will be the most harmonious, and the most acceptable nocturnal Hymn
we can sing to Almighty God, who I believe, receives no greater satisfaction in
this lower world, than to see men (his dearest, and most precious work)
preserve the beauty and perfection of his Creation. But since the Nature of
things created, by its infirmity is apt to suffer that good (with which God
has been pleased to endow them at their birth) daily to perish, and consume of
it self (were it not continually repaired, and sustained by the ordinary flux
of his bounty poured upon us, and that therefore our own force were
insufficient of it self to preserve in us this Perfection) let us add to this
first Canticle, an Epode and Sacred Charm to invoke his divine favor; and in
that manner finish every day of this life, and now this present Instruction,
saying;

O only Good, only wise and Omnipotent God! who have given us understanding to
govern the course of this mortal life, make that life know and love the
Excellence with which it is adorned; and so assist it, that when it shall come
to give motion to the powers of the Soul, it may find the Members, and the
Senses purged from all Passions, and ready to obey. Draw from our minds Eye
the Cloudy Curtain of Lust and Ignorance, that our Reason being illuminated by
the radiance of thy divine Truth, may address us toward that which truly is,
and ever shall be our eternal Good.

FINIS.

