TO THE KINGS Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of William Dyre Gent.
Shows;
THat whereas their late Royal Majesty's King James and King Charles the First,
of ever blessed Memory, did (upon the Resignation of the Grand Charter) Grant
by their Letters Patents, several Colonies in that part of America called
New England, beginning in the West, to the Lord Mougrave, running Eastward to
Hudsons River. Secondly, To his Grace the Duke of Richmond. Thirdly, To the
Earl of Carlisle. Fourthly, To the Lord Edward Gorges. Fifthly, To the Marquess
of Hamilton. Sixthly, To Captain John Mason; and Lastly, To Sir Fardinando
Gorges. All or most of which Colonies having been Planted and Peopled at the
Charge, and by the Noble Encouragement of the Proprietors, and many
Adventurers, do increase and flourish daily: Notwithstanding some of those, and
them not the least considerable; are much obstructed in their Prosperity and
greatly Ruined by the continual Disputes and Controversies arising from their
unsettled Limits and Bounderies, which has occasioned much dissension amongst
the Governments, Treason of the Massathusets usurping a Power and imposing
Laws, or Tyrannical Edicts upon the Inhabitants of the Provinces of Mayn and
Newhampshire, using Acts of Hostility against the Institutions of the
Proprietors (and in direct opposition to Your Majesty's express will and
pleasure strictly commanding the contrary) have subverted the Government settled
there by your Majesty's Commissioners in the year 1666. to the Injury and
Disquiet of the Commonalty; and Contempt of Your Royal Authority.

Wherefore, to Compose the matter, and put an end to the aforesaid Differences,
and for settling Peace, Union and Concord amongst Your Majesty's Subjects and
Plantations; it is most humbly Prayed, that Your Sacred Majesty will be
Graciously pleased to purchase of Mr. Mason and Mr. Gorges, the abovesaid
Provinces of Newhampshire and Main, which now may be bought at an easy Rate,
the which will give your Majesty an absolute and immediate Dominion of all
New England, and bring into Your Majesty the most considerable advantages that
either have been, or are to be made by any of those Your Majesty's Plantations,
as shall be demonstrated by Your Petitioner with Your Majesty's Leave.

And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc.
AN EXPERIMENTAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL Description
Of the PROVINCES of Mayn and New Hampshire in North- America; now belonging to
Mr. John Mason and Fardinando Gorges Esquire, with a brief Collection of such
advantages as are to be made by the same if in case they were in your Majesty's
possession, and settled under your immediate Government, most humbly offered to
Your Majesty's Consideration; By W. D. Gent.
First concerning the Entrance, Latitude and Course of Merrimeck River for
decision of the Northern bounds of the Massathusets Colony in New England.
THe River Monomack, alias Merrimack, has its inlet, or Easterly beginning
about 22 miles North and by East from Cape Ann, the North side of the said
Rivers Mouth being in 42 degrees and 57 minutes Northerly Latitude, running
West Southerly, as far as (...) the South, and Salisbury on the North, where
the River is about half a mile over, and the Torrent swift, though mitigated by
an Island in the midst thereof; and from thence to Haverhill West,
South-VVest, and so continues its course VVestward as high as any settlement of
English, or discovery has yet been made, and is said to proceed from the Lake
of Troquoies, which falls into Hudsons River, and this of Merrimack; but to my
certain knowledge there is no principal branch, nor part of Merrimack that lies
or extends more Northerly then the North-side of the entrance or Rivers mouth,
three English miles to the Northward of which, into the Land, was built a
little Hutt called Bound-house; which said Cottage, or place where it stood
being in 43 degrees of Northern-Latitude, is the Septentrional Confines of the
Massathusets line, nor did they pretend to any more, till the New-setled
Plantations in the Provinces of Mayn and New Hampshire, being without
Government, and in danger of the Salvages, craved their Temporary protection,
which having been long continued, is now by the Bostonians claimed as their
Rights.

Indeed, if Merrimack River or any branch of it were found to run so far
Northward as 45 degrees, and then taking into the Land three English miles
farther North, from whence stretching a direct line Eastward into the Atlantic
Sea, it must be owned, that then the Provinces of Mayn and New Hampshire do
fall inclusively within the Massathusets bounds.

And so likewise, from the Southward of the South-west stream of Charles River,
and three English miles Southward of that running a due South course into the
Ocean, will be comprehended the Provinces of Novum-belgium, New Haven,
Conecticutt, Rhod-Island, and New-Plymouth: The thoughts of which boundless
possessions might swell them of the Massathusets Colony into an ambitious
conceit of being absolute Lords and Proprietors of a Great Empire, and so
arrogate to themselves a Liberty of prescribing Laws, and exercising their
Dominion over all the Inhabitants of New England.

But, to prevent their Title to so Copious a Claim, and settle other Patentees
into their just dues; It Is presumed, there is nothing more plain and
demonstrable (both from the course of the Rivers, and the express words of the
Charter) then that the intent of the Patent, and bounds of the Massathusets
Grant, was, three English miles to the Northward of the Northernmost banks of
Merrimack, taking it Gradually into the Land parallel with the River as it runs
up into the Country, which is West-Southerly; and, in the same manner not to
exceed three English miles to the Southward of the South-west part of Charles
River, still taking it up along the said Rivers side, and not from the heads or
extreme Branches thereof, and then three English miles to the Southward or
Northward of each River, and so run by course into the Sea: which would include
all the Southern and Northern Colonies abovesaid, rendering their Patents
insignificant and improperly Granted. Wherefore the hope of Your Majesty's
suffering Subjects depends wholly upon Your Majesty's Gracious Clemency, Wisdom
and Justice for Relief in the matter; it being only in Your Majesty's Royal
Power to put a final issue to the Controversies: which is earnestly desired by
all that wish well to Your Majesty's interests, and may be happily, honorably
and successfully done by Your Majesty's Purchasing the Provinces of
New Hampshire and Main, of the abovesaid Proprietors, which are situated and
furnished according to the Description here following.

THe Province of New Hampshire, which was the assignment of Captain John Mason,
is bounded on the South and South-west by the Massathusets line North-Eastward
upon the Province of Main, on the East and South-East, by the Sea, stretching
Westward into the Continent, and lies between 43 and 44 degrees of
North-Latitude; in which is comprised Newhampton, with several other Towns,
Villages and spacious Farms pleasantly situated, some fronting the Sea, some
within Land, and some upon the South-West-side, or part of Pascataway-River,
where are built many Commodious and profitable Saw-mills, for cutting Plank,
Timber and Boards.

THat part of America called Province of Mayn, takes its beginning at the
entrance of Pascataway River, extending up the same to the River Newchewannick,
to the extreme part thereof; and from thence North-West, 120 miles, and from
the mouth of Pascataway River aforesaid North-Eastward along the Seacoast, to
Sagadehock; and up the same to Kenebeck-River, as far as the head thereof,
comprehending several Islands in the Sea, viz. the North, half of the Isles of
Shoalds, Nantucket, Martins-Vineyard, Capanawagon, Richmonds-Island, the
Clap-board Islands, and sundry others of very great importance for Fishing,
Farming and Planting.

The Climate and Air of this Province (as well as that of New Hampshire) is
Temperate, Sweet, Clear and Healthy; the Soyles Fertile; the Harbors, Ports and
Havens commodious and safe, and the Country every where well furnished with
Rivers, Brooks, Lakes, Ponds, Streams and Springs; with store of
Champion-Ground, Ranges, Level-Land, Meadows, Swamps, Thickets, Marches,
Uplands, Hills, and fruitful valleys: where grows Tall Cedars, sturdy Oaks,
brave Elmes, tough Walnut, and straight Chestnut Trees; Fragrant Birch, brown
Beech, and multitude of Ash, Maple, Asp, Holly, Ivy, Hazle, Hawthorne,
Shumach, Willow, Buttonwood, Alder, Poplar and Sassafras; with curious Cypress,
Fir, Sprewse and Pines of a vast magnitude; and the most incomparable Timber
for building Ships in the World.

There are also plenty of Vines which naturally yield three sorts of pleasant
Grapes, the first a large Whitish and mellifluous Grape, the second a Purple
color of the same size, and very delicious, the third a small Black
Winter-grape, somewhat tart, but very wholesome and good.

As for Orchard and Garden-Fruits, there are Apples of all sorts, Pears of most
kinds, Peaches, Malagatoons, Quinces; Apricocks, Plums, Cherries, Currants,
Hurts, Strawberries, Cramberries, and Blewberries, also Musk-mellons,
Water-mellons, and Cucumbers, with all manner of Plants, Herbs and Roots; each
Tree, Herb, Plant and Root, according to its kind, brings forth Nuts, Berries,
Fruit and Seeds.

The Pastures are clothed with Grass, and the Fields produce plenty of Wheat,
Pease, Barley, Rye and Oats, with some other sorts of Grain, in which Fields and
Grounds are bred and raised huge droves of good Cattle, Horses, Sheep and Hogs.

But the natural inhabitants of the abovesaid Woods, Hills and Swamps, are
incredible numbers of wild Beasts, as Bears, Moose, Deer, Wolves, Foxes,
Bevers, Otters, Minks, Martins, Musquashes, Sables, Squirils, Rackoons,
Wild-Cats, Hedg-hogs, Porcupines, Wild Rabbets, Hares and Woodchucks.

The Bowels of the Earth being no less enricht with plenty of Iron, Ore, Tin,
Copper, Lead, Coals, Sulphur, and other Minerals, which voluntarily offer
themselves to public view, without searching after, as if Nature were willing
to discover, and disburthen her self of what our Ingenuities are slow in
seeking.

Nor know I any reason why Richer Mines should not there be found, as well as
in the Neighbor-Colonies; in regard there is more external probality, and
visible encouragement in these Provinces then was in any of them.

The Production of the Rivers, Lakes and Ponds, is infinite quantities of
fresh water Fish, as Bass, Salmon, Trouts, Carp, Perch, Pinkerin and Pouts;
also the Salt Water and Seacoasts abounding with Whales, Grampuses, Seals,
Herring-hogs, Porposes, Sharks, Dog-fish, Sturgeon, Hollibut, Cod, Haddock,
Hake, Pollock, Mackeril, Soles, Scate, Alewives, Smelts, Eeles, Lamprons,
Frost-fish, Cole, Thornback, Herrings, Capeline and Shad; and of Shellfish
there be Lobsters, Muscles, Oysters, Crabs, Perriwinkles, Tortoise, Clams,
Cockles and Scollops.

The Islands adjacent, together with the Woods, Sea, Rivers, and Shoares, yield
swarms of Fowl and Birds, as Turkeys, Pheasants, Heath-hens, Partridges,
Quails, Eagles, Hawks, Ravens, Crows, Stares, Owls, Cormorants, Cranes,
Bitterns, Herns, Kites, Pigeons, Thrushes, Turtle-doves, Swans, Geese, Brants,
Murrs, Penguins, Mallard, Teal and VVidgins, with abundance of other Sea-fowle
and small Birds, all which variety of Creatures, being there placed by the
infinite Providence of Almighty God, are so beneficial for the subsistence of
Mankind, as contributes much to the Peopling and Planting of that Country,
which in the Summer is most delightful and pleasant by the lovely shady Groves,
sweet singing Birds, and cool Crystal springs.

Wherefore if the great worth and intrinsic value of the aforesaid Provinces
were duly considered, and by Your Majesty's Gracious Favor brought under the
obedience of Your Royal Authority, there are certain and almost incredible
advantages to be made, as well conducible to Your Majesty's benefit, the honor
of Your Crown and Dignity, as also to the public good of that place a^^ this
Nation, as may appear in the several particulars following.

Imprimis. Were the Provinces of Mayn and New Hampshire Purchased by Your
Majesty, your Majesty has then the absolute, real, actual Dominion and
Sovereignty of those Seas, with the sole propriety and benefit of all Fishing
used on the Coasts of New England, and may at your Royal Pleasure settle a Duty
or Impost upon all Fisheries there, without intrenching upon the Liberties of
the Bostoners Patent, the abrogation of their Privileges, or the least wrong
to the Inhabitants, and also in a short time reduce, or win those of the
Massathusets and Plymouth Colonies to a ready Subjection and complete Obedience.

2. From hence Your Majesty may be (at all times both in Peace and War)
supplied with Masts, Tarr, Timber, Plank, Boards, and Pipe-staves, at a much
cheaper, and easier rate then now your Majesty is, or by any other means can
be; wherein consists very much the safety of your Majesty's Maritime Affairs.

3. In these Provinces your Majesty may settle a very considerable and
profitable Trade with the Indians, for Beaver and all other peltry; in regard
they border so near upon Nova Scotia, and are as well furnished with Lakes,
Ponds and Rivers as that Country is, and also with little charge improve all
Mines and Minerals of worth there.

4. By Your Majesty's being the (...) of your Subjects, the prosperity of Your
Plantations, the encouragement of Trade, Navigation and Commerce, be
inexpressibly advanced, by uniting the Colonies, and securing the Ports and
Country from invasion.

5. To the aforesaid places Your Majesty may in time of peace employ some of
Your great Flemish Prizes to bring over Masts, Deals, Timber and Staves, which
will be of singular benefit both to Your Majesty and this Nation.

6. By having the Propriety of these Provinces, Your Majesty will receive a
considerable Revenue out of the Fish taken and made there, as also by a small
Duty upon all kind of Timber and Raft that shall be Exported, which will be
advantageous and of great value, in regard those Commodities are not to be had
in any other part of New England, but in the Provinces of New Hampshire and
Main, which may now be Your Majesty's for a small sum of Money, or Trifle,
compared with their true value and Consequences.

These particulars are in all Humility, Duty, and submissive Obedience Laid at
Your Majesty's Feet, and most Loyally proposed by a Faithful Subject, to the
end Your Sacred Majesty may be Absolute in your Sovereignty, Greater in Riches,
Name and Power, and that Your Royal Commands may be with reverence obeyed, Your
Majesty's Laws executed, the Protestant Religion cherished, the Privileges of
Your Majesty's Subjects enlarged, Learning propagated, and all Virtue
encouraged. And that Your Majesty's good Subjects in those parts may not only
have the Name of Your Majesty, but also Your Power amongst them, and thereby
live Peaceably, Happily and Quietly under Your Majesty's Royal Government,
which Heaven grant may be long, long and Prosperous.

FINIS.

