THE HISTORY OF THE CAMPAIGN IN THE Spanish Netherlands, Anno Dom. 1694.

WITH The Journal of the SIEGE of HVY.

By EDWARD D'AUVERGNE, M. A. Rector of St. Brelade, in the Isle of JERSEY, and
Chaplain to Their Majesty's Regiment of Scots Guards.

LONDON, Printed for Matt. Wotton, at the Three Daggers; and John Newton, at
the Three Pigeons, near Temple-Barr, in Fleet Street, 1694.

Imprimatur,

November. 20. 1694. EDWARD COOK.

To the Honorable MAJOR GENERAL RAMSAY, Colonel of Their Majesty's Regiment of
Scots Guards, etc.
SIR,
I Need not make an Apology for Presenting the Account of the Last Campaign to
You; for since Custom will have every Trifle that is published, attended with
an Epistle Dedicatory, I should be very Ungrateful, if I did not embrace this
Occcasion to acknowledge to the World the many Obligations I have to You:
Though, to acquit my self of it, I must put your Honorable Name to a Piece in
which I am sensible You must find a great many Faults. For, it is impossible
that a Man should judge so Justly and Equally of the Affairs of War, as to give
an Account of them free from any Mistakes, unless he has as great a share in
the Management of them as You have. However, I am very glad it gives me the
Opportunity to express, in some measure, my Gratitude for Your Favors.

When the Dean of Winchester (whom I must acknowledge for the Author of my
Happiness, in belonging to You) recommended me to be Chaplain to Your Regiment,
I cannot forget how willing you was to Receive me; as if you had been long
expecting an Opportunity of Doing Good to a Friend, though I was then a
Stranger to You: This Favor was, indeed, more than I could expect. But Your
Generosity stopped not here; You have treated me ever since, with so much
Civility and Obliging Kindness, that I cannot be silent, but must own the
Thankful Sense I have of it as publicly as I can. I must yet value Your
Favors the more, that they come from a Person of so much Worth and Merit, that
you excuse and free me from the common Fault of others, in swelling an Epistle
with Praise and Commendations; the whole Army knows more of it than my mean
Rhetoric can express. Those who have been at the Siege of Maestricht, and the
Battle of St. Denis, repeat with Pleasure, to this day, the early Proofs You
gave of Your Martial Conduct and Courage. Your Virtue and Valor has ever since
increased with Your Honor; and this present War has done you Justice, in
raising You to such Considerable Posts in the Army, as have given a better
Light to Your Merit. I could speak with Pleasure of Your Exploits in the Battle
of Steenkirk, where the Brigade under Your Conduct and Command did such
Considerable Service: And in that of Landen, where You fought with so much
Vigor and Bravery, that (notwithstanding the Inequality of the Number) You
often Regained Your Post, and Repulsed several times the victorious Enemy: Your
Brigade was then in the Right Wing; where the Elector of Bavaria was a joyful
Witness of Your Valor and Conduct, which He expressed in the kindest and the
most endearing manner.

But I remember I am writing an Epistle, and not your History. I shall say no
more, but, That You are a Soldier of the KING's Own Making, and that You have
been Trained in His Service from Your Infancy. His Majesty is an Excellent
Judge of Merit, which is the Standard by which He measures His Favors: So that
though Your Birth is Great and Noble, yet it is Your Own Personal Worth that has
Raised You to be Major General of Their Majesty's Forces. If You owe a Noble
Birth to the Earls of Dalhousy, You sufficiently repay the Nobility of Your
Extraction with Your Great Virtues and Accomplishments, which make You now the
Ornament of Your Family.

May You Live, long to enjoy these Rewards of Your Worth and Virtue; and
whatever else is laid up in the Stores of a Great, Just, and Bountiful Monarch.
May You live to enjoy them for Their Majesty's Service, the Comfort of Your
Virtuous and Excellent Lady, the Prosperity of Your Family, the Joy of Your
Friends, and the Honor and Credit of Your Nation. These are the Hearty Prayers
and Wishes of

SIR, Your Most Obliged, Humble, and Obedient Servant, Ed. D'Auvergne.

TO THE READER.
THIS being the Third Account I publish of this kind, I would venture it
without the Ceremony of of a Preface, if I was not obliged to excuse some
Faults which may happen in the Impression: For I Write so ill my self, that I
have been forced to get it Copied, to make it legible: I could not get the same
Hand that Transcribed the last: It has now been Copied with some Faults; which
I could not Correct, without making it as difficult to Read as the Original.
But I have recommended it to Friends, who cannot only Correct the Faults of the
Copyer, but my Own too: Which Favor I beg from them, since my own Affairs here
will not permit me to be in England to see it Printed.

I shall only add, That I have used all possible Diligense to give an Exact and
Impartial Account of Affairs, to inform the People of England (that have so
great a share in the Burden of this Present War) of the Truth; and to disabuse
them of many Stories imposed upon them; some, by the Enemies of the Present
Government, and Friends to the French Interest; and others, by some Bigoted
National People, who do their utmost to foment H^a^s and Animosities between
the several Nations concerned in the Common Cause, who therefore are as great
Enemies to it, as the Open and Professed Enemies of the Government.

I cannot excuse this, nor any of the former Accounts, from several Mistakes.
When a Man is stinted to a Time, for the Publishing such Matters, which would
otherwise be out of season, after so long Consulting of Friends, which, it may
be, would inform me better; Errors, in such a Case, cannot be avoided: But
where I have been guilty of Mistakes, I shall not think it shame, but my Duty
to own it.

I dare say, this Present War now is drawing near to a happy End; and if God
grants me Life to have my share in the Blessings of Peace, I will publish all
the particular Accounts together of the several Campagnes I have seen in
Flanders, exactly Corrected and Amended, with the Draughts and Planes of the
Battles and Sieges: and I will use my best Endeavors to free them from all
Errors and Mistakes, by a diligent Search into Authentic Papers; and a strict
Enquiry among all the Knowing Persons of the Army, the Honor of whose
Friendship and Kindness I may pretend to, several of them having been very
willing to assist me in what I have already done; and I need not doubt of the
same Favor, when there shall be Time and Leisure to bring the Work to
Perfection.

BRUGES, November. 5/15. 1694.
THE HISTORY OF THE CAMPAIGN IN THE Spanish Netherlands, Anno Dom. 1694.
OUR Last Year's History left Both Armies going into Winter Quarters, the
French on their side flushed with a considerable Victory, and with the Success
they had in the Siege of Charleroy, with which they closed the Last Campaign;
and though they never had a greater Occasion to be stirring, than during the
last Winter Quarters, yet the French have not been so quiet all this War, as
they were at that time. The French King knew very well that the Allies were
unanimously resolved to augment considerably their Forces on all sides, and to
bring such Armies in the Field the following Campaign, as might put a stop to
the Progress of his Arms, and oblige him to be now on the Defensive, who before
had been so Violent and so Successful an Aggressor.

And though Alliances are attended with great Inconveniences, and that the
Operations of Allied Armies cannot be so Active and Brisk, as when they are the
Results of one Single, Wise, and Absolute Head; yet, on the other side, they
have this great Convenience and Advantage, that when there is a good and
perfect Correspondence between Allied Powers, their very Defeats improve their
Strength, and they gather Power from their own Disadvantages; because that
makes them the more sensible of the Greatness of the Common Enemy, and of the
necessity of a Mutual and Vigorous Defense; and the Spring and Sources of War,
both for Money and Men, being many, they can with so much the more Ease to
their respective States, not only recruit, but augment their Forces. We have
had good experience of this Truth in the present War, in which the Allies have
kept a better Union and Correspondence than they had in any former Alliances.

The great Victory which the French had over Prince Waldeck, in the Plains of
Fleuri, served to bring an Army into the Field, even the latter end of the same
Campaign, of 70000 Men: which has since obliged the French King to augment his
Forces to so vast a Number, to keep up the Credit of his successful Armies,
that he has entirely exhausted his Treasures, and now finds himself pushed to
such a nonplus, that far from being able to augment his Forces, as the Allies
have done since the Battle of Landen, he is hardly able to pay those he has now
on foot; and which is worst of all, whereas before he supplied the want of
Money, in some measure, by making his Armies subsist in the Enemies Country,
he has had the Mortification, this Campaign, to see them eat and destroy his
own Frontiers. There was therefore a certain Necessity that the French should,
in common Prudence, have undertaken something the last Winter, which was the
only Time they had left to keep up the Credit and Reputation of their Arms.

And as there was a Necessity for them to have done something then; so (I may
say) they have not had a fairer Opportunity all this War, if we consider either
the State of our Army, or the Posture and Condition of Affairs in this
Country. Our Army had been weakened by the Overthrow at Landen: And though our
Losses were far from being so considerable as the French made it, yet no doubt
it did very much disconcert our Affairs; and besides, the Soldiers wading
thorough the Geet to make their escape, and lying wet for several Days after,
caused many Sicknesses amongst them, insomuch that our English and Scotch
Forces never wanted more Recruits than they did the last Winter; and they have
not yet been later in bringing their Recruits over, and in Completing their
Regiments: so that in respect of our Army, the French never had a greater
Encouragement to put them upon some Action.

And as for the Posture and Condition of Affairs, in relation to the Country,
the Death of the late Bishop of Liege, and the following Dissentions of the
Chapter, gave the French King the happiest Opportunity he could wish for, to
have driven the Allies out of that Place; which, no doubt, would have made room
for the Cardinal of Bouillon's Pretensions in the following Election, and would
have given him a great share in the Suffrages of the Chapter. And though the
Pope has given so authentic a Confirmation of the Justice of the Elector of
Cologne's Cause in the last disputed Election, yet if the French had made
themselves Masters of Liege the last Winter, it is very probable that the
Cardinal of Bouillon would have found more Favor at the Court of Rome in this
Suit; and that the Committee of Cardinals deputed for that purpose, would have
found a great deal of Right on his side in the French Canon Law, to have placed
that Mitre upon his Head: And the Cardinal de Bouillon being absolutely the
French King's Creature, he could then have looked upon the Principality of
Liege as in a manner his own, and thus have advanced his Frontier to the very
Gates of Maestricht, which, as to its Civil Government, is equally divided
between the States General and the Bishop of Liege; which then would have
opened to him an Inlet into the States Dominions, the thing he has so much
longed for, and has been so much endeavoring after all this present War. As
for Newport, and the Frontiers in Flanders, the King provided for their Safety,
by sending the last Winter a speedy Supply of Eight Battalions from England;
Tiffeny and the three French Regiments first, who were quartered in the
Camerlings Ambacht, (for so the Country is called about the Canal of Newport,)
and afterward Lloyd, St. George, Friderick Hamilton, and Colonel Ingoldsby's
Regiments, which were disposed into Quarters, for a time, in Ostend and
Newport; but still I dare say, that the rest of our Army was in no very good
Condition to have taken the Field, if the French had undertaken any Siege
during the Winter.

All this being considered, no other Reasons can be alleged why the French
were so quiet all the last Winter, and so contrary to their Interest, which
obliged them to some Action, but these following. First, The Dearth and Famine
that reigned in France, and in the Conquered Country; which was indeed greater
than can be expressed, or than can hardly be believed; though the French Court,
and the King by his Edicts, used all possible means to prevent it, and to cover
the inward Sufferings of his Kingdom. We have seen in Bruges, and in most of
our Towns in Flanders, very lamentable Instances of it, where they fled from
the neighboring Parts of France, and the Paiis Conquis, for Bread; and many of
them had been so long without it, that though they had Bread given them, yet
they could not eat it, and died in the Streets: They came in such Multitudes,
that the Magistrates have been forced to stand Centries at the Gates, to hinder
them from coming in: But since they have had a fruitful Harvest in France, his
Edicts acknowledge in plain Terms, what but some Months before they smothered
over with fine Words, to amuse and deceive the People. The French King, for
this Reason, could not supply and fill his Stores with Corn, a Thing absolutely
necessary for a Winter Campaign: His Subjects were Hungry, and began to be Loud
and Clamorous; which, if his Purveyors had bought up the Corn of the Country
to fill the King's Stores, might easily have been improved into a Revolt; for
Seditions and Tumults about it there had been many in several Provinces of his
Kingdom. The Second Reason, was, Because his own Infantry, notwithstanding the
Victory at Landen, had been so well handled there, and had been so fatigued in
the Siege of Charleroy, that his Battalions were so weak, they could not be in
a Condition to serve in a Winter Siege, though the Misery of his Country
supplied his Army with raw Soldiers enough to recruit them. The Third, was, The
ill Condition of his Cavalry; which, besides the Losses of the foregoing
Campaign, must be very much weakened by the want of Forage, the necessary
Consequence of the Famine at home, insomuch, that whereas the French Troops had
before the same complement with ours, yet the last Winter they were reduced to
Forty a Troup; which does sufficiently show that the French King wanted Horses,
and that he could not re-mount his Cavalry. The Fourth Reason, was, The want of
Money, which is justly called the Sinews of War, and without which, the best
concerted Designs must miscarry: And the Scarceness of Money was so great in
his Army, that they subsisted all the last Winter upon Credit in their several
Quarters; even the very Lieutenants and Ensigns were ordered to have Credit in
the Publick-Houses and Vivandiers, the first for a Groat, and the latter for
Threepence a Day to subsist them. I may write this for Truth, because 'twas
the Report Bruges.
here last Winter; and I enquired of Officers that were Prisoners this Summer in
our Army, who owned it to have been so. Whilst the French King's Affairs were
so at Home, the Allies were increasing their Forces, and making new Levies in
England, the Empire, Holland, Flanders and Italy, to endeavor to turn the
Scale of the War, which hitherto had turned so prosperously and successfully on
the French King's side. And the Event of this Campaign is a convincing Argument
that they have not bestowed their Money in vain: That the French King has
hitherto owed his Success more to the Number of his Troops, than to their
Bravery. Though I do not say this to lessen the Praise and Commendation they
deserve, but only to fix and settle the Judgment of Things in an equal
Balance; which is the right and just way of judging of Success in Military and
other Affairs.

England, to put Himself at the Head of the Confederate Army in Flanders,
though later than His Majesty had done hitherto: But the Settling of the Fund
for the Army, Navy, and New Levies, had drawn the Sessions of Parliament to
such a length, that the King could not come over sooner. After the King's
Arrival in Holland, His Majesty having had some Conferences with the
States General and Ministers of the Allies at the Hague, went, for some few
Days, to take his usual Divertisements at Loo; but Orders were sent to all
Garrisons to be ready to March and take the Field: though the French still
continued very quiet in their Frontiers, without making any Motions to form a
Camp.

On the 17th of May, Sir Henry Bellasis received Orders to March the next Day
with the Garrisons of Bruges, Ostend, and those quartered upon the Canal of
Newport, to form a Camp by Ghendt. The Cavalry marched out some Days before, to
canton upon the Country for Forage: and the Forces quartered in the Frontiers
of Holland, and the Garrison of Brussels, received Orders about the same time
to March and form a Camp at Bethlehem and Terbank, near Louvain, under the
Command of the Duke of Holstein. On the 18th. of May, Eleven Battalions marched
out of the Garrison of Bruges; and were joined by the Four Regiments that had
been upon the Canal of Newport, Two Battalions from Ostend, One from Damme, and
one from Sluys: Those from Bruges were of the Scots Guards, Two Battalions; the
Royal Regiment, One Battalion, (the second was left in Garrison;) Granville,
Tidcomb, Castleton, Ingoldsby, Mackay, Graham, Offarrell and Maitland: from the
Canal Tiffeny, La Meloniere, Belcastel and Marton: from Ostend, Lauder's and
Ferguson's; (Argyle's Regiment Damme, Lloyd: from Sluys, St. Amand, being the
Regiment lately Commanded by Count Horn: These, to the number of Nineteen
Battalions, marched that day about halfway to Ghendt, upon the Canal of
Bruges, being Commanded by Sir Henry Bellasis, and Major General Ramsay. The
next day they marched on to Ghendt, and encamped at Mary Kirk, where the Duke
of Wirtemberg and the Count de Nassau came out of the Town to see them; where
they halted till the 21st. That day they marched thorough Ghendt, making their
way to the Canal of Brussels: And this same day the Garrison of Ghendt,
composed of Three Battalions of English Guards, the Fusiliers, and Seven
Battalions of Danes, marched out of the Town and joined them: The Zealand
Battalion of Danes remained in Garrison, and Colonel Selwin was put in the
Brigade Commanded by Sir David Collier: The Regiments of St. George, and
Frederick Hamilton, that had left their Garrison of Ostend to be more
conveniently quartered near Ghendt, upon the Canal of Bruges, joined them
likewise this day; and Count Nassau's Regiment, from the Sas van Ghendt. Count
Nassau, as Eldest Major General, put himself in this March at the Head of this
Body of Foot; and the Duke of Wirtemberg went on before, to wait upon the King
at his Arrival at the Camp at Bethlehem. But out Train of English Artillery
that had remained all the Winter in Ghendt, was not yet ready, for want of
Horses; for which reason, Sir David Collier was left there with Selwyn,
Granville, Tidcomb, Castleton, Graham, Offarrel, Ferguson and la Meloniere's
Regiment, to guard the Train, when it should come up to the Army: Which Brigade
of Foot encamped on the other side of the Town, upon the Way to Dendermond. All
the English Horse and Dragoons marched the same day out of Ghendt, being joined
by the Foreign Horse, upon English Pay, that had quartered in Bruges, and
cantoned upon the Villages between Brussels and Dendermond, being Commanded by
Monsieur d' Auverquerque. The Dutch Cavalry did the same in the Villages
between Tongres, Maestricht and Hassel, Commanded by the Lord of Athlone,
General of the Horse.

The So Countrymen and Farmers are called in Flanders.
Boors had suffered so much between Brussels, Louvain and the Meuse, the former
Campagnes, in which their Country had been foraged by the Armies, that this
Year they had neglected the Tilling of the Ground, being unwilling to work in
vain. This obliged us to canton our Cavalry, which retarded very much the
Operations of this Campaign, which we were to open in this Country where the
greatest Scarceness of Forage was. Whilst our Garrisons were thus filing off to
form the Camp by Louvain, the French, on their side, began to leave their
Winter Quarters, and to March toward the Country between the Sambre and the
Meuse, where the General Rendezvous was appointed: And the Marshal de Boufflers
gathered together another Body made up of the Garrisons beyond the Meuse, in
the County of Chiney, between the Bishopric of Liege and the Paiis de
Luxembourg.

The 24th. the King came to the Camp that had been formed near the Cloister of
Terbank, where His Majesty found Thirty six Battalions of Dutch Infantry; and
the Regiments of Churchill, Trelawney, and Earl, that had been quartered the
Winter at Malines: And the same day the Dutch Guards left their Winter Quarters
upon the Canal of Brussels, to come up to the Camp. His Majesty took his
Quarters at the Abbey of Bethlehem; where he was waited upon by the Electors of
Bavaria and Cologne, who had left Brussels the same day for that purpose, to
Complement his Majesty upon his Arrival to the Army.

The 26th. the English Infantry, under the Command of Count Nassau, Sir Henry
Bellasis, and Major General Ramsey, passed the Canal of Brussels, at Vilvorde,
and encamped at Stannokezeel: And the Dutch Guards arrived at the same time at
Bethlehem, where they encamped upon the King's Quarter, to mount the Guard. The
27th. the Eight Battalions that had been left at Ghendt, under the Command of
Brigadier Collier, to guard the English Train of Artillery, came up to
Vilvorde, where they encamped between it and Grimberg, along the Canal: The
Artillery was sent by Water to Malines, where the Artillery-Horses had been
ordered to come from Holland. The 28th. the Body of Foot encamped at
Stannokezeel, being joined by Stanley and Collingwood's Regiments from
Dendermond, marched to the General Rendezvous by Louvain, and encamped upon two
Lines, with the Right at the King's Quarter at Bethlehem, and the Left toward
Louvain. Three or four Dutch Regiments encamped in the same Line upon the Left.
The 31st. the King reviewed all the English Infantry that was come up to the
Camp, in the presence of the Electors of Bavaria and Cologne, who were come
from Brussels to be at the Review; and they appeared in very good Order,
Clothes and Accoutrements.

The French (as we have said before) had marked their General Rendezvous on the
other side of the Sambre, between it and the Meuse, where, by this time, most
of the Army was come up; but still they continued cantoned upon the Country,
both Foot and Horse, for the Preservation of Forage: Which thing was very
carefully looked after on both sides. The 20th. the Marshals of Luxemburgh and
Villeroy came to Head the Army cantoned near the Sambre, and the Infantry drew
out to form a Camp: And the 22d. the Dauphin, whom the French King had
appointed to make this Campaign in Flanders, as Generalissimo of his Forces,
both to get the Knowledge and Experience of a General; and also, because where
there are several Mareschals of France in an Army, it has been a Rule generally
observed by the French Court, to put a Prince of the Blood Royal over them, to
prevent Disputes. The Dauphin was followed by the Dukes of Chartres and
Bourbon, and other Princes of the Blood: And the Armies, on both sides, were
now come to their General Rendezvous, and all things ready for the Opening of
the Campaign.

June, the Army decamped from Bethlehem and Terbank, and passed the Dyle by
Louvain, at Havre: We marched by the Camp we had last Year at Park Abbey, and
the Defiles of the Bois de Merdal; but all along this March we could hardly
find any Corn upon the Ground, but here and there, it may be, half an Acre: The
Boors had left the Country so bare, that they boasted of Starving both Armies
into a Peace. The King took his Quarter, after this days March, on the other
side of the Bois de Merdal, at the Cloister of St. Hertogendale, in French
Valeduc, a Cloister of Nuns-of the Order of St. Bernard, (not Benedictins, as I
said in my last Year's Account, through a mistake:) And the Army encamped with
the Right at Tourine Bavechein, Two Parishes that have but One Curate, and
belonging to the Diocese and Principality of Liege, though surrounded on all
sides with the Country of Brabant. The Left of the Army went by the Villages
of Sluys and Meldert, and reached as far as Hoexem, within an English Mile of
Tilmont. The Brigade of Guards encamped upon a Line by the Cloister of Valeduc,
to cover the King's Quarter. The whole Army was here disposed into Brigades,
and interlin'd with a Brigade of Horse, and a Brigade of Foot; so that a
Brigade of Foot in the Front, was sustained by a Brigade of Horse in the Rear:
But because the Cavalry was not yet come up, Intervals were left accordingly in
both Lines, till they should join the Army. The English Horse and Dragoons,
upon this March, left their Quarters between Brussels and Dendermond, and
advanced to the Villages between Malines, Louvain, and Tilmont, where they
cantoned, as before; and My Lord Athlone left the Neighborhood of Tongres, to
canton the Dutch Cavalry nearer our Army, between Hassel, St. Tron, and Leauwe.
The 4th. we were joined by the Eight Regiments under the Command of Brigadier
Collier, which we had left encamped at Vilvorde; and and by Ten Battalions
under the Command of Lieutenant General Tettau, which had marched out of the
Garrisons of Maestricht, Tongres, and Hassel; Four of them were some of the
Swiss Regiments which the States General had raised the last Winter for their
Service. The French being informed of our March to the Camp at Valduc, had just
Reason to fear lest we should advance farther toward the Sambre; for which
Reason they passed this River on the 4th. and encamped at Gemblours, where the
Dauphin took up his Quarter. He reviewed all his Forces here, and disposed them
into an Order of Battle; of which you may read the List following.

The Order of the French Army at the Camp at Gemblours, being Commanded by the
Dauphin; and under him, by the Mareschals of Luxembourg and Villeroy.
RIGHT WING
First Line.
Lieutenant-Generals, Duc de Bourbon, Monsieur de Rose.
Major-Generals, Duc d'Elbeuf, Duc de Roquelaure.
Monsieur de Gassion Commanding the Troops of the King's House. Brigades.
Regim. Squad. Grenadiers, Du Roy 2 Noailles 2 Duras 2 Luxembourg 2 Lorges 2
Gensd' arms 1 Chevaux Legers 1 Montgon Cuirassiers 3 Bourbon 2 La Feuillade 2
Villequier 2 Rottembourg Rottembourg 3 Roquespine 3 Rohan 2 Phelipeaux Orleans
2 Dauphin 3 Cravates 3 Squadrons 37


Second Line.
Lieutenant General, Monsieur de Ximenes. Major General, Duc de Montmorency.
Brigades. Regim. Squad. Praslin Royal Roussillon 3 La Valiere 3 Levis 3 La
Tournelle 3 Rassent Rassent 3 Manderscheid 3 Vaillac 3 La Bessiere Aubeleterre
3 Imecourt 3 Fiene 3 La Bessiere 3 Squadrons 33


Body of FOOT
First Line.
Lieutenant-Generals, Prince of Conti, Duke of Berwick.
Major General, Marquis de Crequi. Brigades. Regim. Battal. Dantin Navarre 3
Languedoc 2 Surville, Du Roy. 4 Cadrieux Dauphin 3 Thoulouse 2 Albergoti
Humieres 2 Royal Italien 1 La March 1 Caraman Gardes Francoises 3 Gardes
Swisses. 2 Charots Vermandois 2 Haynaut 1 Motroux 1 L'Abadie Guiche 2 Gardes
Angloises 2 Villeroy Lionnois 2 Roussillon 2 De Lux Provence 2 Piedmont 3
Battal. 40


Second Line.
Lieutenant-Generals, Feuquieres, Rubantel.
Major General, Monsieur de Castres. Brigades. Regim. Battal. Pompane
Bourbonnois 2 Artois 1 Chartres 1 La Mar 1 Reinold Suisse Stouppa 4 Reinold 4
Monim 2 Zurbeck Suisse Zurbeck 4 Greder 4 Cavoye Cavoye 1 Soissonois 1 Blesois
1 Bugey 1 Senneterre 1 Greder Greder Aleman 2 Angoumois 1 Periguex 1 Lignieres
1 Tulles 1 Surlanbe Royal Danois 2 Surlanbe 2 Crussol 2 Battal. 40



LEFT WING
First Line.
Lieutenant-Generals, Duc du Maine, Monsieur de Montrevel.
Major-Generals, Count de Marsin. Monsieur de Vandeuil.
Brigades. Regim. Squad. Souternon Du Roy 3 Bourgogne 3 Thoulouse 2 Furstemberg
2 Du Mesiul, Carabiners 16 Chaludes Villeroy 2 Du Maine 2 Berry 2 Maistre de
Camp General 3 Squadrons 35


Second Line
Lieutenant General, Busca Major General, Count de Nassau. Brigades. Regim.
Squad. Lagny Lagny 3 Pujeol 3 St. Lieu 3 Thisenhausen Lully 3 Villers 3 Melun 3
Cosse 2 Massot Quadt 3 Clermont 3 Massot 3 Chartres 2 Squadrons 31



Body of RESERVE.
Due de Chartres, General. Major Generals, Messieurs de Bezons, and de Mailly.
Brigades. Regiments. Squadrons. Hussars 1 Mousquetaires gris 2 Mousquetaires
noirs 2

Dragons. Cailus Colonel-General 3 Cailus 3 Chenteran 3

Battalions Royal Artillery 2 Artillery, consisting of 66 Pieces of Cannon,
besides Mortars. Regiment of Bombardiers besides Gunners and Matrosses. 1

Dragons. Davaret La Reine 3 Davaret 3 St. Ermine 3 Asfeldt Fimarcon 3 Asfeldt
3 Squadrons 29 Battalions 3




So that according to this List, the Dauphin had Sixty and Nine Squadrons in
the First and Second Line of his Right Wing of Horse, and Sixty and Six in the
Left, and Twenty and Nine Squadrons of Dragons, Hussars and Mousquetairs in the
Reserve, which makes in all 164 Squadrons. And because the French had reformed
their Troops of Horse, last Winter, to Forties, we must compute each of their
Squadrons to be, at their coming in the Field, of 120 Horsemen; which makes
the Total of the Horse and Dragons of this Army to be 19680. The Foot consisted
of Forty Battalions in the First Line, and Thirty Nine in the Second, and Three
in the Reserve, which makes in all 82 Battalions; which, at 600 Men each
Battalion, at the first coming into the Field, amounts to 49100 Men. So that
the Total of this Army, Commanded by the Dauphin, and under him by the Marshals
of Luxembourg and Villeroy, came to 68880 Men, besides what belonged to the
Artillery, as Gunners and Matrosses, Miners, etc. We shall not make a
Computation of all the Forces the French had in Flanders, till we come to speak
of the Bodies Commanded by the Marshal de Boufflers, the Marquis de Harcourt,
and the Marquis de la Valette; which shall be in their proper Places.

The Dauphin being come with this Army to Gemblours, within a Day's March from
ours; likewise there being but little Forage about our Camp, which hindered the
Cavalry from subsisting in it; the King, for this Reason, ordered to make a
Retrenchment to cover our Body of Foot, in case the Enemy would have come to
attack us. Our Right was covered by the Villages of Tourine and Bavechein; the
first being just upon the brow of a Hill, below which runs a small Current
which has its Spring at Bavechein, and so goes by Ham, and other Villages, into
the River Dyle: The Brigade of Guards encamped upon another Hill, separated
from the Right of the Main Body by this Current, and covered the King's
Quarter. The Left was covered by deep, hollow Ways, and other Defiles of the
Villages of Sluys and Meldert, and a little Brook which rises at Meldert, and
so runs by Hoexem, Oirbeck, and Cumtick, to Tilmont: The Ground was Plain
between the Villages of Bavechein upon the right, and Sluys upon the left, for
about an English Mile and an half upon the Center of our Line; which Plain went
from the Village of Bossu, and the Abbey of Florival, cross our Camp toward
Tilmont: and again on the other side of the Villages of Sluys and Meldert,
toward Judoigne. The French took up this Camp last Year, when we were encamped
at Park, stretching their Line along the Plain from the Abbey of Florival
toward Tilmont, with the Villages of Tourine and Bavechein in their Front, and
Sluys and Meldert in their Rear, where they had their Head-Quarter. And the
Year before, we encamped one Night in this Plain, stretching our Left another
way, toward Judoigne; and the King's Quarter at Meldert; and our Right near
the Bois de Merdal; which now at this Camp of Hertogendale remained in our
Rear. This was the Situation of our Camp; so that nothing remained open to the
Enemy but the Plain upon our Center; which the King, upon the coming of the
French to Gemblours, orderd to be fortified with a Retrenchment from Bavechein
to Sluys and Meldert. We had several Parties toward the Sambre, to observe the
Motions of the French; and upon their March to Gemblours they took many
Prisoners which had straggled from the Army, among which were some of the late
King's Guard. The 5th. the Three Second Battalions of Guards, and Eppinger's
Dragons, were ordered to encamp on the other side of the King's Quarter,
between it and the Bois de Merdal, to cover it from Parties skulking in the
Wood. The 6th. the English Artillery came up from Malines, under the Escort of
Brewer, Lesley, and Buchan's Regiments, which joined us this Day. These Three
Regiments, with those of Strathnaver and Hamilton, had come but lately from
Scotland; they were put in Quarters at Leer and Malines, to put themselves in a
Condition to take the Field, and Strathnaver and George Hamilton were sent to
Ghendt. Our English Train of Artillery consisted of Sixty Pieces of Cannon and
Six Mortars, Four Companies of Gunners and Matrosses, and One Company of
Miners, all of One Hundred Men each. This same day we were also joined by the
Cavalry, who came up only to be reviewed, and encamped by Brigades in the
several Intervals that had been left for them, (as we have said before.) The
King reviewed, the same day, the Eight Regiments which had come up to the Camp
the 4th under the Command of Brigadier Collier, in the presence of the Electors
of Bavaria and Cologne, who had left Brussels to come to Louvain, to be nearer
the Army, where His Electoral Highness expected his own Bavarian Foot and
Dragoons, to form a Camp of his own near Louvain. The day following, the King
reviewed all the Horse that had come up the day before, the Electors being
present: And as the several Regiments were reviewed, they marched again to
their respective Quarters where they had been before; the English, upon the
Villages between Louvain, Arschot, and Tilmont; and the Dutch, toward Hassel
and Leauwe; and appeared all of them, both Men and Horse, in very good
Condition and Order. We were very careful for the Conservation of Forage, which
was but scarce in this Country. The Horse, for this reason, continued
cantoned; and the Foot had Orders to cut down no Corn, upon pain of Death. On
the 8th. the French marched from Gemblours by One in the Morning, to Bonef,
upon the Mehagine where the Dauphin had his Quarter. For which reason, the King
ordered the Army to March the next day upon the Left, toward Tilmont, to be
nearer, to observe the French, who were making their Motions between the Geet
and the Jecker, toward Liege. Accordingly the Army marched the next day
toward Tilmont, and encamped with the Right at Roosebeck, where the King had
his Quarter; and the Left upon the Geet, between Tilmont and Linther. Our Front
was covered upon the Left with the River Geet, and the Town of Tilmont; the
Center, with the Villages of Cumtich, and the little River that runs into the
Geet at Tilmont. We had the little River Velpe in our Rear, that falls into the
Geet below Leauwe. So that our Right only was open in the Camp between the
Village of Cumtich and that of Roosebeck. The whole Body of Foot, consisting
then of Eighty eight Battalions, encamped upon Two Regular Lines, and was
disposed in the Brigades following. Of the English and English Pay, the Brigade
of Guards upon both Lines: Upon the First were the Brigades of Earl, Collier,
and Alefeldt: In the Second Line, Stuart, Offarrel, and Haxhausen. Of the
Dutch, Deden, Anhalt, and Heukelom: In the First Line, and Ratzauw,
Holstein-Norburg and Bernstort: In the Second, which made Thirteen Brigades of
Foot, Seven English, and Six Dutch.

The King, in the Winter, had made the Brigadiers Churchill and Ramsey,
Major-Generals of his Forces: But at this Camp, the King declared Count Nassau
(that had been Major General ever since His Majesty's coming over to England)
Lieutenant General; and the Colonels Fitz-Patrick and Offarrel, Brigadiers. And
in the Dutch Army, the Count de Noyelles was declared Lieutenant General by the
King; and he made the Brigadiers Fagel, Salich, and l'Escluse, Major-Generals
in the Infantry; and the Prince of Anhalt, the Duke of Holstein-Norburg, the
Colonels Ratzauw and Dedem. Brigadiers: And of the Horse, the Brigadiers
Ittersum, Warfuse, Hubert, and Stain, were made Major-Generals; and the
Colonels Dompre, Roo, Lip, Zell, Piper, and Montigny, were made Brigadiers.
In the English Dragoons, Brigadier Eppinger was made Major General; and the
Colonels, Matthews and Wine, Brigadiers. But because the Horse did not come
into the Line of Battle in this Camp, I shall omit the inserting the List of
the Army, till we come to the Camp at Mount St. Andre.

The 10th. the French Army decamped from Bonef, upon the Mehaigne, and marched
into the Paiis de Liege, as far as St. Tron; the Dauphin's Quarter with the
Right at this Place; the Left went along the Joar, or Jecker, almost as far as
Warrem, which River remained then in their Rear. The same day, the King
reviewed Brewer, Lesley, and Buchan's Regiments, the last of our English
Infantry that had come into the Field.

The 11th. the Marshal de Boufflers (whom we had left forming a small Body in
the County of Chiney, and who, upon the Marching of the French Army into the
Paiis de Liege, had drawn nearer to Huy) passed the Maes at Huy, and encamped
on the other side of the Jecker, between Warrem and the Mehaigne, where he
flanked the Left of the Army, and covered the Communication with Namur; which
otherwise would have suffered very much by our Parties and Detachments, which
would have had very fair Play upon their Provisions which should have come to
their Camp. The List of his Army was as follows, but I could not get it
disposed into Brigades.

The Marshal de Bouffler's Army.
CAVALRY. Lieutenant General, Monsieur de Bertillac. Major General, Monsieur de
Lanion. Regim. Squad. Commissary-General 3 -- 2 Anjou 3 La Duretiere 3
Courtebonne 3 Petitpierre 2 Royal Aleman 3 Dragons du Roy 3 -- de Gramont 3
Squadrons 25


INFANTRY. Lieutenant General, Count de Gasse. Major General, Baron de Bressey.
Regim. Battal. Poitou 2 Du Maine 2 La Reine 3 La Saar 1 Beauvesois 1 Foix 1
Nice 1 Berry 1 Arbauville 1 -- 1 Royal Artillery. 1 Battalions 15



The Gentleman from whom I had this List did not understand French, so that he
abused several Names in the Copy; which I got rectified as much as I could, by
informing my self from Prisoners: which I have done all to two Regiments, which
I could make nothing of: However, if there be any Mistake in the Names, there
is none in the Sum. By which it appears, that the Marshal de Boufflers had,
according to our foregoing Computation, 3000 Horse, and 9000 Foot, which
amounts to 12000 Men.

The Marquis de Harcourt had formed another Body of Horse and Dragons in the
Paiis de Luxembourg, of between Twenty and Thirty Squadrons; but I have not
seen a List of them. However, upon the Marshall de Boufflers's passing the
Meuse, he came with his Army, and encamped in the Condros.

At the same time, the Enemy formed another small Body, between Harlebeck and
Courtray, under the Command of the Marquis de la Valette, Lieutenant General of
the French Forces, to cover their Line between the Lys and the Scheld, in case
we should endeavor to make another Attempt on that side, as we had done the
last Year. I have had a List of this Army, but with the same misfortune as the
former, to be a little mangled, for want of knowing the Language; however,
where the Names were not French, or doubtful, I have omitted them.

A List of the Army under the Command of the Marquis de la Valette,
Lieutenant General.
CAVALRY. Major General, Regim. Squad. Dauriac 3 Conde 2 Bissy 3 Courcelle 3
Dragons Asfeildt Estranger 3 Sully 3 Squadrons 17


INFANTRY. Major General, Count de Solre. Regim. Battal. Orleans 2 Maulevrier 2
Anjou 2 Solre 1 Chivois 1 Fontenay 1 -- 1 Battalions 10



Which, as we have before computed, must make 2040 Horse, and 6000 Foot. So
that the French had in all, of Foot, in the Field, in Flanders, in the Dauphin,
Boufflers, and La Valette's Army, 107 Battalions, which makes 64200 Foot: And
of Horse in these Three Armies, and the Marquis de Harcourt's (which we shall
suppose to be 20 Squadrons, which, I dare say, was the least,) 226 Squadrons;
which, according to this Year's Computation of the French Squadrons, amounts to
27120 Horse. So that the Total of the Enemy's Forces in Flanders, both Foot and
Horse, made 91320 fighting Men: Which is a very great Army, though inferior to
what they had the last Year.

The French King having sent his Fleet into the Mediterranean, to make some
considerable Conquest in Catalonia, had left his Coasts destitute of any
Defense from the Sea; for which reason he was obliged to have some Forces
dispersed up and down the Provinces of Britany and Normandy, to prevent a
Descent, and the Insults of our Fleet. Which he did effectually at the Bay of
Camaret, though he had not the same Success in other Places

The French King likewise foreseeing that the Allies would have such an Army in
Flanders the Campaign following, as would hinder any more Conquests on that
side, thought it more convenient to make a considerable Detachment both of
Horse and Foot, the last Winter, toward Catalonia; where the ill Posture of
the Spanish Affairs gave him the Prospect of keeping up the Credit and
Reputation of his Arms by some Conquests: And it is very probable that he would
have possessed himself of the whole Principality of Catalonia, if the King had
not provided for its Safety, by sending our Fleet, under the Command of Admiral
Russel, into the Streights. Which so much thwarted the French Designs, that
they were forced to content themselves with the Taking of Palamos and Gironne,
and to omit the more important Siege of Barcelona. This is the reason, that
though the French had a very good Army in the Field this Campaign, in Flanders,
yet it was very much inferior to what they had at the Opening of the other
Campaign. This Digression may be forgiven, since it serves for a better
understanding the Affairs of Flanders, with relation to former Campagnes.

To oppose this little Army of the Marquis de la Valette, of which we have now
spoken, the Allies formed another of almost an equal strength, which encamped
at Mary Kirk, upon the Canal of Bruges, just by the Walls of Ghendt, under the
Command of the Count de Merode Thian, Serjeant-General de Battaille of the King
of Spain's Forces, which consisted of Seven Battalions encamped, viz the Second
Battalion of the Royal Regiment, which (as we have said before) had remained in
Bruges, at our going out to take the Field. And Argyle's Regiment which was
left at Ostend; besides the Regiments of Strathnaver, and Colonel George
Hamilton; and Three Dutch, viz. Holle, Weed, and Grave John: Van Horn, the
Count de Thian, had besides Three Terces, that is Regiments, of Walloon Foot
quartered upon the Villages thereabouts, viz. the Marquis de Deinse, the Count
de Grobendonk, and the Baron de Winterfelt, which were very well Clothed, and
in very good Order, both for the Number of Men, and their Accoutrements, and in
a much better Condition than is usual with the Spanish and Walloon Terces in
this Country. As for the Count de Thian's Cavalry, it consisted of Six or Seven
Squadrons of Spanish Horse and Dragons, whose List I cannot tell.

Having given this short Account of the State of the French Army, and the Two
little Armies They and We had in Flanders, under the Command of the Marquis de
la Valette, and the Count de Thian, we must return to the Two Main Armies
toward the Meuse. The 11th. in the Evening, we heard three Discharges of
Cannon and Small-shot from the Enemy's Camp; which we heard, the next day, had
been a Feu de Joye, for the Taking of Palamos, in Catalonia. The 12th. sixteen
Hussars deserted from the French Camp, and came to our Army: These are
Hungarian Horse, the Emperor has several Regiments of them upon the Rhine; and
one of their Chief having deserted the Imperial Army about two Years since, so
many were debauched by his Example, and for want of Pay, that the French King
made a Regiment of these Deserters, of which he sent a Squadron (which I
believe was the whole Regiment) to serve this Campaign in Flanders, where they
were farther from their Comrades in the Imperial Army, and where the French
King thought they would have a less mind of deserting back again: But they
found the French Pay so much less to their Satisfaction than that of the
Emperor's, that they were at last weary of the French Service, and I believe
that most of them have deserted this Summer from his Army: To which they were
much encouraged by the Duke of Holstein, who received them all into his
Service, and made a Troup of them, which he added to his Regiment of Dragons;
and he generally had a Detachment of them for his Guard, when he went abroad.
Their Hungarian Horses are little, but very swift, and endure a great deal of
fatigue; and they themselves are very dexterous Horsemen, though they make but
an ill Figure on Horseback: They have a little Saddle covered with Cloth, and
a Houssen, cut like a Swallow's Tail, that hangs very low on both sides of the
Horses Legs: They ride like the Orientals, very short, with their Knees almost
to the Pomel of the Saddle; and when they gallop, they raise themselves up,
learning forwards with their Heads upon the Horses Necks: They have round Furr
Cups, with a long Head hanging behind their Backs; and Cloaks a l'antique, that
hang down to their Heels, and the Capes to their Waste: They have under that, a
short Wastcoat, and their Breeches and Stockings of a piece, and little Russia
Leather Boots that come up half way their Legs: They have a very heavy Sabre,
or Scimiter, which gives an effectual Stroke when it hits; but if they miss,
those that have a light Sword have much the advantage of them, for it is then
difficult to recover themselves. Their Officers have for all Distinction, Brass
Feathers sticking up an end in their Caps, just over their Foreheads: They are
very good for Pursuits and Parties, and have generally had very good Success in
this way against the Turks. The Heydukes are the Hungarian Foot, dressed the
same way, except the Cloak. I thought it convenient to give this Description of
them, because their Names occurr very often in the Gazettes, and, it may be,
few know what they are, that read it.

The 12th* Fourteen Battalions of the Dutch were detached from our Line, to
encamp Half a League to the Rear of the Left, to possess and defend the Pass of
the Abbey of Linther, upon the Geet, between Leauwe and Tilmont; which was a
very convenient Post, not only to defend the Avenues to our Camp, but also to
incommode the Enemy's Forage. This Detachment was put under the Command of a
Dutch Major General.

The 13th. the King rid out very early in the Morning, to observe the several
Posts between his Camp and the Enemy's. The King had with him a strong
Detachment of Horse, with which he passed both the Geets, and came very near
the Enemy's Camp. His Majesty went over the Ground where we fought last Year at
Landen; which he rid over several times, to observe exactly the Field of
Battle, and returned late in the Evening to the Camp. And there scarce happened
a Day all along the Campaign, but that the King rid out toward the Enemy: Such
are the Pains and Care His Majesty takes for the Welfare and Prosperity of the
Common Cause.

The 15th. Seven Battalions more were detached to reinforce the Dutch Foot that
had been posted near the Abbey of Linther; these were drawn out of our Forces,
and put under the Command of Brigadier Earl: viz. Earl, Lesley, Lloyd, Mackay,
Meloniere, Jutland, and Aver. The same Day, the Dauphin removed his Quarter
from St. Tron, to the Village of St. Brusten, to settle here an Hospital for
the Sick, to be near the Army. The same Day, the King had Advice from
Maestricht, that no less than Four or Five hundred Swissers had deserted the
French Army, and were come to that Place. Upon which, Orders were given, That
these Regiments that wanted Recruits, should send an Officer to Maestricht, to
get them among those Deserters: Many of them were of Monim's Regiment, which is
the same as Brigadier Stouppa had, that died of the Wounds he received at the
Battle of Steenkirk. That Stouppa was a Protestant, and had been a Minister;
but I was told, That Colonel No^im, who had the Regiment after him, was a
Roman Catholic, and had turned out the Minister that belonged to the Regiment,
and put a Priest in his Place: Which so disgusted his Soldiers, that it
occasioned a general Desertion in his Regiment.

The 16th. the King reviewed Sir Thomas Levingstom's and Colonel Cunningham's
Dragons, that had lately come over from Scotland; they were cantoned near the
Town of Arschot. The same Day, the Marshall de Boufflers marched nearer to the
Dauphin's Army, and passed the Jecker at Warem, where he encamped upon the Left
of the French Army. Forty Suisse Deserters more came at the same time from the
Enemy, and our Detachment brought in several Prisoners. My Lord Athlone came up
likewise nearer to our Army this same Day, and took his Quarter upon the Left,
at the Abbey of Linther.

On the 17th. because Bouffer's had now joined the Dauphin's Army, and that we
had only Foot in our Camp (the Horse being still cantoned in the Neighborhood)
which might have given the French an Occasion to attack us, 'twas ordered to
fortify our Camp, and to make a Retrenchment from the King's Quarter at the
Village of Rooseheck, to that of Cumtich, the only Place open in our Camp, the
rest was well covered, (as we have before described.)

We said before, that the Elector of Bavaria expected some of his own Forces,
which he had sent for, to augment his Army this Campaign; they were now come to
the Neighborhood of Louvain, and consisted of Three Squadrons of Dragons of
Count Philippe d' Areo, Three of Monasterol, Two Squadrons more of Cuirassiers
of Weychel, Two Battalions of his Guards, Two Battalions of Riviera, and One of
Horthansen; these joined the Spanish Horse, and the Bavarian Cuirassiers, and
made a Body near Louvain.

The 18th. they were reviewed by the Elector, where the King was invited, and
received with Three Salutes of Cannon and Small-shot, and afterward treated by
the Elector.

The 19th. a Detachment of Danish Horse took Fifty six Prisoners, and brought
them into the Camp with their Officers: And the same Day, we had the first
Forage, by Order; before, the Horses gras'd, in the Daytime, in the
neighboring Fields, and in Meadows; and the Men cut down Hay, which they
brought along with them in the Evening, just enough for the Horses to subsist
on in the Night: Standing Corn was scarce; and there was a Necessity of
Preserving it, else we should have had no Occasion for Retrenchments.

The 20th. a great many Deserters more came from the Enemy; and, indeed, there
hardly passed a Day, but there came in some of them to our Camp, more or less
The same Day, a Detachment of our Dragons brought in Seventy seven Prisoners:
They fired upon the Vanguard, not thinking it had been the whole Detachment;
but the rest rid up immediately, being a strong Detachment, and surrounded the
Wood, where the French had posted themselves in Ambuscade; and so they all
yielded themselves Prisoners of War. At the same time, we took Two Dominican
Friars Prisoners, and an Irish Priest, that were come as Spies into our Army: A
Soldier of the late King James's Guards, that had deserted to us some Days
before, and had taken Service in our English Guards, discovered them: He knew
they had passed between both Armies several times, particularly the two
Dominicans, and that they had engaged to debauch as many as they could of our
English Soldiers, to recruit the late King's Regiments in France; for which
they were to receive a Luy d'ore a Man, for as many as they could bring over.
They had an Irish Young Man with them; who being pressed to confess, owned the
Truth, and was afterward an Evidence against them. After being Examined, they
were Committed Prisoners severally in Tents, at the King's Quarter, and
Centries continually set over them.

On the 21st. a Detachment of our Foot, posted at the Abbey of Linther, brought
in Fourscore Prisoners; of which, some of them were Gensd'arms, and of the
French King's Life-guards. The Detachment, from this Post, did very much
incommode the French Army; and they seldom had a Forageday, but that they
brought in several Prisoners.

The 22nd. the King reviewed Brigadier Matthews and the Lord Fairfax's Dragons,
which had come up to the Camp the Day before. Brigadier Matthews's Regiment
encamped on the other side of the Village of Cumtich, which was without the
Retrenchment, to cover Monsieur d' Auverquerque's, and other General Officers
Quarters there. My Lord Fairfax's Dragons encamped without the Defiles of the
Village of Roosebeck, to cover the King's Quarter on that side. The same Day,
several of the Enemy's Squadrons came in sight of our Camp, in the Plain on the
other side of Tilmont. Upon which, the Major of the several Regiments upon the
Right, had Orders to come to take the Posts of their Regiments upon the
Retrenchment, in case the French should come and attack us; and to see if the
Retrenchments of their several Posts were well made, with a good defensible
Breastwork. I forgot to say, That the Town of Tilmont (the Dutch call it
Tienen) which in this Camp was, before, the Left of our Army, was guarded by a
Detachment of Three hundred Men, under the Command of a Field-Officer, and
other Officers proportionably, which relieved one another every other Day: It
is situated upon the greater Geet, which comes from Judoigne, and has several
petty Cloisters and public Buildings in it, with an old decayed Wall, and
ruined Retrenchments about it: There is no Water near it, but the little River
Geet, and it is commanded by the Country about it; for which reason, it is not
capable of any good Fortification.

The 24th. One of the French King's Carabiners deserted, and came to our Army:
And the same Day we brought in Eight Prisoners; and an English Officer that was
a Lieutenant in the Duke de Chartres his Regiment of Foot, and has served many
Years in the French Army; the rest of his Party made their escape, and some of
them were wounded. This Day, the Spanish and Bavarian Forces left the
Neighborhood of Louvain, and marched up along the River Dyle, as far as Near
Ische. The Elector of Bavaria left Brussels at the same time, to come and Head
his Army in this Place: (I shall reserve the List of these Forces, till we
bring them all together at the Camp of Mount St. Andre: His Brother, the
Elector of Cologne, accompanied him the most part of this Campaign, being
incognito in the Field; so that no Honors were paid to him by the Army. The
same Day, Ten Drums, all of the Regiment of Piemont, deserted together, and
came in their Livery-Coats to our Camp.

The 25th. we worked again at the Retrenchment, to make some of the
Breast-works higher, which were found too low: and yet as bad as they were, I
heard several Officers say, that they were infinitely better than those we had
last Year at Landen, which were made up hastily in one Night; so that they
could only serve to hinder Horse from riding into our Camp, but not cover our
Men either from Cannon or Small-shot; a Man could easily have jumped over them,
Ditch and all: And yet these were called, by some, (to magnify the Victory)
Formidable Retrenchments.

The 26th. the Regiments of Marton and Fuhnen were sent to reinforce Matthews
his Dragons, to cover the Village of Cumtich.

The 27th. the Enemy made a great Forage hard by Leauwe; and because they were
to come very near our Camp, and to forage just under the Garrison of Leauwe,
they had a strong Detachment of Twelve hundred Horse, and Six Pieces of Cannon,
which the Dauphin Commanded himself in Person, to take this Opportunity of
viewing the Posts between the two Armies and the Field of Battle where we
fought last Year at Landen. The Enemy foraged so near the Garrison of Leauwe,
this Day, that they fired Cannon upon them, to oblige them to retire; but
Seventy of their Maroders were made Prisoners by a Detachment of ours upon the
Left. (When the Soldiers go out of the Camp to gather Roots, Fruits, or Pulse,
or, it may be, to Plunder the Boors, this is called Maroding.)

Lieutenant General Dewits, Commanding the Elector of Brandenburg b's Forces
employed in Flanders, past the Meuse, much about this time, at Maseick, coming
from the Lower Rhine, and the Duchy of Cleves, to join our Army with Twenty
Squadrons of Horse (of which I shall give a List hereafter) and advanced as far
as Die, to be at hand to reinforce our Army, when the King should have
Occasion for it.

The 28th. in the Evening, we heard a firing of Cannon and Small-shot in the
French Camp; which we guessed to be for the Reduction of Gironne, in Catalonia:
Of which we were informed the next Day. The French were so much the more glad
for this Conquest, because that in 1684. the Marshall de Belfonds suffered a
Disgrace before this Place, and was forced to raise the Siege, when he had made
a Breach in the Place; and that his Forces, in a general Assault, had got into
it, but were beaten out again with a great slaughter by the Besieged, that had
fortified themselves in the Paradeplace. But the Marshall de No^ailles got a
better Bargain this Bout, and the Besieged did not think fit to stay to
Surrender till Things should have been brought to this Extremity.

The 29th. our Parties brought in Two hundred and fifty French Maroders. We had
taken so many Prisoners by this time, that the Provosts Guard, and Gaols of the
neighboring Towns, were full of them, though the Marshall de Luxemburg had
them reclaimed as fast as he could: Their Pay is so small, and, for this
Twelvemonth past, so ill received, that their Soldiers could not subsist, but
by what they could gather in the Country: so that they were forced to tolerate
the Soldiers going out of the Camp, to get wherewithal to live. This is the
reason that so many fell into the hands of our Parties, and that we took so
many Prisoners: And though the French are more given to Deserting than any
other Soldiers, yet Deserting was never so much known among them, as 'twas at
the Beginning of this Campaign, not only in Flanders, but upon the Rhine, and
in Piemont, where they all unanimously complained of their want of Pay; so far,
that by this time 'twas computed, that above Five thousand of them had deserted
from their Army here, either to our Camp, or to the Garrisons of Liege and
Maestricht, since the Beginning of the Campaign: Which would be reckoned a
great Loss in a Battle.

Tron and Brusten, and marched toward the Jaar and the Meuse, and encamped
with their Right at Tongres, and the Left at Fies, along the Jaar, which was in
their Rear: The Dauphin took his Quarter at Oerle, upon the same River: They
had made great Preparations at Huy, of Bombs, Battering-Pieces, and all other
Necessaries for a Siege; which now they had brought to their Camp, and gave
out, That they designed to Bombard Liege and Maestricht: And some were not
content with this, but would have a Formal Siege to one of these Places. But
though the French had heavy Cannon and Mortar-pieces brought to their Camp, yet
they had Bridges laid along the Jaar, to pass that River: Which shows, That
they were more afraid of being attacked by us, than of having any real Design
to fall upon us.

We had above Forty Battalions in the Lines of Liege, and a good Garrison in
Maestricht* and our own Army consisted now of Ninety Battalions, after the
arrival of the Two Regiments of Wolfembuttel to our Camp: And if the French had
not been covered by so many Rivers, which we must have passed to come at them,
they had run a great risque of having been attacked on all sides by our Army,
and the Liege Forces; but the Nature of the Country gave Opportunity to the
French of advancing so near to Maestricht, having Rivers on all sides between
them and us, and between them and the Forces encamped in the Lines of Liege:
And besides, there was a necessity of suffering the Enemy to consume the Forage
about Liege, for Reasons that we shall mention hereafter. However, the French
made a great Noise of their Foraging under the Cannon of Maestricht.

The 4th. the two Dominican Friars, and the Irish Priest, that had been taken
up in our Army for Spies, were set at Liberty: The two first were found Guilty
by the Court-Marshal, and Sentenced to Die: After which Judgment of the Court,
they were removed from the King's Quarters to the Provost's, and laid in Irons:
But the King Pardoned them, out of his pure Mercy, (for the Elector of Bavaria
would have had them Hanged,) and sent them to the Archbishop of Malines, to
have that Town for a Prison, during the War. But the Irish Priest alleged,
That he was going to his own Country; That he took only the Opportunity of the
two Friars Company to come to our Camp, and so to go for Ireland. Which
appearing to be Truth, he was Acquitted, and set this Day at Liberty.

The 7th. Lieutenant General Dewits, that Commanded the Brandenburgh Forces
that we left at Die, marched to join the Elector of Bavaria, at the Camp of
Neer-Ische.

The 10th. the King reviewed My Lord of Essex and Brigadier Wynne's Dragons;
the latter wanted Two Troops that had been left in England, and his Horses very
much fatigued in twice crossing the Sea the last Winter, and their continual
Motion thorough Ireland and England, to come over to this Country. My Lord of
Essex's appeared in very good Condition and Order. The same Day, Two Irish
Officers left the French Army, and came over to us; one of them had been in the
late Queen's Regiment, and the other in Colonel Talbot's, both of them in
Savoy. And Prince Vademont, that had come Post from Italy, to make the Campaign
in Flanders, came to Salute the King at his Arrival. His Majesty received him
with a great deal of Joy, and with the greatest Demonstration of Friendship. He
is a very Wise General, and has been with the King in all his Campagnes (except
the last, that he was in Italy) both in the former and this present War, and is
very zealous and affectionate for His Majesty's Interest. Orders were given,
this Day, to be ready to March.

The 11th. One of our Parties came to the Camp with a Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel, Major, and two Captains, and several Soldiers, which they
had taken in the Passage-Barge between Namurr and Huy: The Officers were
treated very civilly in our Camp, especially the Colonel, who had the liberty
of his Sword, and to ride with the Army in the following March, to have a full
View of it: With which he was very much pleased.

The 12th. the Battalions we had posted upon the Left, near the Abbey of
Linther, left that Place to come up to the Army, to be in a readiness to March:
And the Seven Battalions under the Command of Brigadier Earl, encamped upon the
Right, upon the Ground that remained between it and the Village of Roosebeek,
which covered the King's Quarter. Some Squadrons of Horse had encamped here at
the beginning; but upon the making of the Retrenchments, they were sent back to
the Village, for their more convenient Subsistence. This same Day,
Major General la Forest was sent with a great Detachment of Horse, to observe
the Enemy; and Orders were given to load all the heavy Baggage, and to march
that Night without any precedent Beat of Drum, but to take our Motions from the
Right.

Accordingly, the 13th. by One of the Clock in the Morning, the Army began to
March upon several Columns. The First consisted of the Brigade of Guards, and
the Seven Regiments that had been detached under Brigadier Earl: This Column
was led by the Duke of Wirtemberg, and Count Nassau, and passed the Geet
between Tilmont and Judoigne. The Two Lines had the General Officers upon their
respective Divisions, and the First marched thorough Tilmont, by the Gate of
Louvain, out of the Gate of Judoigne. The Second marched thorough the Town, by
the Gate that leads to Leauwe, and went out by the Gate of St. Tron. The
Artillery and Baggage followed the Column led by the Duke of Wirtemberg. Very
early in the Morning we were got on the other side of the Town, into the Plain;
which made room enough to subdivide the Two Lines into Six Columns, for a more
speedy and convenient March. The Elector of Bavaria marched at the same time
from his Camp at Neer-Ische, to join us this Day; and all the Cavalry had the
same Orders. We made a long March between the two Geets, and by the Town of
Judoigne, toward the Mehaigne: And though we owe all the following Advantages
of the Campaign to this Camp, and that we made no Secret of our March, (for, as
we said just now, Orders had been given two Days before, to be ready to March,)
yet the French did not think it convenient to hazard a Pattle, to dispute this
Camp; which, it may be, was the King's Design, by making no Secret of his March.

We made a Halt about Judoigne, to stay for the Elector's Forces, which were to
pass the Geet here; and about the Evening, the Right of our Army got to the
Mahaigne. The Quarter Masters had remained in this March with the Army, because
the Ground we were going to, could have been disputed by the Enemy; and so we
marked our Lines, after we were come up to our Ground. The King's Quarter was
marked, in the Order of the March, at Bonmale; and the Elector's, at Tav^ers,
upon the Mahaigne. But the King took his Quarter, upon our coming to this
Ground, at Mount St. Andre; and the Elector, at first, had his at Ramelies. Our
Right was at Harlue and Taviers, upon the Mehaigne; and the Lest stretched out
beyond the Villages of Marilles and Molembais, which we left in our Rear. The
Line made a small kind of an Elbow by the Village of Henieux Heddin, which we
had here in our Front; the Right of this Camp was a Plain, and the Left went
into narrow and close Grounds. All the Cavalry joined us here.

The Brigades of Rantzaw and Dedem were interlin'd in the Right Wing of Horse,
under the Command of Major General Fagel; and the Brigades of Collier and
Offarrel in the Left, under the Command of Major General Ramsay.

And because this is the First Camp where all our Army got together, and where
we formed our Line of Battle, it is here that I shall insert the List of our
Army: I have had an Authenick List of it, which is as follows. But the Reader
is to observe, That I assign no Post upon the Line either to the King, to the
Elector of Bavaria, the Duke of Holstein; or the Prince de Vaudemont, General
of the King of Spain's Army in Flanders: Because being Generals in Chief, they
have none. I was guilty, the last Year, of this Mistake.

[
Note, That the Regiments to which I give Two Names, with Olim before the
Second, that the Second is the Name the Regiment had last Year.]

The List of the Confederate ARMY in Flanders, under the Command of His Majesty
of Great Britain, and the Elector of Bavaria.
RIGHT WING.
First Line. Lieuten. Generals, Major-Generals, Brigad. Regim. Squad. Spanish
Horse. DUKE of HOLSTEIN, General of the Spanish Horse. Lieutenant General, Du
Puy. The Spaniards have none: Neither have I seen the List of their Generals de
Battuille, which answer to our Major-Generals. Valencar Dragons 1 Elector's
Life-guards 2 Prince Vaudemont and the Duke of Holstein 1 Guards. 1 De Bay 1
Marquis d'Avese 1 Hartman 1 Count d'Arco, Lieutenant General of the Bavarians.
Bavarian Foot. Battal. Elector's Guard 2 Count Riviera 1 Bavarian Horse. Squad.
Arco Dragons 3 Elector of Cologn's Guards 1 Arco Cuirassiers 5
Lieutenant General, Dewits. Brandenburgh Horse. Squad. Horse-Granadiers 1 Grand
Mousquetaires 1 Life-Regiment 3 Du Hammel 1 Electoral Prince 3 Gensd'arms 1
Squadrons 26 Battalions 3

RIGHT WING.
Second Line. Lieuten. Generals, Major-Generals, Brigad. Regim. Squad. MARQUIS
de BEDMAR, Master de Camp, General of the Spanish Foot Steenhuys Dragons 1
Risbourg Dragons 1 Moncada 1 Troop Ribeaucourt 1 Penalosa 1 Vintimiglia 1 Borja
1 Couriers 1 Bavarian Foot. Bat. Count Riviera 1 Horthausen 1 Bavarian Horse.
Squad. Monasterol Dragons 3 Weickel Cuirassiers 5 Major General, Sonsfeldt.
Brandenburgh Horse. Squad. Dorfling 3 Du Hammel 2 Letwits 2 Fleming. 3
Squadrons 25 Battalions 2

RIGHT WING.
First Line. Lieuten. Generals, Major-Generals, Brigad. Regim. Battal. Brigade
of Foot interlined, Commanded by Major General Fagel. Fagel. Rantzouw
Slangenbourg 1 Rantzouw 1 St. Amand 1 Bernstorf Zell 1 Lochman Suisse 1 Arents
1 Sparre 1 Fagel 1 8 Dutch Horse in the Right Wing. Nassau Weilbourg. Pyper.
Mont pouillon 2 Wirtemberg 2 Vrichapel 2 Erback 2 Hubert 2 Ryswick Warfuse 2
Wolfembuttel 2 Hesse d'Armstadt 2 Ostfrise 1 Ryswick 2 Squadrons 19 Battalions
8 Spanish, Bavarian, and Brandenburgh Squad. 26 Bavarian Foot 3 In all,
Squadrons 45 Battalions 11

RIGHT WING.
Second Line. Lieuten. Generals, Major-Generals, Brigad. Regim. Bat. Brigade of
Foot interlined in the Right Wing, under the Command of Major General Fagel.
Dedem. Noyelles 1 Oxensterne 1 Lewenhaupt, Olim^ Koningsmark 1 Buldenbrook,
Olim Disenhausen 1 Marquett 1 St. Paul 1 Dedem 1 7 Dutch Horse in the Right
Wing. Montigny. Ittersum 2 Voght 2 Saxen Meiming 2 Saxen 2 Hesse Hombourg 1
Montigny 2 Squadrons 11 Battalions 7 Spanish, Bavarian, and Brandenburgh Horse
25 Bavarian Foot 2 Squadrons upon this Line 36 Battalions 9

BODY of FOOT.
First Line. Lieuten. Generals, Major-Generals, Brigad. Regim. Battal. DUKE of
WIRTEMBERG, General. Count Nassau. Churchill. Brigade of Guards English Guards,
1st. Reg. 1 English Guards, 2d. Reg. 1 Dutch Guards 1 Scots Guards 1 Mirmont.
Earl Royal, or Lord G. Hamilton 1 Selwin 1 Churchill 1 Trelauney 1 Fuziliers,
or Fitz-Patrick 1 Brewer 1 Earl 1 Ellemberg. Alfeldt Meloniere 1 Belcastel 1
Brandenburgh 1 Nassau 1 Prince George 1 Prince Friderick 1 Danish Guards 1
Anhalt Tettau 1 Salisch 1 Luc 1 Tzcharner Suisse 1 Melune Suisse 1 Anhalt 1
Wymbergen 1 Tettau. L'Ecluse. Heukelom Torsay 1 Bulow 1 Bielke 1 Wolfembuttel
Guards 1 Holstein Beck 1 Heukelom 1 Ringrave 1 Holstein Ploen 1 Battalions 33

BODY of FOOT.
Second Line. Lieuten. Generals, Major-Generals, Brigad. Regim. Battal. The
other half of the Brigade of Guards English Guards, 1st. Reg. 1 Dutch Guards 1
Scots Guards 1 Bellasis. Stuart Granville, Olim Bathe 1 Tidcomb 1 Lesley 1
Castleton 1 Lauder 1 St. George 1 Meloniere. Haxhausen Marton, Olim Cambon 1
Aver 1 Funon 1 Jutland 1 Prince Christian 1 Queen of Denmark 1 Salisch*
Holstein Norbourg Zobel 1 Gober 1 Capol Suisse 1 Schrattenback, Olim Aylua 1
Cinquilles 1 Carle 1 Holstein Norbourg 1 Count de Noyelles. Bernsdorf L'Ecluse
1 Dumont 1 Heyden 1 Hockeren 1 Hering 1 Bernsdorf 1 Hanouer Guards 1
Bickenfeldt 1 Battalions 30

Continuation of the Left Wing.
Earl of Athlone, General. First Line. Lieutenant General, Auverquerque.
Major-Generals. Hubert. Tilly. Ramsay La Forest. Colchester. Scarborough.
Brig. Regim. Battal. Iselstein Nassau Sarbruck 2 Prince Phiilpe 2 Saxengotha 2
Boisdair'd 2 Tilly 2 Dompre Dompre 2 Saxe Heylburg 2 Grisper 2 Nassaw Weilburg
4 Athlone 2

Brigade of Foot interlined, Commanded by Major General Ramsay. Brig. Regim.
Battal. Collier Tiffeny 1 Ingoldsby 1 Fred. Hamilton 1 Stanley 1 Collingwood 1
Lloyd 1 Battalions 6

Leveson Leveson 2 Windham 2 Galloway 3 Wood 2 Lumley Langston 2 Coy 2
Schomberg or Linster 2 Lumley or the Qu. 3 L'Etang Portland 2 Auverquerque Li.
G. 1 Colchester now E. of Rivers Life-G. 1 Ormonds Life-Gua. 1 Scarborough
Life-G. 1 Horse Granadiers 1 Squadrons 47





Continuation of the Left Wing.
Second Line.
Lieutenant General, Lord Portland. Major-Generals. Warfuse. Ittersum.
Zeugleustein. D. of Ormond.
Brigad. Regim. Battal. Choviere Nassau Friseland 3 Lip Holland 2 Turk 2
Monflin 2 Choviere 2 Stain 2 Roc Arco 1 Bernikow 2 Saxen 2 Oht 2 Flodort 2
Lip Zell Lip Zell 2 Zeulen 2 Goedon 2 Heyden 2 Opdam 2

Brigad. Regim. Battal. Second Brigade of Foot interlined, Commanded by Major
General Ramsay. Offarrel Offarrel 1 Buchan 1 Mackay 1 Maitland olim Leven 1
Ferguson 1 Graham 1 Battalions 6 Schack Schack 2 Scravenmor 2 Vittinghoff 2
Zeulestein 2 Boncourt Boncourt 2 Wirtemberg 2 Zeestadt 2 La Forest 2 Squadrons
48 Battalions 6





Body of Reserve, consisting of Dragoons.
Major General Eppinger. Dutch Dragoons. English Dragoons. Brigadiers. Squad.
Brigadiers. Squad. Holstein Ploen 4 Win Eppinger 5 Berenburg 4 Essex 4 Mathar
4 Win 3 Schlipenback 4 Cunningham 4 Schuglenburg 3 Mathews Fairfax 4 Willers
3 Livingston 4 Dopf 4 Mathews 4 Squadrons 26 Squadrons 28

You must observe that at first coming to the Camp of Mount St. Andre, all the
Dragoons encamped upon the Left, where the Left is the Post of Honor: It Is for
this Reason that the English Dragoons in this List fall after the Dutch. Our
Artillery consisted of Sixty pieces of Cannon and six Mortars, and four
Companies of Gunners and Matrosses, and one of Miners, each of one hundred men.
The Artillery was commanded by Colonel Goor, Lieutenant Colonel Brown, and
Major Slondt; and the four Companies of Gunners and Matrosses which carry
Fire-Armes, were commanded by the Captains, Watson, Cock, Vanderstam and
Lesley. The Dutch Artillery consisted of the same strength both in respect of
Cannon and Men.

It appears by this List of our Line of Battle at Mount St. Andre, that our
Army consisted in the Right and Left Wing, of 176 Squadrons of Horse, which at
150 Horse each Squadron at our first coming into the Field, makes 26400 Horse;
the Reserve consisted of 54 Squadrons of Dragoons, 100 each Squadron, which is
our complement, which makes 5400 Dragoons; by which the total of our Horse and
Dragoons amounted to 31800 Men, all very well Mounted and Armed; but of the
Dragoons especially I may say, That such a Body, either for Number or the good
Order they were in, has hardly ever been in the Field. Our Infantry consisted
of 63 Battalions in the body of Foot, 20 interlined in the Right Wing of Horse,
and 12 in the Left, which in all makes 95 Battalions, which at 600 each
Battalion at first coming into the Field, amounts to 51000 Foot and 31800
Horse, which makes the total sum of our Army at Mount St. Andre to be 88800
Men, and about 7000 which Count Thian had encamped under his command near
Ghendt, of which we have given an account before, which being added to the
former sum, amounts to 95800 Men. This is all we had now in the Field. It Is
true that we had a great many Forces in Liege, of which I shall give an account
to the Reader hereafter. But that Town being then our Frontier, it required an
Army for a Garrison; and the condition of affairs in regard of that City did
then require our special care for its safety; so that what Forces we had in
Liege at that time were useless as to the acting offensively; whilst the Enemy
were between us and the Meuse, with as good an Army in the Field as ours,
except what it had suffered by deserters; for by our computation of the French
Forces above, it appears that they had here and in Flanders 91320 Men, which
was but 4480 Men less than we had in the Field in both these places, which in
such a number is no great odds: I put it therefore to the Judgment of Impartial
Men, whether the French were not in a better condition to act defensively
against us this year, than we to have acted defensively against them in the
former Campaigns.

We disposed our Fieldpieces this March to mount to St. Andre upon the head of
the Several Brigades of Foot, each Brigade had Five Fieldpieces, with Stores
and Gunners proportionably. The Day following, Count Alefeldt was Detached with
his Brigade to the Village of Ramelies, which the Elector of Bavaria left to
take his Quarter at Taviers upon the Mahaigne, and this Post was committed to
the Charge of Major General Ellenberg. We made a Retrenchment about Ramelies,
and placed a great many pieces of Canon upon the height of this Village which
commanded the Plain that leads to Huy. The same day we rectified our Camp,
which had been marked in haste the day before to make the Line more regular,
and filled up the Interval that had been left by Alefeldt's Brigade. The French
being advised of our March toward the Mehaigne, left this day their Camp
between Tongres and Fies, and marched near to Huy, after they had passed the
Jaar upon several Bridges; they imcamped with their Right between the Villages
of Vignamont and Walef toward the Jaar, and their Left at Fenmale upon the
Mehaigne. The Dauphin took his Quarter at Vignamont, within Two English Miles
of Huy; and the French, which before made a show of having some design upon
Liege or Maestricht, now did not think themselves secure enough in the Camp of
Vignamont, though strong by Situation between the Meuse, the Jaar, and
Mehaigne, but immediately upon their coming to this Camp they fortified it
where it was open, between the Jaar and the Mehaigne, with a very good
Retrenchment, which they made as strong as art and leisure could do it. The
Right of our own Camp, upon the Mehaigne, was within Two Leagues and a half of
Namur, and within Four English Miles of the Meuse: for which reason the French
kept their Communications with Namur, from whence they had their Provisions by
Land on the other side of the River, which before they had by Water; and the
Marquess d' Harcourt, which before lay encamped between the Paijs de Liege and
that of Luxemburg, was ordered to come and Post himself on the other side of
the Meuse near Huy, to cover the French Convoys, which otherwise would have
been much exposed to the Excursion of the Garrison of Liege, which has an equal
advantage on both sides of the River: And because the French were now every
much straightened in their Camp, that they had already forraged all about Liege
and Maestricht, and that there remained but little Ground on this side of the
River which they could forage securely on; the Dauphin, to provide for the
subsistence of his Army as long as he could, ordered all the heavy Baggage of
the Army to march by Huy to the other side of the Meuse. This was the great
Advantage of our Camp at Mount St. Andre, That the French, which before ravaged
all the Country between Liege and Maestricht, were now forced to Retrench
themselves under the Walls of their own Garrison of Huy; and that it put all
the Country on this side of the Sambre under our Command, so far, that the
French, though Masters both of Namur and Charleroy, yet could not hinder us
from incamping in the Plains of Fleury, and were themselves forced to pass and
re-pass the Sambre, which is a great way about, to follow us into Flanders. And
though our Advantages were so great by this Camp, yet we could not take it up
sooner, because the French might then have subsisted about Liege and Huy longer
than we could have done upon the Mehaigne; which would have exposed Liege too
much to the French Power, upon our March to the Scheld.

The 16th. Stuarts Brigade was detached out of the Line to incamp at the Cense,
or Farm of Franquenies, near the Abbey of Bonef upon the Mehaigne, where they
entrenched themselves, and the Guard of this Post was committed to the charge
of Count Nassau, Lieutenant General. This Village, with that of Ramelies on the
other side, Commanded the Plain before our Right Wing, (where we encamped along
the Mehaigne in the Campaign of 1692. where the King had his Quarter at
Ramelies, and our Right by Perwys, and the Left at Brancon upon the Mehaigne:
The French were then besieging the Castle of Namur,) the rest of our Camp was
covered in the Front by the Lesser, and in the Rear by the Greater Geet: The
River in the Front was a great way from the Line, above half of a League, but a
little Brook covered it nearer that went from the Village of Offus and fell
into the Lesser Geet at Jauche. This was the Strength and Situation of our Camp
at Mount St. Andre, the Posts that covered, and the Advantages we got by it.

Upon our coming to this Camp, and the French to Vignamont, the King ordered
the Forces that were encamped within the Lines of Liege, to march out, and form
a Camp by the Citadel, consisting of Dutch, Brandenbourg, and Liege Forces,
Commanded by Prince Circlaes of Tilly, and the Major General Heyden, and
Cohorne. This was a very convenient Camp to molest the Enemy in their Forage
toward Liege; and the French to be even with us, Commanded a small Body of
Horfe and Dragoons, Commanded by Colonel Vaillat, to incamp under the Walls of
Namur to molest our Forragers between the Mehaigne and the Meuse, who often
went very near Namur: The French sent besides this Detachment, a Man of a
Company Commanded by the Officers, that had best knowledge of the Country, to
go out in Parties; in which they had pretty good success, particularly between
the Mehaigne and the Meuse, where we lost several Horses, and they took
generally some Prisoners. But if these were inconvenient to us from Namur, our
Camp near Liege was equally inconvenient to the Enemy on that side from whom
they took a great many Horses and Prisoners; but few Deserters came to us from
this Camp, though they deserted before in Multitudes, because they were so
closely entrenched between Rivers that it was difficult for them, who had a
mind, to get away.

The 17th. the King rid out very early, with a strong Detachment of 4000 Horse,
along the Mehaigne, toward the Enemies Camp, and returned very late that
Evening: The day following we had a general Forage on the other side the
Mehaign. Several of the Enemies Squadrons appeared in sight of our Forragers;
for which reason we fired three Pieces of Cannon from our Camp, the Signal to
call them in. The French did forage the same day on their side, and these
Squadrons were of the Detachment to Cover the Forragers, who were no less
surprised to see some of our Squadrons posted near them for the same reason;
however there was no Action on either Side, though such Accidents falling out
have sometimes brought two Armies to an engagement, as it happened in 1689 at
Walcourt, between Prince Waldeck and the Marshall de Humieres. Our Foragers
nevertheless made a shift not to come into the Camp empty, but we lost some
Horses that tarried too long after the Signal given to come off, at which time
the Detachment that covered the Foragers were commanded back to the Camp.
Colonel Mathews lost 8 Horses out of his Regiment, and 3 of his Men were
wounded.

The 22 th all the Dragoons removed from the Left to the Rear of the Right by
Hottemont: What remained of the English and Dutch Artillery after the
Fieldpieces had been distributed into the several Brigades of Foot, and that
we had planted some others at the Village of Ramelies, came to be posted here
the day before from the ground between Mount St. Andre and Bonmale, where it
had encamped at our first coming here. And the 24 th the Duke of St. Albans and
Colonel Lutterel came to the Camp from England; the first to serve as a
Voluntier, and the second to go to Venice and command the Irish Forces in the
Service of that Republic, with a Commission of Major General. This day we had
another general Forage toward Wavre, where the Lord Colchester, now Earl of
Rivers, lost some Horses out of his Troop of Guards. The Parties not only from
Namur, but from Mons and Charleroy, were very frequent, and came often to the
very Rear of our Camp; so that upon a Forage, 'twas very hard to prevent the
losing several of our Horses, either by negligent Men who did not take care to
keep within the outguards; or others, who for choice of Forage would venture
beyond them.

The 26 th we surrounded a party of the Enemies in a Wood, just by the Rear of
our Left, where they had been decoyed by a Boor, who gave notice of it to my
Lord of Athlone. This was a voluntary Party of dismounted Troopers that had a
great mind to ride some of our Horses, and to mount themselves at our own cost;
they got a Partisan with them, who when they came near to our Camp inquired
whereabouts our Horses grazed; the Boor told them, that they were every day
just by the Wood, and that if they would lie there in ambuscade that night they
would not fail of Horses the next morning: They took his advice, and the Boor
came immediately to advertise my Lord of Athlone of it, who commanded a
Detachment of Dragoons and of the two Brigades of Foot interlined in the Left
to surround the Wood, and to give no quarter; so that they killed 20 of them up
and down, and the Partisan among the rest; but at last they gave quarter to 17.
Much about the same time one of our Parties, composed of Soldiers of Hukelom
and Carles Regiments, brought in the Lieutenant Colonel of the Dauphins
Regiment, and several other Prisoners, which they took between Huy and Namur.
And though it is none of my business to speak of the actions of Parties and
Partisans, which have no more to do in the main business of an Army, than
Privateers have in that of a Fleet, the one being upon Land what the others are
at Sea, yet I cannot omit to speak of a considerable adventure of one of our
Parties, which ventured to pass the Meuse though not 30 Men, and got about 50
Troopers in a defile, where they took all their Horses, and made every one of
them Prisoners, and repassed the Meuse with their Booty, which they brought
safely off.

The 21 th Count Thian had a quiet Camp in the Neighborhood of Ghendt, where
he seemed posted only to make head against the Marquis De la Valette near
Courtray, yet he would not remain idle there, but about this time he made a
Detachment of 300 Spanish Horse out of his Camp, under the command of the
Lieutenant Colonel of the Prince of Chinays Regiment, who in their way by Aeth
took a Reinforcement of 700 Foot out of that Garrison, and the next day they
were joined with about 3 or 400 more of the same Garrison: These Forces attacked
the French Line about St. Ghilain, and forced several of their Redoubts upon
the Haine, where they made 50 Prisoners; they passed the River after this, and
plundered the Town of St. Ghilain, where there was a small Garrison which
abandoned it upon their approach, and retreated to Mons; they detached several
Parties in the Country round about for Hostages, and made a very great booty
of Horses and Cattle which they brought to Aeth.

The 27 th the three Battalions of Guards in the Second Line, had Orders to
incamp upon the Kings Quarter, a great deal of baggage of the Kings Horse, and
several, both Mules and Horses were on the other side of the little River which
went under the Kings Quarter; and the King had information of the designs of
some of the French Partisans to come and endeavor to steal away what lay on
the other side of this River, where it was exposed to such attempts; and
besides the Kings Quarter was removed from the Line of the Army, for which
reason these three Battalions of Guards, and the Duke of Holsteins Dragoons
encamped here by the Kings Quarter, the Guards on the other, and the Dragoons
on this side of the Geet.

The 28 th we had another general Forage, under a good escort of 20 Squadrons
of Horse commanded by Count Tilly, Major General, and a good Detachment of Foot
commanded by Brigadier Collier. Some Horses were lost of Brigadier Mathews his
Dragoons, and two of his Men were killed by the French Parties that lay in
ambuscade for a like occasion.

The 31 th the King took a review of the 20 Brandenburgh Squadrons of Horse
that (as we said above) had joined the Elector of Bavaria at his Camp of Near
Isthe, being commanded by Lieutenant General D' Witz and Major General
Sonsfeldt^; the Elector of Bavaria was present, and the King was very well
pleased with the order they were in. The grand Musketeers made a very fine
show, being all French Gentlemen Refugies, very well Clothed with Scarlet
Coats and Silver Lace, and as well Mounted; they behaved themselves very well
the beginning of this War at the Siege of Bonne, and have been no less
serviceable this Campaign in that of Huy.

st of August the King reviewed four Regiments of Saxon Horse that had come up
to the Camp the Saturday before: They are included in the Line of Battle which
we have incerted above. Intervals had been left for them in several Brigades at
our coming to this Camp, which they filled up at their arrival; so that their
coming did not alter the Line of Battle above specified; they are only called
Saxon Regiments in the List, but their Names were Rebauld, Bernickow and
Penhausen, the fourth I have forgot. The States have hired them for their
service from the Elector of Saxony; and notwithstanding that they had made a
long march to come so soon to the Camp from their Country, yet they appeared in
good order.

The 5 th all the heavy Baggage of the Army was commanded away toward Louvain
under the Escorte of Brigadier Wynnes Regiment of Dragoons, which was sent to
garrison in Ghendt, because their Horses were out of order for reasons we have
before alleged. A Man out of a Company was likewise detached for the security
of the Baggage, under the command of a Captain, Lieutenant and Ensign, out of
each Brigade, and the whole was commanded by Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, and
Major.

By this time Forage began to be very scarce in both Armies, which were very
numerous, and yet had now been above two Months in and about the Pajis de
Liege. The French had been in it from the very beginning of the Campaign, and
now had liberty of Forage but between the Meuse and the Jaar, for that part of
the Principality of Liege which lies on the other side of the Meuse called the
Condros, affords but little Forage; it is a Woody Country, and part of the
Forest d' Ardenne abounds in Coal-pits, which makes firing very cheap about
this Country. The French for want of Forage on this side the Meuse were forced
to send their Horses to feed on the other, having besides the passage at Huy
several Bridges upon the Meuse for that purpose. I saw a Letter about this time
from a Gentleman in the French Army to his Friend, dated from this Camp of
Vignamont, wherein he complained for want of Forage, and that they wished very
much for our decamping, that they might have the liberty of going to a more
plentiful Camp. As we have given a hint of it before, there was a reason to
bring the Army to this want of Forage on both sides in this Country, because
the King designed to bring his Army into Flanders to make room for the
undertaking that has closed up this Campaign. Liege was our Frontier Town,
which required an Army for its Garrison, and the French being Masters of Huy,
they could not only incommode Liege very much, but march and subsist with their
Army as far as Maestricht, as we have seen this Campaign; so that above all
things, 'twas necessary to drive the French out of Huy, and establish our
Frontier there: But if we had marched toward Flanders without consuming first
the Forage all over this Country, and without obliging the French themselves to
help us in it; upon our removal from this Camp, and our march toward the
Scheld, they might have fallen upon Liege, and our great Towns in Brabant,
which would have been as good for them as any Expedition we could have made in
Flanders, and which I believe they would have compass^d so much the sooner,
since these places here are weak, and their Frontier Garrisons in Flanders very
strong.

The 5 th, 240 Suisse Deserters were sent from Maestricht to the Camp to
recruit the Suisse Regiments we had in our Army.

The 6 th an Order from the King was published at the head of every Regiment,
to forbid Foraging without order, to go on Maroding, or to molest Victuallers,
or any persons that came to the Camp with Provisions, upon pain of death. For
what most destroys and ruins a Country are these interloping Foragers and
Maroders, who not only augment the scarceness in a Camp by plundering the
Country people round about, but often fall into the Enemies hands, whereby we
lose our Horses, and our Men are made Prisoners.

The 7 th the Army had orders to be ready to march, and the Artillery and
Pontons were sent this day as far as Perwys, under the Escorte of the Regiment
of Fuknen or green Danes. The French expected our march, for which reason they
fired several pieces of Cannon from Huy to call in all their Horses from the
other side of the Meuse. We had a report that the French had abandoned it, and
that what we heard was the blowing up of the Works, which appeared afterward
to be a story; though I believe the French had once a design of doing it,
because the week before they had sent most of the Provisions and Stores from
thence by water to Namur, but upon better thoughts they found the place of such
consequence to us, that they resolved to use their power to keep it if possible
out of our hands. The French upon the news of our march, which they expected
this day, sent several Parties and Detachments out of the Garrison of Namur, to
observe the Flanks of our Columns upon the march, and take Prisoners or Baggage
if they could find any straggling from the Lines: But because we did not march,
our Detachments were not yet drawn off from the other side of the Mehaigne, so
that several of the French fell into their hands, who were made Prisoners;
among the rest, a Captain of Horse of the Regiment of Tournelle. This Evening
orders were given to march the next day, and though we had a Defile to pass
between the Mehaigne and Perwys, where the French might have the opportunity of
attacking our Rear-guard the next day; nevertheless we did not use any means to
conceal our march from the Enemy; it may be to entice them out of their
Retrenchments at Vignamont to fall upon our Rear-guard, and to engage them to a
Battle, for our Rear guard was very well prepared to receive them.

The 8 th the Army decamped very early from Mount St. Andre, and directed its
march toward the spring of the Mehaigne and Gemblours passing by the Defile of
Perwys My Lord Portland had the Rear-guard, composed of a good body of Horse,
and the Brigade of Stuart and Alseldt of Foot, which had been posted at
Franquenies upon the Mehaigne, and some Fieldpieces The King kept with the
Rear guard till he saw it free from any attempts of the Enemy, where the nature
of the Country did afford them an occasion to have fallen upon it. We made a
long march this day, and the weather being warm made several Soldiers saint
under their Arms. The King took his Quarter at the Chateau of Sombref, our
Right went toward Fleury at St. Amand, from whence it turned back almost in a
right Angle to Marbais, where the Elector of Bavaria had his Quarter, and our
Left went toward Gemblours as far as the Cense or Farm of Bretinchamp. The
Kings Quarter being in the Front of the Army, was covered by all the English
and Dutch Dragoons, who encamped before it upon a Line. The Enemy being
sensible that they could not hinder us from this Camp, and expecting our march
to this place, had ordered the small body of Horse and Dragoons commanded by
Colonel Vaillac from Namur, to march to Charleroy, both to cover that place,
and to incommode our Foragers. We halted here the next day; we had made a long
march, and the Rear-guard could not come up till two or three of the Clock in
the Morning, and besides it was necessary to see what the French would do upon
this march; whether they would go back to Liege, and endeavor to fall upon it,
(though the want of Forage could not allow them to subsist there any longer) or
whether they would follow us, and march upon the Sambre: For if they had been
obstinate, to have kept on this side of the River, then the Plain of Fleury was
a very convenient place to try the Issue of another Battle, and the odds were
not so great between the two Armies, but that the French (if they depend so
much on their boasted Bravery) might very well have ventured it. The Enemy
out-did us in Foot by Two Battalions, as it appears by the List of their Line
of Battle and ours, but we out-numbered them in Horse and Dragoons; however it
appeared by the Enemies behavior at this time, that they depend more upon the
Number than the Bravery and Valor of their Soldiers.

The French had so many reports of our marching the day before, in which they
were deceived, that though we made no secret of this days march, yet they were
not certain of it till about Noon; their Right Wing of Horse was then gone to
forage: The Dauphin caused several Pieces of Cannon to be fired to call them
in; the Resolution was taken to follow us, and the Drums immediately beat the
General to give notice of marching. About Four in the Afternoon the Dauphin
began to move with the Right Wing of Horse and Body of Foot, and passed the
Mehaigne at Falay, directing their March up along the Meuse toward Namur. The
Right Wing of Horse, Commanded by the Marshall de Villeroy, being returned
from their Forage, followed the Dauphin about Eight that Evening, and so they
marched all Night and the next day, that they came about the Evening between
Spy and Masey, and the Dauphin took his Quarter at the Chateau de Soye upon the
Sambre; but in leaving the Camp of Vignamont, the French provided for the
safety of Huy, and left a Battalion to reinforce the Garrison. When they were
come up to this Camp, we could discover part of their Left, but the little
River that runs from Gemblours into the Sambre covered them, and remained
between us: However though we were so near one another, and that the Plains of
Fleury offered a very convenient field of battle, yet the French were unwilling
to hazard it, but rather resolved to make a Retreat, and pass the Sambre; which
they began that very Night: The Infantry of the Kings House led the way, and
the next day the whole Army, with the Right Wing of Horse, Commanded by the
Marshall de Villeroy, followed, and encamped at Ausart l' Estrang, about a
League and a half from Charleroy, between it and Namur; but their Troops were
so fatigued with the March, which continued night and day, that the Colors of
their Battalions were almost left bare, and Sixty Men made a good Battalion
upon the March, the rest being weary stragled behind. The Marshall de
Villeroy was detached from this place with a Body of Horse and Dragoons toward
the Scheld, (where the Enemies were informed we did design to march with all
speed) and took his March by Maubeuge, where he re-passed the Sambre, and
passed the Scheld the next day at Conde, making all diligence to get to Tournay.

The Enemy upon our halt at Sombref the 9th. fired several Pieces of Cannon at
Charleroy; I suppose for Signals of our halt; but the King being informed that
the French would pass the Sambre rather than venture the Issue of a Battle in
the Plains of Fleury, and that they did actually begin to pass it that very
Night, gave Orders for the Army to march the next day. Accordingly the Army
left the Camp of Sombref the day following, and marched by Melle toward Genap
and Nivelle; about noon we passed the Dyle at the Village and Chateau of
Promel, about Four in the Afternoon our Right was got to Arkennes upon the
Senne, that runs by Nivelle and Nostredame de Halte to Brusselles. We encamped
here this Night; our Line went from Senne almost to the Dyle, our Right at
Arkennes, the Elector of Bavaria's Quarter; and our Left at Vaillantpont, not
far from Promel, where we had passed the Dyle; the King took his Quarter in the
Town of Nivelle. This is a neat little Town; it lies in a Bottom, and so cannot
be made strong, however it has ancient Walls and Roundels about it, and is more
particularly famous for the Abbey of Secular Chanonesses, which are all to be
Women of the first Quality of the Country; they take no Vows, but may marry if
they please, and leave their places. In the Choice they have Robes and Furrs
like Secular Canons, and the Head-dress like Nuns; but otherwise, when they are
out of the Church they dress themselves like other Ladies. The design of the
Foundation was for Women of the best Quality, that had no considerable
Fortunes, to live here Honorably, without incumbring the small Estate of the
Family. The Abbess of this Collegiate Church is Lady of the Town; and the Army,
on both sides, have been very favorable to this place, for the sake of the
Religious Ladies.

Upon this March to Nivelle, the Colonel of the Dutch Train of Artillery
visiting the Ammunition Wagons, found a Stranger in one of them that could
give no good account of himself: He had got in by pretending himself to be of
the Army, that he was weary, and could not march; by which pretense, and a
little Drinking-Money to the Waggoner, he got leave to get up in the Wagon:
The Dutch Colonel, that came to visit the Wagons, suspected him, and caused
him to be searched, and found a lighted Match about him, and besides he gave so
ill an account of himself that he was soon discovered to be a Frenchman, and
that he was come from the Enemies to endeavor to set fire to our Ammunitions:
For which he was sent to the Provoste, where we shall leave him, till we come
to give an account of his Punishment suitable to the Enormity of the Attempt.

The 11th. Major General Fagel was detacht, with the Two Brigades of Foot of
Rantzaw and Dedem interlined in the Right Wing of Horse, to go by Lessines to
Audenarde, and the Artillery went with a good Escorte another way to join us in
the the Plains of Cambron, because the Defiles were too difficult in the two
following days March for the Artillery to go along with us; we were got into
the Country of Hainault, which is generally very close and woody. The same day
the Army marched from Nivelle and passed the Senne over several Bridges above,
and at the Village of Arkennes, and so we came to Soignies. We lost upon this
March some of our Pontons, or Tin-Boats, and some Baggage taken by the Enemy,
which (as it is said) persuaded the Men that looked after them to go a more
convenient way, pretending themselves to be Dragoons of our Army, and so got
them out of the Line of the Baggage; they made the Men Prisoners, and took the
Horses from the Pontons and Wagons; they rifled the Baggage and took what they
thought good, and left the rest; they blew up holes in the Pontons with powder,
and so left them. The Army being now come up by several Defiles to Soignies;
our Right was at Horrues and Neufville, where the Elector had his Quarter; the
Left stretched out a little beyond Court Aubois; and the King had his Quarter
at Soignies, an old Town in the Chatelleine of Mons, and within three short
Leagues of it. As soon as the French had made themselves Masters of Mons, they
Summoned the Burgh-Masters, and Inhabitants, to come and swear Allegiance to
the French King, and since are reckoned in the Paijs Conquis. We heard firing
of Cannon at Mons this Evening, which (as we had information the next day) was
for the Dauphine's Arrival at that place, where the whole Army followed him
that very Night. Upon our march from Sombref toward the Scheld, the French
made their utmost diligence to prevent any designs we could have upon their
Lines, or Towns, in Flanders; for which reason they marched on the 11 th from
Ausart L' Estrang; (though their Army was already fatigued by their March night
and day to get to that side of the Sambre;) they went by Ham Sur Heure, and so
repassed the Sambre at Bussiere, which was already a good March: But the
Marshall de Luxemburg finding it necessary to get as far as Mons that very
Night, that he may come to the Scheld as soon as we, ordered all the Infantry
to fling away their Snap-sacks, and march with nothing but their Arms, and all
the Baggage was ordered to stay behind; he caused likewise all the Wagons of
the Country to be summoned to follow the Army with the Soldiers Snap-sacks,
and to take up the wearied Soldiers who could not march, and bring them after
to the Camp. The Enemy made a halt at Bussiere, after they had re-passed the
Sambre, to refresh themselves; the Prince of Conti, who Commanded the Infantry
as first Lieutenant General, told them, That they had suffered but little for
the King's Service that Campaigne, That the King's Service did now require a
quick and a speedy March, and therefore that such who loved His Majesty's
Service should show it, and follow their Colors. He then caused 400
Pistols-worth of Brandy, which had been brought from the neighboring Towns for
that purpose, to be given to the Infantry to drink; and so the Colors were
ordered to march on, and all the Foot, that were come up, endeavored to show
their Zeal for the King's Service by marching along with them; but all along
Wagons were provided to take up those who could not march, and Brandy upon
every halt. The Enemy came very early, by break of day, near Mons, to which
place the Dauphine was got the night before. I cannot say that they encamped
here, because all the Soldiers Tents were left behind for a more expeditious
march, but here they lay down upon the ground to rest themselves.

The 12 th the Army marched toward Aeth; we passed the River of Cambron at
Lens, and so got into the Plain of Cambron, where we encamped with our Right at
Irchonwetz, within half an English mile of Aeth, where the Elector of Bavaria
had his Quarters, and the Left at Lens, the Abbey of Cambron remained in the
Rear of the Left. We had the Town of Chievres before the Right, where the King
took his Quarters. This is an old ruined Town, where the Spaniards had once a
Garrison, but the French upon pretense that it was within the Chatelleine of
Tournay, beat them out of it, and no Garrison has been in it since There is
hardly a finer place in all the Seventeen Provinces for an Army to incamp upon,
than the Plains of Cambron, where the strength and situation equals the beauty
and convenience of the Plain, which reaches from the Village of Irchonwetz to
Lens upon the little River that runs by Cambron, about five English Miles in
length, with a small rising over against Chievres, from whence we could have a
perfect prospect of the Camp from the Right to the Left. Our Right was covered
by the Dender and Irchonwetz, which runs through Aeth, where it is joined by the
River of Cambron; and our Left and Rear by the River which from Lens went round
the Rear by Cambron Abbey, and so to Aeth. Our Front was covered by a Wood and
close Defiles which are between this place and Mons. The Artillery which we had
sent from Nivelle another way, because of the narrowness of the Defiles we were
to march through, came up to us this day. But we could not long enjoy the
commodiousness of this Camp, the King was hastening his march to the Scheld,
and so orders were given to march on the next day.

The 13 th in the Morning the Duke of Wirtemberg was commanded with seven
Brigades of Horse, one of them under the command of Brigadier Lumley, to pass
the Scheld at Audenarde, where he was to join the two Brigades of Foot
commanded by Major Fagel, detached from the Camp at Nivelle, of which we have
given an account before. An Express was sent likewise to Count Thian to march
up from Ghendt, with the body under his command toward Audenarde; and to send
the three Terces of Walloon Foot to garrison in Bruges, and to leave Brigadier
Holles Regiment in Deinse. The same day the Army marched, the first Line passed
the River of Irchonwetz above Aeth, the second with the Cannon and Baggage
marched through the Town. This Town, as it appears by what we have said before,
is situated at the confluence of two small Rivers, the Dender and that of
Cambron, which pass through the Town; it was taken by the French King in 1667,
in that irruption he made in Flanders after the death of Philip the Fourth:
'Twas left to the French King by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, and remained in
their hands till the Peace of Nimeguen, when it was given up again to the King
of Spain; and as all Spanish Towns are very much improved by coming into French
hands, so this place got a signal advantage by it: It was before of a very
irregular figure, as appears by the Gates (before the French had it) which are
left standing to this day, and its chief Strength consisted in the Morass made
by the Dender and Cambron River on the one side of it, the other was fortified
with weak Bastions of Earth-work, commanded by the neighboring ground. But as
soon as the French had it yielded to them by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle,
Mounsieur de Vauban was ordered to use his Skill about it. He new Modeled the
Circuit of the place, and brought it almost to the figure of a regular
Heptagone; it has one side longer than the rest (upon which is the Port of
Tournay) which occasions an almost flat Bastion, else all the rest of the
Courtines and Works are near equal; the Circuit of the Town and all the Works
of it are faced with Free Stone, the Fosse all about the place is fortified
with Tenailles or Horn-work in it, according to Monsieur de Vaubans Method of
Fortification, and faced with Free Stone; and the River Dender joined by the
other, passing through the Town, keeps the Fosse always full of Water, which
they can stop in the Town by Sluices, or let it out again in Frosty-weather, at
which time such a Fosse would otherwise be dangerous; and because the grouud
about the Town, from the Port of Mons to that of Brussels, is high and commands
the place, every Bastion has a good Cavalier raised upon it to remedy this
inconveniency. The French had made a Hornwork by the Port of Mons, and another
by the Port of Tournay, but as we marched through this place they were pulling
it down to make it a double Fosse and covered way between these two places,
with Redoubts in the Angles, Saillants, or Points jetting out, which they found
more convenient and defensible. The place has now three very stately Gates,
that of Mons, that of Tournay, and that of Brussels, done according to Modern
Architecture, with an Inscription above each of them in Letters of Gold, in
Latin, French and Dutch, upon the several Gates; upon that of Mons it is in
Latin, importing that the King of France took the place in the Expedition he
made in Flanders in 1667, to assert the right of his Queen Mary Theresa, and
that he was content to establish the limits of his Empire here, when Fortune
promised him the Conquest of all Flanders. All the other States of Christendom
are so much under-valued in this piece of Flattery, that it may very well be
incerted here for the satisfaction of England in particular, as I have
translated it.

The Inscription upon Mons-Port at Aeth.
LOUIS the XIV. King of France and Navarre, finding nothing that could Resist
His Arms, in the Expedition He made for the Legal Pretensions of Mary Theresa
His Wife, was content to give Bounds to Himself, to a Fortune that promised Him
in a short time the Conquest of all Flanders. Thus it is that this Prince,
truly Great, has known how to Reconcile two Virtues so much opposed to one
another, as the Love of Glory, and Moderation; and to let the World see, that
in the very height of His Victories, He desired Peace: Being the only One that
could find the Art of Obliging all Europe, even His Enemies, by extending the
Bounds of His Empire. And that the Town of Aeth may be an Everlasting Monument
of so many Glorious Actions, He has been willing after He has had it Fortified,
that it should serve for a Limit, and a Bulwark to his Empire, in the Year 1670.

Within each of the Gates is a very fine Piazza, with the Corpse de Guard at one
end, and the Officers of the Guards-Room and other Apartments at the other. The
Pillars of the Piazza support a very fine Store house built of Free Stone, with
a good Frontispiece that over*looks the Gate, upon the Chemin des rondes, or
way that goes round the Rampart; it has an Italian Roof, with Crowns of
Flower-de-luces or Dolphins gilt upon it; all the Sentry-boxes are built very
pretty with Free Stone, with like Crowns of Flower-de-luces and Dolphins gilt
upon them. There is a fine Arcade in the Market over the Conduit, with the
French Kings-Armes upon it, supported by two Angels, and adorned with Trophies.
In short, as to its Fortifications, it is a noble place, the Magnificence of the
French King appears in it, and deserves a better description than I can give
it, which has made me wander from the account I was giving of the Armies march
by and through the Town. That Evening we encamped by Leuse, the place where the
Marshall de Luxemburgh fell upon Prince Waldecks Rear-guard with the Cavalry
of the Household in 1691, our Left was at Lignes upon the Dender, that runs from
Leuse by Lignes and Irchonwetz to Aeth; our Right made an elbow from the
Center, where we had Leuse upon our Front to Harquignies toward Tournay, where
the Elector of Bavaria had his Quarters, and the King took his at Grames.

That same Evening Lieutenant General Tettan, Major General L. Meleniere, and
two Brigadiers, with a Detachment of 60 Men per Battalion, was commanded to the
Scheld to post himself over against the Village of Hanterive, in order to pass
the River. We heard firing at Tournay for the arrival of the Marshall de
Villeroy, who as we said before had been detached from the Camp at Ausart
letong with a good Body of Horse, and all the Dragoons of the Army to pass the
Sambre at Maubeuge, and the Scheld at Conde, and so to make all possible
diligence to join the Marquess De la Valette, who upon our march toward
Flanders was ordered to leave Courtray, and to post himself at Pont de
Espieres, where the French Line (of which we have given a sufficient account in
our last Years History) does terminate it self upon the Scheld. The Marshall
de Villeroy at his passing through the Town of Tournay, found Monsieur de l'
Arteloire ready with a Train of Artillery to go down the Scheld under his
Convoy to Pont de Espieres. When he had joined the Marquess de la Vallette,
they left Pont de Espieres, and marched down the Scheld about a League lower,
and posted themselves at Hanterive, where they arrived on the other side of the
Scheld much about the same time that Lieutenant General Tettan was got by
Escanaffe on this, betimes in the Morning. We attempted to lay a Bridge of
Boats upon the River, but the French opposed it with their small Shot, and were
much superior to our Detachment; for according to the French account, the
Marquess de la Valette had then 15 Battalions, 9 Regiments of Horse and 2 of
Dragoons, and besides was now joined by the Marshall de Villeroy. Lieutenant
General Tettan had 15 pieces of Cannon sent with him, which was disposed in 3
several Batteries which begun to play upon the Enemy; their Cannon was not come
up so soon as ours, but they entrenched themselves just upon the other side of
the River, where our Cannon did them some considerable damage: Of Maulevriers
Regiment, by their account, 1 Lieutenant was killed and 25 Men. Our own people
could easily see our Cannon do execution upon them, being so near one another*
A little after the French began to fire upon us from 2 Batteries on their side,
but I have not heard of any execution or damage they did us at that time. The
same Morning the Duke of Wirtemberg had passed the Scheld at Audenarde with the
7 Brigades of Horse and the 2 of Foot, of which we have given an account
already, for which reason, as the Marshall de Villeroy had entrenched upon the
River to hinder our passage, he was also obliged to fortify his Rear with a
Retrenchment, to cover himself from the Duke of Wirtemberg, who upon His
Majesty's Orders was marching up to attack him in the Rear, whilst we should
force our passage in the Front. I shall now leave things in this disposition
upon the Scheld, and return to both the Armies.

The 14 th we decamped from Grames, and marched toward the Scheld, which was
now but 2 Leagues from the Right of our Army. We passed not far from the foot
of Mount Trinite, and the Left Flank of our Columns was reckoned within 4
English Miles of Tournay. We heard in the Morning upon our march great firing
at this place, which at first was supposed to be Signals for their Army and
neighboring Garrisons, but by the regularity of the fire we found it to be
rather a Salute. In effect the Dauphine passed this Morning through the Town,
and was saluted with a triple discharge of the Cannon round the place; the Army
followed him, which in two nights and one day had marched from Mons to this
place. We left them at Mons the 12 th, where they were got betimes in the
Morning; they refreshed themselves the best part of that day, except the
Brigade of Guards that was sent to Conde, where it was put on board of
Bilanders to come down the Scheld to Tournay by water, where I suppose it
arrived as soon as the Marshall de Villeroy, and with him joined the Marquis
de la Valette. The 12 th in the Evening the French Army left Mons, and marched
night and day (only halting for rest now and then) and so came to Tournay the
14 th early in the Morning; but the Wagons of the Country were ordered all
along to take up the Sick and the Weary, and upon every halt, there was a
provision of Brandy ready to refresh the Men. The 14 th about Noon our Right
Wing came up near the River, but it was then too late to have undertaken to
force the passage, and for the Army to have gone over, for which reason 'twas
ordered to halt, and the Weather proved so bad just at that time, that it would
have been impossible to have undertaken it, though there had been day enough
left for it. We had this Evening and most of the Night following, a violent
storm of Rain and Wind, which made the ways very deep and heavy; the Army was
ordered to incamp in the ground where it stood upon the halt, and every Brigade
to incamp the most conveniently it could, without any regard to the niceness of
a Line; the King took his Quarters this Night at the Chateau de Cords, and the
Elector at Chastelet: And the Dauphine being now come up with the Body of the
French Army to join the Marshall de Villeroy, so that though we had forced the
passage of the River, yet still we could not prevent the French Army from
incamping between Harleber and Courtray, where they covered their Country in
Flanders; and besides the French having drawn all their Forces in this side of
the Country, which gave the King way for another undertaking may be of as great
consequence; His Majesty did not think it convenient to attempt the passage
here, where there might have been a great deal of Blood shed, but no advantage
on our side, though we had forced it, because the Enemy would still have been
Masters of the Camp at Courtray, which equally covered their Lines on both
sides of the Lys. The King therefore resolved to leave the French where they
were, and to pass the Scheld about two Leagues below at Audenarde.

The French very much magnified their speedy Marches to prevent our passage of
the Scheld before them, that in Four Days they should with their whole Army
pass and re*pass the Sambre, and pass the Scheld at Tournay, and be the fifth
encamped on the other side of the River, to oppose the passage of our Army:
It Is said, that the Marshall de Luxembourg valued it more than the Battle of
Landen; but if he valued it more, it did not cost him much less, for it is
supposed that this violent March has cost him at least Three Thousand Men, and
his Cavalry has been almost ruined by it, so far that the French King is now
forced to reform his Cavalry, (as he did the last Year,) and to reduce the
Troops yet to a less Number, which the last Winter he had brought to Forty: (I
have heard that he has reduced them to Twenty Five a Troop*) The French Army
might have been followed by the Scent which they left behind of dead Men and
Horses, which were to be found all along the Road it went; so that we may say,
The French have suffered as much in this March as they could have done in a
Battle, either in Men or Horses. It has been reported, that the French King has
writ a Letter to the Army, to be read at the Head of every Regiment, by which
he thanked the Dauphine, the Marshall of France, the Lieutenant General, and
other Generals, and all the Army, but more particularly the Suisse and French
Infantry, for the great Services they had done him in this speedy March, by
which they have saved his Country in Flanders from the Invasion intended by the
Enemies This indeed is a very different Language from what we had last Year
from him after the Battle of Landen; there was nothing then but what he could
expect after so considerable a Victory, and there was nothing but what his
Enemies ought to fear after so great a Defeat; but now he seems to recant in
his Letter, and own that he was mistaken, and thanks his Army for running as
fast as they could, (and so fast that it has suffered as much as in a Battle,)
to save his conquered Country from being invaded by the Enemies, who last Year
were to fear every thing after the loss of the Battle of Landen. This is a very
different Note from the first, and would make but a very ill concert with it:
Such a thing must make his Subjects sensible, either that the state of Affairs
is very much altered to their disadvantage, or that their King is strangely
transported with success. Whether this Letter was read or no at the Head of
every Regiment, I cannot tell; but such a Letter has been Published at Paris.

Because the French made so quick and diligent a March to prevent our passage
of the Scheld, it has given occasion to several Men, who are generally rash in
giving their Judgments of things, to extol very much the Enemies Conduct in
this Occasion, and as much to blame our own, without examining the different
circumstances of the one and of the other: What I shall say at present is not
to lessen the Wisdom and Conduct of our Enemies, or the Commendation they
deserve; for their March was as wisely contrived, and managed with as little
loss as the great diligence they used was capable of; I shall only show, that
considering our circumstances, and those of the Enemy, it is no wonder they
could make such diligence as to get before us to defend the passage of the
Scheld, and it could be no want of Conduct on our Side if they could make so
much larger Marches than we, as to be able to be there before us; for the
French had wholly the advantage of the Country on their side. From the Meuse to
Audenarde we met with no Garrison of ours upon the March, but that of Aeth; the
French they had in their way Namur, Charleroy, Mons, Conde, Valencionnes, and
Tournay; and unless when we passed by the Plain of Cambron, and the Town of
Aeth, we marched upon the Enemy's Country, but the French still near their own
numerous Garrisons: From whence the Enemy had this advantage over us for a
speedy March, that the Boors were all fled to their Garrisous with their
Effects, from whence they could not only get Supplies of Refreshments for
their Infantry upon every halt, but also Wagons to bring the Baggage, the Sick
and the wearied Soldiers after them, in so much that though their Battalions
were not of One Hundred Men each, at their coming up to a Camp or Halt, yet
still by Night all the rest were brought up in Wagons, who could not march and
follow the Army; and the Soldiers Bagagge being carried in the same Wagons,
they marched only with their Arms so much lighter than ours This is a
convenience the French had, and which it is plain we wanted: Besides, the
French, marching by so many of their Garrisons, could be supplied with fresh
Battalions which had suffered no Fatigues in the Field, but could hasten with
so much the more ease to the Scheld. Another convenience, the French marched
without their Baggage, which was brought up afterward by the Wagons of the
Country, who had retired generally to to the neighboring Garrisons; but our
Baggage must march with us, or be left to the Enemies, over whose Country we
marched, or it must have been sent so far about, that we must have laid many
more Nights than the French without Tent or Cover The French had no occasion to
march with their Artillery, being to act upon the defensive: They had a
sufficient Train ready at Tournay to defend the Passage of the Scheld, so that
they left their Train in their Garrisons to come up leasurely after them; but
we were obliged to have our Train along with us, and to proportion our Marches
to the Fatigues the Artillery Horses could endure, or else leave them exposed
to the Enemies Garrisons, by which we passed. The French had another great
advantage of the Scheld; for when once they were come up between Mons and
Conde, they could send down by water from Conde to Tournay, upon the Scheld,
any thing that might incumber the March of their Army, or any Detachment of
Forces which they thought sufficient to oppose our passage of the Scheld, till
they themselves could come up; they sent this way the Brigade of Guards,
according to their own account, (and may be more) which sailed down the River
night and day, till they had joined the Marshall de Villeroy and the Marquess
De la Valette. Now any impartial Reader must own these to be great advantages
which the French had over us in this March, and such as may very well equal the
difference there was between the way the French had to go to the Scheld and we,
which at most cannot amount to one part in three, which the Reader may observe
if he will be pleased to consult the Map. Nothing can be alleged against our
diligence, but the Halt we made at Sombref the 9 th. but of that we have given
an account above. And at last, these who so willingly pass their Judgments upon
the Conduct of our Army, don't know whether their was at bottom any other
Design, but to bring the French from the Meuse to the Scheld, to make room for
the Siege of Huy, whith (as it shall hereafter appear) was a place of great
consequence to us, and if it was so, then the French by their speedy March
helped our very Designs instead of opposing them: Or if the French would keep a
Body near the Meuse for the conservation of Huy, then that would have made way
for some Siege in Flanders, because the French were not able to act defensively
on both sides. Whatever was the design, it appears that we did what we could to
make the French believe it was upon Flanders, because upon our March from Mount
St. Andre, Major General Cohorne was commanded from Liege with Twelve
Battalions, and Six Squadrons of Liege-Dragoons, to march by Brusselles toward
Ghendt. This was sufficient to give the French the Alarm in Flanders; and
accordingly they left Huy open to a Siege, rather than leave their Country in
Flanders exposed to an Invasion.

Thus I have endeavored to state, as justly as possibly I could, the account
of this great March which has made so much noise in the World, and in which the
French have so much applauded their diligence. I shall now return to both the
Armies, which we have left on both sides of the Scheld. Our Army (as we said
before) had encamped the 14 th. with the Right near the Scheld, the Elector's
Quarter upon the Right at Chastelet, and the King's at Cords. The Dauphine
having passed the Scheld this Day at Tournay, could not be hindered of the Camp
of Courtray, and besides, the Evening proved so bad, that though we would then
have endeavored to have passed the Scheld at Hanterive, yet we could not. The
next day the Army was ordered to march toward Audenarde: We came at Escanaffe
in presence of the French Army, encamped with the Right at Hanterive, and the
Left at Avelghem, all along the Scheld, though I believe that the whole Army
was not there, but at hand between it and Courtray, to observe our Motions.
General Tettan was Posted just on the other side of the River, with his
Detachment and Fieldpieces, but the Caunon was silent on both sides. From
Escanaffe we marched all along the Scheld toward Audenarde, and encamped with
our Right at Melde by Audenarde, where the Electot had his Quarter, and the
Left at Escanaffe, over against the Left of the French Army. Our Left was here
close under the Cannon of the Enemy, so that in the Evening, when we were come
to our Ground, the French Cannon played very briskly upon our Left, where our
Two Brigades of Foot, Commanded by Major*General Ramsay, and our English Horse
most Exposed, yet I have not heard of any Men killed, but we lost fourteen or
fifteen Horses; but the French used their greatest Endeavors to do mischief to
Tettan when he came off with his Detachment, and Fieldpieces, from under their
very Retrenchments, on the opposite side of the River, where he lay under
cover, but could not get off without Exposing himself very much to the Enemies
Cannon: He remained quietly in his Post for this reason all the day, and took
the opportunity of the Evening to come off, which he did without any loss. The
King, at this Camp before the Scheld, took his Quarter at Berghem, upon the
very Bank of the River, where it was very much Exposed to the Enemies Cannon.
The Rear-Guard, which was brought up by the First Battalion, and the Battalion
of the Second Regiment of English Guards, and the First Battalion of Dutch
Guards, which had encamped upon the King's Quarters at Cords, which was a
considerable way from the Line of the Army, could not come up before the next
Morning; for which reason there was no Orders given overnight to march the next
day.

The 16 th in the Morning the French began to play again upon our Left with
their Cannon, where they killed some of our Men, and our Generals Quarters were
very much exposed here, being just upon the River, but none of them suffered
any damage Besides the Batteries the French had against our Left, we perceived
that they were bringing of Cannon down along the River to take up the length of
our Line, and have Batteries from Right to Left; one of their General Officers
came up in the Morning to view the Windmill between Peteghem and the River,
which absolutely commanded our Right; but to hinder the Enemies bringing Cannon
down any farther, we had Batteries made upon our side from the Kings Quarters
along our Left, to hinder the Enemies from advancing any further. The Cannon
played on both sides all the Morning, but without any considerable execution
that I have heard of. The King rid out early to observe the countenance of the
Enemy; part of their Army was making a motion toward their Left, which gave us
reason to suspect that they designed to march, and take up the Camp of
Peteghem, a high ground in the way from Audenarde to the Enemies Lines, from
whence they might have Canonaded the Duke of Wirtemberg (who upon His Majesty's
resolution of passing the Scheld lower at Audenarde, was countermanded under
the Cannon of this place) from whence likewise the Enemy would have very much
incommoded our passage of the Scheld even here, for which reason His Majesty
immediately ordered the Four Brigades of Earl, Stuart, Alfeldt and Haxhausen,
and the Two Battalions of Scots Guards, to march and leave their Tents
standing, to join the Duke of Wirtemberg, and take up the high ground between
Poteghem and Audenarde; these Brigades were Commanded by the Count de Nassau,
and Major-Generals, Churchill, La Meleniere, Miremont and Ellenberg. We passed
the Scheld at Audenarde the same Morning, and the Two Battalions of Scheltinga
and Prince Charles of Brandenburgh came out of the Garrison to join us. The
French upon this motion were afraid they were coming to surround them, for
which reason they immediately left their Camp at Hauterive and Avelghem, and
marched directly to Courtray, where they encamped between it and Harleber; but
a Party of Thirty Men of the Enemies that had advanced too near Peteghem, were
all made Prisoners. Upon the removal of the French from Hauterive and Avelghem,
the Army that had passed the Scheld was ordered to halt, and to incamp upon the
ground where it stood, every Brigade to take the most convenient way of
incamping for it self: About half of the Infantry of the Army had passed the
River, being now Six Brigades of Foot, under the Command of the Duke of
Wirtemberg. We said above that Count Thian, when the Duke of Wirtemberg was
commanded before to Audenarde, had Orders to come up with his Body from Ghendt,
and join him here. He came up accordingly, and encamped not far from Audenarde,
between it and Deinse, but upon the March of the French to Courtray and
Harleber, he was sent back to Deinse, where he had left Holles's Regiment for
the security of the Pass.

The 16 th the rest of the Army passed the Scheld at Audenarde, and below it
upon a Bridge of Boats. The Scheld above Audenarde makes a great kind of a
Lake, which being reduced in a narrow Channel to run through the Town, does
make the best and the chief defense of it; and generally all along between
Audenarde and Tournay, the banks of the Scheld are low, and the ground about it
a Morass, so that it is not passable by an Army at many places, and the passage
may be defended with a little opposition. The Army marched this day between the
Lys and the Scheld, the King took his Quarter at Wanneghem, our Right made an
angle from Cruyshoutem (the Elector of Bavaria's Quarter) toward Deinse and
the Lys; our Left stretched out toward the Scheld by Peteghem; our Front was
covered all along with close ground and Defiles, for which reason we could not
incamp upon a Line, but some Brigades more advanced and some less; our Front
running between the Lys and the Scheld faced exactly the Enemies Lines which we
attacked last year, which were not above Three Leagues from our Camp* The Enemy
upon our incamping did not think it convenient to remain upon the same side of
the Lys with us at Harleber, but on the 18 th they passed the River at
Courtray, and encamped with their Right at this place (the Dauphins Quarter)
and their Left at Moorselle toward Menin, where they were posted equally to
defend their Lines between the Scheld and the Lys, and their Towns between the
Lys and the Sea, but the Marquis de la Valette was posted at Pont de Espieres
to defend their Lines toward the Scheld: however the French by this motion
left the Country open before us, and gave us liberty of Foraging to their very
Lines.

The 19 th our heavy Baggage came up to the Camp; it had been sent away the 5
th under the Convoy of Brigadier Wynnes Dragoons, and a Man of a Company. They
marched by Louvain, Vilvor de and Ghendt, and so joined us in this place. We
have said before that upon our marching from Mount St. Andre toward the
Scheld, the King had ordered Major General Cohorne with Twelve Battalions, and
some Liege Dragoons to march toward Ghendt, which obliged the Enemy to bring
all their Forces in Flanders to make head against so great an Army as we should
have after the joining of all these Forces. The 15 th Major General Cohorne
came to Vilvor de with the Body under his Command, and the 21 th he marched
through the Town of Ghendt, and encamped just without the Town, upon the Canal
of Bruges; he had then with him Three Battalions of Swerin, and the Regiments
of Stockhansen, Lindeboom, Harsolt, Ameliswert, Prince Christian Lodowics,
Essen, Vaudermeuten, Churprince and Friesheim, and Two Regiments of Liege
Dragoons. The Enemy having now left the Meuse open, the King sent Order^ to
Maestricht to prepare a Train of Artillery, and all other necessaries for a
Siege, to send it up by water to Liege; and all the Boats belonging to
Maestricht and Liege were taken for the Kings Service.

The 22 th we made a great Detachment under the Command of Count de Noyelles
Lieutenant General, toward the Right, to cover Pioneers, who had come up to
cut ways through the enclosures we had before us; and we had Bridges laid upon
the Lys and upon the Scheld for the convenience of the Army to Forage on the
other side of both these Rivers, and also to leave the Enemies in suspense (who
were now busy in fortifying of Courtray for a Winter-Quarter) which way we
designed to march next, whether farther in Flanders, or back again toward the
Meuse.

The 24 th the heavy Baggage was commanded back again to Ghendt, and Pontons
were sent to make Bridges upon the Lys at Mechlen.

The 25 th. the Right Wing of Horse, and Body of Foot, was ordered to march
toward the Lys, except the Brigade of Guards, which remained encamped at the
King's Quarter; and and the same Day Lieutenant General Dewits was ordered to
re-pass the Scheld at Audenarde, and to march toward the Meuse with the
Brandenbourg Horse under his Command.

The 26 th. the whole Army marched, and passed the Lys upon two Bridges at
Mechlen. We began now to come in the close Country of Flanders; and this is the
reason that part of the Army was ordered to march from the Camp at Wanneghem
the day before, because the Defiles were such here, that the whole Army could
not have marched from Wanneghem, and pass the Lys, in one day. After we had
passed the Lys, we encamped with our Right at Caneghem, where the Elector had
his Quarter, and the Left between Markeghem and Wacken upon the Lys; the King
took his Quarter at Wouterghem about Three English Miles from Deinse; the
Artillery and Baggage march^d by Deinse and came up here to us the same Day.

The 29 th. Count Thian marched from Deinse, and came up to join us; he
encamped before our Left at Wacken, where the River Mandel that comes from
Rouselar falls into the Scheld. The Second Battalion of the Royal Regiment came
to incamp in the Line, and Colonel Lauders was ordered to join Count Thian in
its place; he was likewise reinforced with Mathars Regiment of Dragoons. The 29
th the Body of Foot and the Two Brigades interlined in the Right Wing of Horse,
together with the Spanish Horse upon the Right, and the Brigade of Life-Guards
and Boncourts, with Eppinger and Dopfs Dragoons upon the Left, marched by
Thielt, and so came to Rouselar: The ground being very close here, and
generally all over the Province of Flanders, we had no occasion for Horse; the
Defiles were very bad, and the March long and tedious. The King took his
Quarters at Rouselar, our Right reached to Hooghleede, where the Elector of
Ravaria had his Quarter, and our Left by Rumbek upon the River Mandel; the
ground upon which we encamped was all high enclosures, with rows of Trees upon
all the Hedges, which made the Country hereabouts so close, that one Battalion
could hardly see those upon the Right or Left. The Town of Rouselar is called
in French Roulers (as most of the Towns in this Country have a French and a
Dutch name, which are often very different from one another) and situated near
the Springs of the River Mandel, which falls into the Lys at Wacken. The
Country all about it is very even, though Woody, for which reason if this
little River could afford more water for a good Fosse, the Town might be very
well fortified; it is in the Chatellenie of Ipres three Leagues from thence,
nine from Ghendt, three from Courtray, four from Dixmuyde, and six from Bruges;
this is reckoned the last place of the Pajis conquis, and in time of Peace the
French King had Officers to gather his Duties for Goods Imported or Exported,
as being his utmost Frontier. The Duke of Newbourgh, now Elector Palatine of
the Rhine, is Lord of this place, but he has a bad Tenant in the French King.
The Foot being encamped at Rouselar, all the Horse remained at Wouterghem under
the Command of my Lord of Athlone, and the Two Brigades of Foot interlined,
under the Command of Major General Ramsay; but the Dutch Horse of the Right
Wing joined the Left. Though we were encamped here in very strong and close
ground, yet 'twas commanded by the height or little Hill of Hooghleede (where
we had our Right) which is a rare thing in this level Country: We made several
Redoubts upon it for the security of our Camp, this being the only place by
which we could be attacked. The French upon our March to this place made
several Detachments from their Army for the security of their Country; the
Marshall de Villeroy was commanded with a Body to incamp by Ipres to oppose
our passage of the Canal, which goes from this place by the Knock and Furnes to
Dunkirk; and the Marquis de la Valette had Orders to leave Pont de Espieres to
come and post himself between Furnes and the Fort of Knock for the defense of
these places. We have given an account of both of them in our first relation
for the Year 1692, to which I shall refer the Reader. I must not omit to say
that the Dutch Artillery upon our March to Rouselar, was sent from the Camp at
Wouterghem to Malines its usual Winter-quarter.

The King having now brought all the Enemies Forces in Flanders (except the
Body of Horse Commanded by the Marquis de Harcourt, which was not sufficient to
hinder or oppose his designs) had resolved to besiege Huy, for which end (as we
have said before) great preparations of Ammunitions, and all other necessaries
for a Siege had been prepared at Maestricht; His Majesty had sent also
Lieutenant General de Witz from the Camp at Wanneghem with the Brandenburgh
Horse, to join the Liege Forces to invest the place; but the Care and Conduct
of the Siege was kept for the Duke of Holstein Ploen, Velt-Mareschal General of
the States Forces; accordingly upon our March from Wouterghem to Rouselar, the
King ordered the Duke of Holstein to go and Command the Forces to be employed
in the Siege of Huy, and Major General Cohorne who had remained with his Body
(of which we have already given an account) near Ghendt till this time, was
commanded to march toward Liege.

The 31 th the Three Battalions of Guards, the first of the English Guards, the
second of Dutch Guards, and the third, the second Battalion of Scots Guards,
were ordered to incamp on the other side of the Town of Rouselar toward Ipres,
to cover the Kings Quarters; for the Country being close and Woody made the
Enemies Parties very bold. The same day Quarter-Master-General Dopf was sent to
Dixmuyde to observe the Place; he had an Escorte of 600 Men, Commanded by
Colonel Trelawney; at his return he gave His Majesty an account of the Place,
upon which 'twas Resolved to fortify it.

Sombref to Nivelle, that was taken in one of the Ammunition Wagons with a
lighted Match, was burnt alive, after he had first his Right hand cut off, and
flung into the fire; he was put to the Torture to confess his Ruin, and was
found guilty by the Court-Marshal of designing to blow up our Powder Wagons; I
have not yet seen the Copy of the Sentence, and so I cannot give a farther
account of his Crime, and of the Persons by whom he was set on; I have only
heard that it was the Marquis de Grammont. We had such an Accident in the
Campaign of 1691. the Evening that we returned from Beaumont to the Camp at
Court Sur Heure: The thing was undertaken by one of the Dutch Train; he
actually set fire to Two Bombs, which put the whole Army into an Alarm, and if
the Gunners had not hazarded themselves very much, to fling them out of the
Wagons, it would in all probability have set all our Ammunion Wagons on fire;
he underwent afterward the same punishment at the Camp of St. Gerrard; his
Right hand was cut off, and burnt before his face, and was himself afterward
burnt alive with a small fire, which he endured with a great deal of constancy.

The Third, an Ensign of King James his Irish Guards left the Enemies Camp, and
came over to our Army; and the same day one Pierce Oliver, that had been a
Sergeant in the Dragoons of Valencar and Native of Tournay, was hanged near the
Elector of Bavaria's Quarter: He had deferted the Spanish Service, and went
over to the Enemies, where he turned Partisan; he Spanish Party, and was hanged
the next day for a Deserter. The same the Duke of Wirtemburg began the Review
of the Infantry, and Reviewed this day the Brigade of Guards, the next day he
Reviewed the rest of the Body of Foot; the same day His Majesty went to My Lord
of Athlone's Camp under a strong Escorte, and and because this close Country
was hardly ever without some of the Enemies Parties, they suprized one, of
which they made Fifty Prisoners, killed some, and dispersed the rest. The King
having dined with the Lord of Athlone, returned the same night to the Camp,
after he had ordered a Detachment of Thirty Squadrons of Horse, and some
Dragoons, to march toward Aeth under the Command of Count Tilly,
Major General: This Detachment was made to cover Brusselles from the Garrison
of Mons, which made some Incursions to the very Canal of Brusselles; and also
to observe the Enemy, in case they should make any Detachments toward Huy. The
same day the Regiments of Hackelem, Dedem, and Holstein Beck, were sent to
reinfore the Army to be employed in the Siege of Huy; they were Commanded by
Brigadier Dedem, and followed the next day by the Regiments of Birkenfeldt,
Zobel, and Sparre, and the 6 th by the Regiments of the Rhingrave,
Holstein-Norbourg, Goar, and Dumont, under the Command of the Duke of Holstein
Norbourg, Brigadier; the Regiment of Lowenhaupt was detached the same Day
toward the Canal of Brusselles, to secure it from the Attempt of Parties.

The 7 th. the Duke of Wirtemberg's Quarter took fire, which began in his
Kitchen, and the Wind was so high that it presently consumed above Twenty
Houses to the Leeward, in the Street that goes to Ghendt, most of them being
covered with Straw; but the Duke's Servants had the time to save the best of
his Baggage, and Furniture for the House, so that he suffered no great Damage
by it. The same day all the English Horse and Dragoons, and all the Cavalry
upon English Pay, came up to Rouselar from the Camp of Wouterghem, under the
Command of Monsieur d' Anverquerque, and encamped that Night upon the Left
between Rombeck and Inghelmonster. Wynne's Dragoons, that had been sent from
the Camp of Mount St. Andre to Ghendt to get their Horses in better case, being
now refreshed from the Fatigues they had endured, came up to the Camp along
with them, and the 8 th they were all sent to canton upon the Villages between
our Right and Dixmuyde. My Lord of Athlone left at the same time the Camp of
Wouterghem, and marched to canton the Dutch Cavalry and Dragoons from Nivelle
to St John de Learn, upon the Lys, between Deinse and Ghendt. Major General
Ramsay came the 8 th. to the Camp with the Two Brigades of Foot under his
Command, and encamped upon the Left, where he flanked it near Rombeck. My Lord
of Athlone's Camp being thus separated, Count Thian was ordered to march from
Wacken back to Deinse to fortify that Place, and the government of it, during
the Winter, was given to Brigadier Off arell. This Place is situated upon the
Lys, Three Leagues higher above Ghendt; it lies upon both sides of the River,
and in a convenient Post to cover Ghendt, and part of the Canal of Bruges, from
the Enemies Parties, who before would venture up to the Gates of the Town; and
besides, our Forces now were so numerous that we could not quarter them
conveniently in the Frontier Towns and Garrisons; for which reason we have
fortified several such Posts this Year, to enlarge our Quarters, and advance
them as far as we could toward the Enemy's Frontier.

The 8th. the Dauphine left the Enemy's Camp between Courtray and Menin, to
return to Versailles; by Eight in the Morning he parted from Courtray, being
saluted by a Triple Discharge of the Enemy's Cannon; by Twelve he arrived at
Lisle, and was met at the Gates by the Marshall de Bouflers, the Governor of
the Place since the Death of the Marshall de Humieres, and by the Magistrates;
all the Cannon was fired thrice round the Town and Citadel; he was treated by
the Marshall de Bouflers, and so continued his way toward Versailles. We
could hear very plainly the Enemy's Cannon upon this occasion.

The Resolution being taken to fortify Dixmude for a Winter Quarter, after the
Report which Quarter-Master-General Dopf made of it to His Majesty, Six
Regiments were Commanded on the 9th. to this Place, the Two French Regiments of
Belcastel and Marton, three Danes, the Queen's, Prince Christian and Jutland,
and the Dutch Regiment of Aver; they were Commanded by Major General
Ellenbergh, who has been made Governor of the Place; Captain Cock's Company of
Gunners and Matrosses was sent at the same time, with Fifteen Pieces of Cannon
and Ammunitions, and the Boors were set at work to fortify the Place, assisted
with a Detachment out of every one of these Regiments. I have given a
Description of this Place in my Relation of the Campaign of 1692. to which I
refer the Reader. I have not heard we have altered any thing in this
Fortification, but only made up again the Works which the French left last
Spring when they abandoned it. The same Day the Regiments of Bernstorf-Zell,
and Bulo, were detached from the Camp to march toward Brusselles and Louvain,
and the Suisse Regiment of Milune, and the Regiment of Luo to Maestricht.

The 10 th. the King went toward Dixmuyde, to Review the English Cavalry and
Dragoons, which appeared in very good order, at such a time of the Year, and
after so many Marches.

The 11 th. His Majesty Reviewed the Infantry, which drew out of the Camp upon
Two Lines, all the General Officers being posted upon their several Divisions
of the Army, where they saluted the King as he rid along the Line His Majesty
rid round every Battalion of the Army, to take a more special and exact Review
of them, and his Aid de Camps took an account of the depth and number of the
Files, to compute the Strength of each Battalion. The Body of the Infantry
appeared generally in very good order, the Regiments very full, and in a better
condition than they have been at this time of the Year since the beginning of
the War, notwithstanding the great Marches we had for so many Days together,
from the Meuse to the Scheld. Indeed the Weather was all along very favorable
and free from heat, which gave a great deal of ease to the Soldiers, who rather
marched better the last Days than the first. The same Day the King Reviewed the
Foot, the Dutch Troop of Lifeguard was ordered to march toward Loo to make
the Relays for His Majesty from Breda to that place.

The 12 th the Elector of Bavaria reviewed the Spanish and Bavarian Forces, His
Majesty being present, and they appeared in good order as all the Army had
done. The King dined afterward with Prince Vaudemont.

The 15 th the King went to Dixmuyde to view the place himself, to see the
condition of the Works, and what forwardness they were in, and His Majesty this
day dined with my Lord Auverquerque that commanded the English Cavalry and
Dragoons cantoned about this place. The same day the King had an Express from
the Duke of Holstein from the Camp before Huy, that the 13 th at night we had
advanced our works and approaches to the point of the Counterscarp of the Forts
Rouge and Picard, that our Cannon had made breaches large enough to make an
assault the next day upon these Forts. This place was invested the 7 th by the
Duke of Holstein with the Dutch and Brandenburgh, and the Prince of Tilly with
the Liege Forces. The 9 th the Artillery and Mortars came up by Water from
Liege. The 10 th, 11 th and 12 th, the Besiegers worked at their Batteries,
upon which they mounted their Cannon and Mortars. This Day their Batteries
began to play upon the Two Forts, and the Night they opened the Trenches at
their several Attacks. I shall say no more of the Siege of Huy, but what we had
in our Camp by Expresses from the Duke of Holstein, till we come to the News of
the Capitulation, after which I shall incert the Journal of that Siege, to give
a more particular and exact account of it.

To return to the Camp at Rouselar. The 15 th in the Evening we heard very
great firing toward Dunkirk, by which we soon imagined that our Fleet was
before the place Commanded by Sir Cloudesly Shovel, Vice Admiral: The Marshall
de Villeroy upon the news of our Fleets being before the place, left
immediately his Camp near Ipres and went to Dunkirk, accompanied with several
General Officers to see the success and issue of the undertaking, to be there
ready for the defense of the place. Our Machines had no success here, and the
Enemy were so well provided for our coming, that their Out-Forts did not permit
our Bomb-Ketches to come near enough to do any damage to it.

The 16 th the King had by an Express from the Duke of Holstein, the news of
his having carried the Forts Rouge and Picard by Assault, with about Three
Hundred of the Enemy put to the Sword, and Seventy only escaped out of the Fort
Picard to the Castle, with the Commanding Officer, but a Lieutenant Colonel
that Commanded in the Fort Rouge was killed in the Trench, where he flung
himself in the midst of our Men after he saw the Fort so easily carried by our
Forces.

The 17 th the Regiments of Lesley, Tiffeny, Maitland, Tergueson and Buchan,
were detached from the Camp to march to Dixmuyde, being appointed to have their
Winter Quarters in the Camerlings Ambackt, or the Country about the Canal of
Newport, which is not far from this place. They made Baraques or Huts of Straw
without the Works of Dixmuyde, where they continued encamped to work with the
Garrison at the Fortification till it has been finished; after which they went
into their Winter Quarters: The Fortification of Dixmuyde went on hitherto but
leasurely for want of Men, for which reason these Regiments were detached to
forward the work. The Camp of Rouselar being strong by the closeness of the
ground, and the Wood and Defiles about it, gave us the opportunity of making
securely as many Detachments as we wanted, though we were encamped just by the
Enemies Garrisons and their own Army too. The same day the King by an Express
from the Duke of Holstein, had an account that the Besiegers before Huy had
made themselves Masters the 15 th of a Tower that commands the way that leads
up to the Castle, defended by the Major of the Castle and Forty Men, and the 18
th, that our Batteries were playing upon the Castle, since the taking of the
Two Forts Rouge and Picard, which commanded it, and from whence our Batteries
played with such success against it, that a breach was made, and that he hoped
in a very short time to be Master of the place. The Cannon, when once we were
Masters of the Two Forts, did so much annoy the Besieged in the Castle, that a
Sentinel did not dare to show himself upon the Ramparts of it.

The 19 th the Army had Orders to Forage all the Churches and Cloisters before
us in the Chatellenie of Ipres, and to take out the Corn they had there: The
Town of Rouselar was not spared, and the Cloister of the Augustines was Foraged
as well as the rest, the Country before being the Frontier of the Pajis
conquis, 'twas thought convenient to destroy the Corn and Forage about the
Enemies Garrisons as much as possibly we could, and the Enemy by our incamping
here being kept within their own Garrisons, were no less inconvenient to the
Country round about: They had encamped between Courtray and Menin since the 18
th of the last Month, insomuch that though they had agreed with the Chatellenie
of Lisle to excuse it from Forage, yet we kept them so long here, that they
were forced to break the bargain, and not only the Chatellenie of Lisle was
forced to send Forage to the Army, but the Towns and Villages much more remote
from the Enemies Frontiers were obliged to do the same thing. The 19 th day
Count Tilly, Major General of the States Forces that had been commanded with a
Detachment of Thirty Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons toward Aeth, had the
misfortune to be taken Prisoner in his own Quarters at Mafle, between Aeth and
Mons, by the treachery of one of his own Domestic Servants, who run away to
Mons, and informed the Enemy of the condition of the Major-Generals Quarters,
what Guard it had upon it, and how it might be surprised; who accordingly sent
immediately a strong Party of Dragoons that surprised his Quarters, made him
Prisoner, and carried him to Mons: This is the same Gentleman that had the
misfortune last Year to be attacked by a strong Detachment of the Enemies
Horse, all of the French Kings House, near Tongres, where he was posted with
Nine or Ten Squadrons of Horse, with which he was to join our Army; he was
forced to retreat toward Maestricht with the loss of some of his Baggage; and
not Count Cerclas, now Prince of Tilly, as I said last Year by a mistake.

The 20 th early in the Morning the King left the Army to go by Liege and
Maestricht to Loo, and so to the Hague, in order to repass the Sea. His Majesty
was attended out of the Camp by the Elector of Bavaria, and all the General
Officers of the Army, and had an Escorte of Fourscore Men out of each
Battalion, Commanded by the Prince of Anhault Brigadier; the Detachment out of
the Kings Forces was Commanded under the Prince of Anhault by Colonel Titcomb,
Lieutenant-Colonels, Peyton and Corbet, and Major Sabine, they conveyed the
King to Deinse, where a strong Detachment of Horse out of my Lord of Athlone's
Forces, which were quartered thereabouts, attended to conduct the King farther
on His way. His Majesty passed through the Town of Ghendt, incognito, and lay
that Night at Overmeere between Ghendt and Dendermond, and so His Majesty went
on His Journey toward Liege, good Escortes being laid by relays all along the
way. The King just at his going out of the Camp, had by an Express from the
Duke of Holstein, an account that the Castle of Huy had Capitulated the 17 th,
and that the Garrison was to march out of the breach the next Day, with Drums
beating, Colors flying, and other marks of Honor, but without Artillery, to
Namur. Thus far the account of Huy, as we have had it in the Camp; but because
it has been the most remarkable Action of this Campaign, I shall here incert
the Journal of this Siege.

The Journal of the Siege and taking of the Town and Castle of Huy, with the
several Forts belonging to it, by the Confederate Army, Commanded by His
Highness the Duke of Holstein Ploen, Velt Marshall General of the Armies of
the States General of the United Provinces.
WE have said above that the King, pursuant to the resolutions he had taken of
laying Siege*to Huy, had ordered the Duke of Holstein Ploen from the Camp at
Wouterghem to march toward the Meuse with the Body of Foot and Dragoons
encamped near Ghendt, under the Command of Major General Cohorne; that the
Garrisons of Liege and Maestricht had Orders at the same time to be ready to
march. The Train of Artillery and Mortars, and all things necessary for a Siege
were ready at Maestricht, with Boats to carry them up the River, and expected
only the junction of the Forces to form the Siege to be sent up to Huy.

The 5 th Prince Cerclas of Tilly marched out of Liege to possess himself of
several Posts in the Neighborhood of Huy, with the Cavalry of the Diocese. He
was followed the next Day by the Duke of Holstein, who was now joined by the
Dutch and Brandenburgh Forces, and the Cavalry Commanded by Lieutenant General
de Witz, which in going back to the Meuse from Audenarde, had marched almost
the same way we came to it.

The 7 th all these Forces being joined together posted themselves at all the
avenues leading to the place, and formally invested it; Brigadier Swerin passed
the Meuse with his Brigade of Foot to post himself on the opposite side of the
River to the Town of Huy. I refer the Reader for the description of this place
to what I said of it in my last Years History; I shall only add, that the Fort
Picard, which was then imperfect, was quite finished by the French, and besides
that they had made the Fort Rouge for the greater security of the place. When
Huy was invested, our Army before the place consisted of the Forces following.

The List of the Confederate Army before Huy.
Duke of Holstein Velt-Mareschal General. Prince Cerclas of Tilly, General. De
Witz Lieutenant General. Heyden, Cohorne and Sonsfeldt, Major-Generals. Swerin,
Lindeboom, etc. Brigadiers. Dutch Infantry. Brandenburgh Foot. Brandenburgh
Horse Regim. Battal. Regim. Battal. Regim. Squad. Du Theil 1 Electors Guards 3
Dorfling Dragoons 4 Cohorne 1 Electoral Prince 1 Sonsfeldt Dragoons 4 Lindeboom
1 Prince Phillipe 1 Auspach Dragoons 2 Dutch Infantry. Brandenburgh Foot.
Brandenburgh Horse Regim. Battal. Regim. Battal. Regim. Squad. Swerin 3 Prince
Louis 1 Horse-Granadiers 1 Stockhausen 1 Dorfling 1 Grand Musketeers 1
Friesheim 1 Altholstein 1 Gens d' Arms 1 Ameliswert 1 Denhof 1 Life Regiment 3
Essen 1 Barfus 1 Churprince 3 Churprince 1 Heyden 1 Fleming 3 Prince Phillipe 1
Brand 1 Dorfling 3 Harsolt 1 Lottom 1 Du Hammel 3 Prince Louis 1 Doua 1 Litwits
3 Anhaltdessau 1 Slabendorf 1 Schlipenback 3 Knoring 1 Anhalt 1 Obergen 1 Hult
1 Vandermuklen 1 Horn 1 Battalions 18 Battalions 18 Squndrons 38 Liege
Battalions 4

We had by this List Forty Battalions, which at Five Hundred each Battalion one
with another (the usual way of reckoning the latter end of a Campaign) makes
Twenty Thousand Foot; and Thirty Eight Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, at One
Hundred each Squadron the latter end of a Campaign, makes Three Thousand Eight
Hundred Horse, by which the total of our Army before Huy consisted of Twenty
Three Thousand Eight Hundred Men; the Ten Regiments which were detached from
our Army at Rouselar under the Brigadiers Holstein-Norbourg and Dedem, came to
the Camp before Huy but the very day of the Capitulation, for which reason I
have not incerted their Names in this List.

The same Day that we invested Huy, the Count de Guiscard, Governor of Namur,
who had put himself into the place to defend it in person, went out of it
betimes in the Morning under a good Escorte of Dragoons by an express Order of
the Court, which enjoined him to go back to his Government of Namur, whither he
got with some difficulty: We had the News in our Camp that he was forced to
leave his Baggage behind him, which fell by this means into our hands, but
afterward was returned safely to him. The Count de Guiscard at his going out
paid the Garrison, which was made up of the Regiments of Ponthieu and
Angoumois, consisting of Twelve Companies each, which made between Thirteen and
Fourteen Hundred Foot, and One free Company of Dragoons. The defense of the
place was recommended to Monsieur de Regnac Commandant of the Castle. About
Noon some Deputies from the Magistrates of Huy came to wait upon the Duke of
Holstein by Monsieur de Regnacs leave, to make some Propositions, according to
which he was willing to deliver the Keys of the Town into their hands, and to
retire into the Forts and Castle if the Duke would consent to them.

1. That the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Religion should be maintained in it
in the state it was now. 2. That the Burghers and Inhabitants should return
under the Government of their Natural Prince the Bishop of Liege, and the Sea
being now vacant, of his Illustrious Chapter. 3. That the Magistrates, Mayors,
etc. should be continued in the possession of their Charges, Privileges,
Rights and Liberties, as well as the Burghers and Inhabitants of the Town. 4.
That the Town being under the Power of the Allies, none of the Ecclesiastics
either Secular or Regular, nor the Burghers and Inhabitants, nor those of the
Neighborhood, which have fled thither for refuge shall be insulted, disturbed
or molested in their Persons, Goods or Effects, wherever they may be. 5. That
when the Allies should have taken possession of the Town they should not attack
the Castle from it, and those of the Castle should not commit any Hostilities
against the Forces in the Town. 6. That if the Allies were obliged to raise the
Siege, and to abandon the Town, they should in no wise molest or disturb the
said Ecclesiastics, Burghers and Inhabitants, etc. nor their Effects, nor
burn, ruin or plunder their Houses, nor seize themselves of any of them, upon
any pretext whatever. 7. That in case they abandon the Town, they should not
demolish, cut down, nor blow up the Ramparts, Bulwarks, Towers, Gates,
Barrieres, or any other works of defense belonging to the Town. 8. That they
should not demolish nor do any damage to the great Bridge of the Town upon the
Meuse, nor those built upon any Rivulets, either within the Town or liberties
of it. 9. That they should not sieze themselves of, nor take any Bell, or piece
of Metal belonging to the Town, Ecclesiastics or Inhabitants, neither should
they cause them to be redeemed for money or otherwise. 10. That it should be
Lawful for any of the Burghers and Inhabitants, to retire where they please
with their Effects for the space of six Months. 11. That the Hospitals, Pious
Houses and Lumber Houses, should not be molested nor disturbed in any of their
Revenues or Effects.
These are the Articles upon which the Town was given up to the Allies, most of
them are upon condition the Allies should raise the Siege of the place; by
which it appears that the Besieged had great hopes of it. About Four in the
Afternoon Monsieur de Regnac caused the following Article to be added to it.

That the Allies should not attack the Castle by the Town or Faubourgs, nor
cause any Troops to pass the Bridge in a Body during the Siege; nor any Cannon,
Ammunitions or any other Provisions of War; and that by virtue of this
Capitulation he should deliver the next Day by Six in the Morning the Keys of
the Town in the hands of the Magistrate.

This Capitulation having been agreed unto, and signed by the Duke of Holstein,
and Monsieur de Regnac, the Besieged left the Town, and retired into the Castle
and Forts; Four of of our Battalions entered into the place to take possession
of it. Having now the Castle and Forts to besiege, the Duke of Holstein took
his Quarter upon the Hill of Coureux; with most of the Generals; we began to
work at our Batteries, and we finished our Bridge of Communication at Tavern.
The Enemy made a great Fire with their Artillery against our Works, and shot
some Bombs, but without doing any considerable damage. The Evening they made a
Salley on that side where Major General Cohorne Commanded, thinking to possess
themselves of three Fieldpieces we had there, but the Guard having perceived
it gave the Alarm, and we repulsed the Enemy, with some loss on their Side.

The 9 th. the Besieged continued to fire with their Artillery, but not so
briskly as the day before, and some Deserters, who came over to us, reported,
that they had some Gunners killed in the Fort Picard by three Pieces of Cannon
which had broke. We hastened our Work at the Batteries, and other Works, and
landed as fast as we could our heavy Artillery, which had come up to our Bridge
of Communication at Tavern, by the Meuse, consisting of Fifty and Five
battering Pieces, and Twenty Eight Mortars, besides the Cannon we had brought
by Land.

The 10 th. we had advice that the Besieged, resolving to defend themselves to
the last extremity, did work within as fast as they could, chiefly to cover
themselves in their Works with Earth and Hay, to defend themselves from our
Bombs: They fired upon none but those who appeared out of the Faubourgs of the
Place, and made but a small Fire upon us this day, and hitherto they had killed
us but very few Men

The 11 th. the Enemy fired upon us with their Cannon and Mortars, with more
Vigor than they had done the day before. We finished this Enening our
Batteries for Cannon and Mortars; we had one upon the Hill of Coureux, the
second near the Counterscarpe; Major General Cohorne had one above Croisiers,
upon the Saur; Brigadier Swerin another near St. Leonard; and Prince Circlas of
Tilly had the fifth.

The 12 th. the Enemy fired very briskly upon us till Nine in the Morning, that
the Duke of Holstein being come to the chief Battery upon the Hill de Coureux,
gave the Signal by ordering a Bomb to be fired in the Air, after which this,
and all other Batteries, both of Cannon and Mortars, fired without
intermission; all the Generals had posted themselves by the main Battery, to be
Spectators of this Work. This Evening we opened the Trenches at the
Brandenbourg Quarter, who directed their Attack toward the Fort Picard; the
rest did the same at their other Attacks.

The 13 th. we had a thick Fog in the Morning, which interrupted the Vigor of
our Fire, but as soon as it was over, our Cannon and Mortars began to play with
more force from all our Batteries; that of St. Leonard fired perpendicular upon
the Head of the Fort Picard, to make a Breach. The Enemy, who kept themselves
in their Works, fired but seldom with Two Six-pounders, of which we soon
dismounted one; they fired some Vollies of Shot upon the Bridge of the Town,
which caused the Duke of Holstein to send a Message to Monsieur de Regnac, to
let him know, that it was against the Tenor of the Capitulation, which would
oblige him to give no quarter when once he should be Master of the Castle: The
Governor endeavored to excuse himself, but the Duke of Holstein returned for
Answer by a Drum, that he was a German and could not understand the wrangling
of the French. A Deserter came in, and told us, that the Besieged could not
hold out much longer, that our Bombs had ruined their Well, and had broke to
pieces most of their Casks filled with Beer and Water, that they had spoiled
their Provisions, and put their Magazines of Fascines on fire; thereupon we
pushed our Approaches to the Foot of the Counterscarpe, and the Besieged killed
and wounded some of our Soldiers.

The 14 th. the Enemies Fire ceased. The General held a Council of War, where
it was concluded, That the Breach in the Forts Rouge and Picard being wide
enough for an Assault, Orders should be given to the Brandenbourgers, who were
the most advanced, to prepare themselves for it; and all things being ready,
the Signal was given about Four in the Afternoon, after which they made the
Assault upon the Fort Picard with so much bravery, that in less than half an
hour they carried it Sword in hand, without any great resistance from the
Enemy, of whom they made a great slaughter: The Fort Rouge had the same
success; our People came into the place with the Enemies, before they had time
to know themselves. The Paris Gazette gave an account that they sustained our
Assault twice, but that we carried it the third time, after a vigorous
Resistance. Thus it is honorable to have to do with a proud Enemy. We carried
at the same time the Tower of St. Leonard, and another which surrendered at
discretion: Monsieur de Condron, the King's Lieutenant that Commanded in these
Forts, escaped with 60 or 70 Men, out of 300, though he was very much wounded,
after he had nailed three pieces of Cannon, which he was forced to leave in our
power, and sprung a Mine, which had no effect at all. Among the Prisoners we
took, those of note were Monsieur de Tromboy, Lieutenant Colonel of the
Regiment of Ponthien, one Major, three Captains, aad other Officers; but the
Sieur Fronier, Lieutenant Colonel of Angoumois, was not found in the Castle,
nor amongst the Prisoners, and so it was concluded that he was killed: Our
Soldiers stripped all those that were killed naked, so that he could not be
found. We had in this Action but 9 or 10 Soldiers killed, and some wounded.

The 15 th. we changed some Batteries, with which we continued our Fire, to
ruin all the Works, the Casemates, etc. of the Castle. We had several Fascines
brought to fill the Ditch, and disposed all things for an Assault; about Eleven
in the Evening the Duke of Holstein sent to summon the Commandant to surrender
and deliver to the Magisttates of the Town diverse Burthers whom he detained in
the Castle, contrary to the Capitulation. During this Message we had a
cessation of Arms for half an hour; at which time the Officer, the Duke of
Holstein had sent, returned with this Answer from the Commandant, That it was
not time yet to surrender, that he would stay till things were brought to a
greater Extremity, that for the Burghers demanded he had reason to retain them
without explaining himself any further. The Besieged did think of making a
Retrenchment in the Castle, where to retreat and capitulate in case of an
Assault.

The 16 th. we began again, as soon as it was day, to fire from all our
Batteries to make the Breach wider, and to overthrow all the Defense the
Besieged had, but we found it more difficult than was at first believed, to
bring down the heaps of Stone at the Breach.

The 17 th. we continued the same Work till One in the Afternoon, that the
Besieged beat the Chamade, and asked to capitulate, which surprised us very
much, since they might yet have defended themselves very well for some days;
for though the Breach was wide enough, yet 'twas very difficult to go up to it.
Hostages were Exchanged on both Sides, and the Count de Lur, Colonel of the
Regiment of Angoumois, brought the Conditions in Writing to the Duke of
Holstein, according to which the Commandant would deliver up the Castle, which
after examination some were agreed unto, and some rejected. We would have given
no other Conditions but those which the Marshall de Villeroy had granted the
Year before to the Baron de Ronesse when he took it, which caused great
contestations on both Sides, and several Messages backwards and forwards. The
French insisted very much to have marched out with Cannon, which was absolutely
refused; but at last the Duke of Holstein sent word to Monsieur de Regnac, If
that Night passed without accepting the Conditions he had prescribed, that the
next Morning he would make a general Assault upon the Place, without any regard
to the said Conditions; which Message had the success we expected; for the
Count de Lur came about Midnight to the Duke of Holstein with Monsieur de
Regnac's Cousent to the said Articles, which I shall here insert for the
satisfaction of the Reader, as they were proposed by Monsieur de Regnac, and
granted by the Duke of Holstein Ploen.

The Capitulation Granted by the Duke of Holstein Ploen Commanding the
Confederate Army before Huy, to Monsieur de Regnac, Commandant for the French
King in the Castle of Huy.
I. THat the Garrison shall go out of the place with Arms and Baggage, Drums
beating, Colors flying, Matches lighted at both ends, and that they shall
march out of the Breach. Granted.

II. That they shall carry out along with them Two Brass Pieces of Cannon and
Mortars which are in the place, which shall be at the choice of the Commandant
of the Castle. Rejected.

III. That the Garrison with the Artillery, the Officers of the State-Major,
the Commissaries of War, the Ingeniers and Commissaries of the Artillery, etc.
and generally all those that are employed in the Kings Service in the said
Castle, shall march out to morrow at Nine a Clock in the Morning, with Monsieur
de Regnac, to be conducted to Namur by water, with their Equipage, Baggage,
Sick and VVounded, at the Charges of the Allies, who shall cause Boats to be
provided, with Boatmen and Horses, and a good Escorte of One Hundred Horsemen
for their safety, which shall be ready to morrow by Nine in the Morning, to go
that same Day to Namur. Granted thus far by the Duke of Holstein. That Boats
shall be provided for Baggage for the Sick and VVounded that are in a condition
to go out of the Garrison, but the rest mentioned in this Article shall march
on foot to Namur, by the shortest road under a good Escorte, and shall go out
to Morrow by Nine at farthest in the Morning.

IV. That the Sick and VVounded who are not in a condition to be transported to
Namur shall remain in the Town to be dressed and looked after at the expense of
the Allies, till they are able to go back to their several Posts, and then they
shall have sufficient Passports for their Journey. Granted.

V. That the Deserters shall not be reclam'd on either side. Rejected.

VI. That all Officers and Soldiers that have been made Prisoners during the
Siege shall be set at liberty without Ransom. Granted, for those only that were
made Prisoners during the Siege of the Castle.

VII. That no Officer or Soldier shall be Arrested for Debts, or otherwise; nor
any other Persons comprehended in this Capitulation. So far agreed unto by the
Duke of Holstein: That this Article shall be regulated according as the French
observed it when they took Huy; but it is understood, that if the Officers owe
any thing to the Burghers of the Town, that the Governor shall oblige himself
for the payment.

VIII. That we shall not command nor expect any restitution of the Provisions
which might have been taken in the Town or Neighboring Villages to put in the
Castle or otherwise. Granted.

IX. That we shall not search nor visit any Equipages belonging to the Officers
or others marching out of the Castle. Granted.

X. That after the Signing of the Capitulation, the Hostages shall be restored
on both sides. Granted.

XI. That when this Capitulation shall be Signed, the Duke of Holstein may send
Fifty Men to take possession of the Gate of the Castle which has a Drawbridge.
The Gate of the Castle shall be possessed this Day by One Hundred Men; and the
Besieged shall leave all the Magazines in the state they are now; and they
shall show to the Hostages sent, the place and state of their Mines, and that
faithfully.

The same Day that the Garrison began to Capitulate, the Duke of Holstein
Norbourg, and Brigadier Dedem, came to the Camp before Huy, with the Ten
Regiments that had been sent from our main Army at Rouselar, viz. the
Rhingrave, Birkenfeldt, Dumont, Heukelom, Dedem, Holstein-Norbourg, Gohr,
Holstein-Beck and Sparre, of which we have given an account before

According to the Capitulation Monsieur de Regnac marched out of the Castle
between Nine and Ten in the Morning by the Breach, at the head of his Garrison,
consisting of about Seven Hundred Men carrying Arms, which remained of Thirteen
or Fourteen Hundred, they had at the beginning of the Siege; they had about
Three Hundred wounded. The Governor Regnac Complemented the Duke of Holstein
as he passed by him, which the Duke returned very civilly. We had the news in
our Camp that the Breach was so difficult that the Garrison had much ado to
march out of it, and that finding this way so difficult, the Governor would
willingly have changed the First Article of the Capitulation, and have marched
out of the Gate; but the Duke of Holstein answered, That Capitulations were
Sacred, and exactly to be observed; and therefore since they had made their
bargain to march out of the Breach, they conld not go out any other way. We
obliged the French to leave Hostages for the payment of their Debts contracted
in the Town; and of the Cattle which they had taken before the Siege from the
Inhabitants of the Town, and neighboring Villages. We took likewise our
Deserters which were among the French in this place. The same Morning we sent a
Detachment of Six Hundred Foot of the Dutch, Brandenburgh and Liege Forces to
take possession of the Castle, where they entered by the Breach, the Sieur Tobie
Ingenier had the command of it given him till other Orders; Brigadier Lindeboom
was made Governor of the Town. It Is a very wonderful thing that during the
Siege we had not above Forty Men killed and wounded, no Officer killed, and
none wounded but a Brandenburgh Major, which adds very much to the Reputation
of the General; that he has in so little time, and with so little loss, reduced
a place to the Allies which the French had taken as much care as they could to
fortify, and to furnish it with all things necessary for a good defense;
notwithstanding, this place was taken in five days from the opening of the
Trenches, which is no longer than the Baron de Ronesse defended it last Year
against the French. 'Twas invested by the Marshall de Villeroy the 9 th, the
Trench was opened the 10 th, and the Castle surrendered the 14 th of July;
though the Fort Picard was not then quite finished, and that the Enemy has
since added the Fort Rouge, both which are situated upon the points of Hills
which commanded the Castle; it is true that since we had made our selves Masters
of these two Forts, they so much commanded the Castle, that the Enemy could not
persuade the Soldiers to stand Sentry upon the Ramparts, but they kept
themselves close under cover as much as they could. The Governor could expect
no relief, and that I believe was the reason why he would not defend the place
to the last extremity. The French could not relieve it from Flanders, because
they could not make a sufficient Detachment without hazarding Ipres, and other
Towns on this side; and Prince Louis of Baden passed the Rhine much about the
same time, so that he could not expect any succor from the Marshall de Lorge,
who was obliged to keep all his Forces against Prince Louis of Baden, who was
on this side of the Rhine in the Enemies Country. As soon as we had taken
possession of the Castle, the Clergy, Religious, and Inhabitants of the Town
went to the chief Church (which has a Chapter consisting of a Dean and Secular
Canons) where Te Deum was sung for their deliverance from the French Yoke, and
for being restored to their Lawful Prince the Bishop, but now (the Sea being
vacant) to the Dean and Chapter of Liege, that had the Administration of the
Government, as usually till the Bishop Elect had his Confirmation from Rome.
The Dean and Chapter of Liege had likewise Te Deum sung in the Cathedral Church
of St. Lambert, and a triple discharge of all the Canon round the Town, to
express their joy for the reduction of this place to the Government of Liege.
But before I part with the Siege of Huy, I cannot omit to show the importance
and consequence of it to the Allies. We have already spoken of the great
inconveniences we suffered by having Liege for our Frontier Garrison, which
being a very large place, situated amongst Hills, required a good Army for its
defense; so that whilst Liege was our Frontier, we could not well act
defensively against the Enemy, because it took up those Men within it for its
defense which should have been required elsewhere: That very Army which the
Duke of Holstein had before it, was but the Garrison of Liege, and some
Regiments of Maestricht; and though we exceeded the French Army by much,
including these Forces of Liege, yet as long as the French had Huy, they could
still hinder the junction of these Forces with us, or else the Town of Liege
must be left exposed to them. But we having advanced our Frontier by the taking
of this place, a small Garrison will serve Liege, and as much as will keep the
Citadels will be sufficient; so that by the taking of Huy, we can without
raising One Man, have above Twenty Battalions more in the Field the next
Campaign. This is sufficient to show the Consequence of Huy, and of what
Importance it is to either side.

It is now time to return from the Siege of Huy, to our Camp at Rouselar, and
to bring things to the conclusion of the Campaign. The King, as we have said,
left the Army here the 20 th, and went that day by Deinse and Ghendt to
Overmeere, where His Majesty lay that night; but at his passing by my Lord of
Athlones Quarters, where the Dutch Cavalry was cantoned, the King ordered
Major General Hubert to go and command the Body of Horse and Dragoons we had by
Aeth, in the absence of Count Tilly, who (as we have said before) had been
taken Prifoner from his very Quarters by a Detachment of the Enemies from the
Garrison of Mons.

The 21 th the First Troop of Guards, Commanded by my Lord of Scarborough, was
sent to quarter at Breda, and the Horse-Granadiers to Bois le duc; and now some
Regiments went off daily from the Camp to go into Winter Quarters.

The 22 th we made a Detachment to cover our Soldiers, who went to marode up
and down the Country; which before occasioned many of them to be taken
Prisoners by the Enemy; for the Country hereabours abounded in all manner of
Fruits, but Roots especially, as Turnips, Parsnips and Potatoes; but when they
began to grow scarce near the Camp, the Soldiers could not be hindered from
going farther to gather them, which was the cause that the Enemies Parties
daily took a great many Prisoners; for which reason 'twas thought convenient to
have set days upon which the Soldiers should have liberty, a Man of a Tent, to
go and gather Roots and Fruits, and a Detachment was ordered out of the Army to
cover them; but some greater inconveniences happened by this way, for which
reason 'twas since left off. If the Camp at Rouselar was strong and secure, so
that we could make what Detachments we pleased from thence, yet in other cases
'twas very inconvenient; the Country all about it was close and Woody, which
sheltered the Enemies Parties, which were so frequent that our Sulters
underwent great hazards to get Provisions for the Camp; and our Bread-Waggons
were several times attack^d by these Parites; for the Train of the
Bread-Waggons and Sutlers who took the opportnnity of Convoys, made a Line of
such length through the narrow ways of this Country, that 'twas impossible for
our Detachments to cover them all along; so that the Enemies Parties, which lay
in the Woods, would often sally out when they saw their opportunity, and take
the Horses from the Wagons, which was all they look*d for, and so run away
with their booty as fast as they could; about this time a Party of the Enemy
attacked our Bread-Waggons, but part of our Detachment which was near, hindered
them from stealing any Horses; yet being in close Ambuscade they fired upon our
Men, where Captain Sacheverel of Colonel Titcombs Regiment, that commanded this
part of the Detachment, had the misfortune to be wounded mortally; which is the
only Officer of our Army I have heard of, that has been killed this Campaign by
the Enemy.

The 23 th the King, who had left the Camp at Rouselar the 20 th, came to Liege
the 23 th about Noon; His Majesty was waited upon by Deputies from the Chapter
to Complement Him upon his arrival to this place, and by Prince Cerclas of
Tilly, the Liege General, and the Cannon was fired all round the Town. His
Majesty did not go into the place, but only rid round the Lines and Works to
see the condition they were in, and how far His Majesty could depend upon them,
whereby to take His Measures for the next Campaign. That Evening the King went
to Maestricht, and lay in the Duke of Holstein-Ploens house (the Governor)
which had been prepared for His Majesty's reception; and the next day the King
went on to Loo, where His Majesty arrived the 26 th to take his usual
Divertisements after the closing of the Campaign.

The 25 th we sent a reinforcement from the Camp at Rouselar of Thirty Gunners
and Matrosses, with Stores to Dixmuyde.

The 26 th the Elector of Bavaria and Prince Vaudemont left the Army early in
the Morning to go to Brussels, 16 Men being commanded out of each Battalion, by
Two in the Morning, to Escorte his Electoral Highness as far as Deinse, from
whence relays were ready upon the Road by Ghendt to Brussels. The Command of
the Army remained now to the D. of Wirtemberg, who had thereupon the Honors
paid him which are given to a General in Chief. The same day the Army had
Orders to forage all the Churches and Cloisters in our Front toward the Enemy,
and to take all their Corn (as we had before) to leave the Enemies Country
hereabouts as bare as we could.

The 28 th the Bavarian Foot and Dragoons marched away from the Camp to go into
Quarters; they were encamped upon the height of Hooghleode, where they flanked
our Right, and covered the Electors Quarters; but because this Hill commanded
our Camp, 5 Battalions of the Brigade of Rantzow and Dedem were sent the same
day to incamp in their places, to defend the Redoubts which we had made at our
first coming to fortify this Hill against the Enemy. The same day the Barracks
of the Battalion of the Second Regiment of English Guards (whereof my Lord Cuts
is now Colonel in the room of the late Lieutenant General Taldmash) took fire,
the wind drove the flame to the Left, where it chanced to be advanced forward
to the Front of the Dutch Guards, or else the fire might have done more
mischief in our Straw-Camp, which is very dangerous, when an Army is thus
hutted all along in Straw.

The 29 th the D. of Holstein-Ploen came back from the Siege of Huy to the
Camp, to command the Army; he was Complemented by all the Generals upon his
arrival, and the good success he had at Huy: the Marshall de Luxemburgh sent
him a Complement of 2 very fine Mules. The D. of Holstein at his coming away
from Huy dispersed the Troops employed in the Siege. The Baron de Heyden was
sent to incamp near Liege by the Ourte, which rises in the Pajis de Luxemburgh,
and passes through the Duchy of Bouillon, and bois d' Ardenne, and so falls
into the Meuse at Liege. Lieutenant General de Witz was sent with the
Brandenburgh Horse and Dragoons toward the Pajis de Luxemburgh, to raise
Contributions in the Enemies Country, and the Dutch Foot commanded by
Major General Cohorne remained encamped by Huy till the Breaches were repaired;
of which six Battalions, and two of the Liege Foot were sent into the Town and
Castle, to keep a strong Garrison in the place, which is now our Frontier to
the Enemy.

The 30 th the Second Troop of Life-Guards commanded by the D. of Ormond, and
the Third by my L. Rivers, marched out of the Camp toward their
Winter Quarters at Breda. The French which now wanted Forage very much by their
long continuance in their Camp between Courtray and Moorselle, made a
considerable Detachment to the other side of the Scheld between Mons and
Tournay, commanded by the Marshall de Bouflers, to subsist them more
conveniently there; and Major General Hubert, who commanded our Detachment of
Horse and Dragoons near Aeth, was now marched toward Wavre and Genap: It may
be the Enemy suspected some design against Charleroy by this motion, for which
reason the Marshall de Bouflers was commanded with this Body toward Mons.

October 1. All our heavy Artillery was sent to Ghendt (and none remained but
the light Fieldpieces) under the Convoy of the Battalion of the Second
Regiment of Guards, whose Barraques had been burnt (for which reason they were
now sent to Winter Quarters at Ghendt) and the Regiments of Tettan, Salisch and
Bieck which marched to Maestricht. Colonel Titcomb had this day the same
misfortune the Second Regiment of Guards had some days before.

The 3 d our Bread-Waggons were again set upon by the Enemies Parties, and as
they made a false attack upon the Center of the Wagons, where our Detachment
came for relief, they had the opportunity to steal several Horses from the
Front. Our Camp was so far toward the Enemies Frontier Garrisons, that
Courtray was nearer Ghendt, from whence we had our Bread, than Rouselar. This,
with the closeness of the ground in our Rear, made the Enemies Parties very
successful, who had all the advantage they could desire, for such undertakings.
But if the Camp of Rouselar was a perfect Wood when we came to it, insomuch
that any Regiment could not discover the Line upon the Right or Left; yet
before we parted with it we made it a Plain, for above half an English Mile in
the Front and Rear. The Soldiers cut down the Wood and Hedges to build their
Huts, and afterward to burn and make fires withal. 'Twas really pity to see
many fine Trees and stately Oaks cut down, and yet these are the least
inconveniences a Country suffers, that is the unhappy and miserable seat of
War. This reflection ought to make us set the greatest value in the World upon
our domestic Peace, and to let War be any where else (whatever it may cost us)
rather than have it at home; and if the mischiefs of War are so great, that
when David was put to his choice of Punishments for his Sin, he chose rather
the Pestilence, or to be chasten'd by the hand of God, than to have a War at
home: Certainly those are to be looked upon as the most unnatural monsters in
the world, who would disturb the Peace of our Government under any pretext
whatsoever; and yet so much the more when it is only to satisfy their own
ambitious revenge or discontent.

The 5 th the Regiments that were to be Quartered at Audenarde marched out of
the Field to go to their Garrison.

The 6 th the whole Army began to separate in order to march into
Winter Quarters; the Garrisons of Bruges, Ostend and Sluys, marched away under
the command of Major General Ramsay, and all the heavy Baggage of the remainder
of the Army was sent away under the Escorte of the Regiments of Noyelles,
Oxensterne, St. Paul and Marquet, which marched to Brussels; and the next day
the whole Camp broke up at Rousetar: We had a good Rear-guard to cover our
March, but the Enemy did not appear to disturb it; and so all the Regiments
marched toward their several Quarters that had been assigned them.

The 9 th the Marshall de Luxemburgh came to view our Camp at Rousclar, with
the Marshall de Villeroy, and 4000 Horse of the French Kings Household; 'twas
supposed his design was to disturb the Quarters of our English Cavalry cantoned
about Dixmuyde; but my L. Auverquerque gave such Orders for the defense of
their Quarters, that the Marshall de Luxemburgh did not think convenient to
attack them, and so he went back again to his Camp at Courtray to give Orders
for the separation of the French Army into their Winter Quarters, which though
they had been now above 7 weeks in this Camp, yet they could not stir from it
till our Army had left the field. My L. of Athlone marched with the Dutch
Cavalry from his Quarters near Deinse toward Ninove, to cover the Works we
made at this place, and Gramont upon the Dender, to make them serve for a
Winter-Quarter, and to lodge our Troops as near as possibly we could to the
Enemies Frontiers. The D. of Holstein, after the separation of our Army, went
to wait upon the King at the Hague, (where His Majesty arrived the 13 th from
Loo) and the General Officers to their respective Quarters where they command.

The 14 th and 15 th the French Army left the Camp of Courtray to go into
Winter Quarters, and the Mareschals of Luxemburgh and Villeroy went away for
the Court; but the Marshall of Bouflers staid to take possession of his New
Government of Lifle, and the French Flanders.

About the 16 th. all the Cavalry and Dragoons left the Villages where they
were cantoned, to go into their Quarters, and Dixmuyde being in a condition of
defense, not only the English Horse and Dragoons marched into Quarters, but the
five Regiments that had their Quarters assigned them in the Comerlings Ambacht,
which had been sent here to forward the Work of the Fortification* Count Thian
separated his Army from Deinse, which was now fortified, and Four Regiments
were left in the place under the Command of Brigadier Offarrel.

The Army being newly separated into Quarters on both fides, I shall only beg
leave to make some Reflections upon the present state of Affairs, which may
serve to close up this Narrative. The Scale of War had inclined very much in
the former Campagnes to France, and the French King has had very great success
against the Allies; but the Event of this Campaign is sufficient to convince
them, that if the French have had success, it has been because they did not
make their best Efforts in a vigorous prosecution of the common Cause: For now,
that the Allies have been sensible of the necessity of augmenting their Forces,
we find the Scale to turn. The Enemy, who before were very stirring and active
upon our Frontiers, have been forced this Year to preserve their own, and think
they have made a good Campaign, when they have been about Eleven Weeks of it
imcamped under the Cannon of their own Garrisons; a Month by Huy, and above
seven Weeks between Courtray and Menin; and yet have not been able to act so
far defensively, as to hinder us from taking of Huy, a Place of equal
importance to both Sides. The Marshall de Lorges (notwithstanding the great
Matters the Turks expected from their Allie against the Empire) has been forced
to keep on this side of the Rhine almost all the Campaign, and to suffer Prince
Lovis of Baden to pass this River, and raise Contributions in Alsatia; and in
all likelihood more would have been done, if the apprehensions we had for
Hungary at that time, and the sudden Swelling of the Rhine, had not obliged
Prince Lovis to re pass the River. The Marshall of Catinat has done as little
in Savoy; he has acted wholly upon the defensive, to secure Provence and
Dauphine from an Invasion* There was nothing left but Catalonia for the French
King to talk of Conquests and Victories, and the Success due to the Justice of
his Arms, which has been his last Shift; where he has chosen rather to consume
and ruin an Army by the intemperateness of a hot Climate, than want a Te Deum
in the Great Church of Paris to keep up the Hearts of his Subjects. It has
appeared by all that has passed in this War, that the French King loves much
more the Laurels that grow in Flanders, upon the Rhine, or in Piedmont, than
those which Catalonia affords; so that Gironne and Palamos are but a Shift to
cover a weakened Power: And I believe that those who know the state of Spain,
don't think the French King much the greater Conqueror for it: But yet we have
had this Advantage by it, That the French King has been forced to discover his
Weakness at Sea, in a Place where he had hitherto rid, Neptune-like, Lord and
Sovereign of it, and our Fleet no sooner appeared in the Mediterranean, but the
Marshall de Tourville thought fit to leave that Sea to our Power, and retired
into the Harbor of Thoulon.

If therefore it appears by the Event of this Campaign, that the French Power
and Greatness does begin to abate, it ought to give the greatest encouragement
in the world to the Allies, to act so much the more vigorously in the
prosecution of this present War. If the Efforts of the Fren^ch begin to lessen,
let not ours be the weaker for it; but on the contrary, let them be so much the
stronger, and the more powerful. This will be the way to make a quick and happy
End of the War, and to procure a solid and lasting Peace, which is the only
design the Allies propose to themselves in this present War; which is so just,
so good and laudable, and so much becoming Christians, that if we will act our
part as we ought to do, we may justly expect God's blessing upon it. The
Experience the World has had of Lovis XIV. since the beginning of his Reign, is
sufficient to convince all Mankind, that as long as his Power is so great, as
his Encroachments upon his Neighbors have made it, it is in vain to expect a
solid and durable Peace. If we survey his History from the beginning of this
Monarch's Reign, we shall find, that the longest Peace he has had with his
Neighbors, has not lasted Seven Years, which was from the Pyrenean Treaty to
1667. That all along he had invaded the Dominions and States of his Neighbors,
without any regard to Treaties, though never so sacred; and therefore if we
should let this Opportunity slip, can we expect a lasting Peace so long as he
has Power sufficient to disturb it when he pleases? I dare say, that the French
King's own Subjects, if they value the Peace and Quiet of Christendom, must be
concerned themselves, and have an interest in the common Cause of the Allies,
which has no other end but to procure it; and consequently, that they
themselves are sensible of the necessity of the French King's Power to be less
in order to obtain it.

I shall yet beg leave to address my self to Englishmen in particular, who have
so great an interest in the present War, that our Religion and Liberties cannot
be reckoned upon a sure Basis, nor our Nation flourish, so long as the French
Power is so great; therefore it is absolutely our interest to use our utmost
endeavors to make it less; whatever it may cost us, yet we cannot pay too dear
for it. If we should not take hold of this occasion, and use our utmost
endeavors to compass an End so beneficial to the Honor, Safety, and
flourishing of the Nation, what will our Posterity say of us, when it may be
they have those Fetters on which it is now in our power to break, nay which is
worse, which we may live to wear our selves, and to be wise too late? If such
miserable Times should happen through our neglect of this present Occasion,
will not our Posterity curse our Memory, if we do not live to blame our selves
for it? If we justly condemn our former Governments, because they have suffered
France to arrive to a Power so prejudicial to our Safety and Interest, when
they might, and ought, to have hindered it, should not we justly deserve the
most ignominious Character that can be printed upon paper, if we neglect so
fair an opportunity as this, to assert the Honor and Credit of our Nation, and
to Establish our own Religion and Liberty upon a sure Foundation? We make so
considerable a Figure in this present War, and England has such a share in it,
that by our vigorous prosecution of it, we shall not only secure our Rights and
Liberties, but we shall have the Credit, under the Care of our Wise, Great, and
Just Monarch, to free the rest of Christendom from Slavery; which will gain our
Nation such a Credit, Renown, and Reputation abroad, as will make England
flourish (when we have compassed a Lasting and Solid Peace) more than ever it
has done hitherto, and it will abundantly repay our present Charges with
Interest. And at the same time that the French King's Efforts are less, since
his Offers of Peace are daily so much the greater, we may reasonably expect,
that if we do our duty as we ought, in this present Conjuncture, we shall soon
compass this wished for, firm, and Lasting Peace.

A List of the Winter Quarters for the King's Forces, for the Year, 1694.
INFANTRY.
GHENDT: The Three Battalions of English Guards, Fitzpatrick, Frederic
Hamilton, Collingwood, La Meloniere, Danish Guards, Prince Frederic, Prince
George, Zealand, Fuknen Packmoer, or Brandenbourg, Nassau. BRVGES: Regiment of
Scots Guards, Royal Regiment, Lloyd, Cuts now Colonel Seymour, Rada, Brewer,
Titcomb, Collier, Castleton, Ingoldesby. Note, that the Three Regiments of
Seymour, Rada, and Collier, came over from England the latter end of August,
and have not been in the Field this Year. MALINES: Churchil, Trelawney,
Granville, Earl. DENDERMOND: Selwyn, Stanley. OSTEND: St. George, Mackay,
Graham. DIXMVYDE: Belcastel, Marton, Queen of Denmark, Prince Christian,
Jutland, Aver. DEINSE: Offerrel, Lauder, Strathnaver, George Hamilton. DAMME:
Argyle. In the Villages of Willebrook* and near Canal of Brusselles, the Two
Battalions of Dutch Guards. In the Camerling's 'Ambacht, or Villages near the
Canal of Newport, Lesley, Tiffeny, Maitland, Ferguson, Buchan. LEER: St. Paul,
Lewenhaupt, Guards of Hanover. AVDENARDE: Guards of Wolfembuttel, Hering. In
the Villages of Musen and Heuens, Cinquilles.
CAVALRY.
BREDA: Portland, Searborough, Ormond, Rivers, Life-Guards. HAGVE:
Auverquerque, Life-Guards. BOISLEDVC: Horse-Granadiers. GHENDT: Lumley,
Schomberg, Coy, Langston, Wood, Galloway, Windham, Leveson, Wirtemberg, La
Forest, Zeestadt. BRVGES: Zuglenstein, Boncourt, Schack, Vittinghof,
Tennaghel, Being the Regiment that was lately Scravenmoor 's. St.
GERTRVDENBERG: Montpouillan. In the Villages between Ghendt and the Sas Van
Ghendt, Eppinger, Mathews, Levingston, Fairfax, Essex, Win, Cunningham,
Dragoons.
FINIS.

