A DISCOURSE UPON Grants and Resumptions. Showing How our ANCESTORS Have
Proceeded with such MINISTERS As have Procured to Themselves GRANTS OF THE
Crown-Revenue; And that the Forfeited ESTATES Ought to be Applied toward the
Payment of the Public DEBTS. By the AUTHOR of, The Essay on Ways and Means.

Apud Sapientes cassa habebantur, quae neque dari, neque accipi, salva
Republica poterant. Tacit. Hist. Lib. III. LONDON: Printed for JAMES KNAPTON,
at the Crown, in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

INDEX.
SECTION. I. INTRODUCTION.
ALL Governments wisely Constituted have set a aside a Proportion of their
Wealth for Public Uses, Page 1 In the Kingships settled by the Goths, Hunns
and Vandals, the Conquered Country was divided, 3 Good Princes have always
reckoned their Revenues as belonging to the Public, ibid. Thrift in the
Public necessary, because indigent Princes have seldom been known to compass
great Things, 5 Profusion in a Court destroys all sort of Order, 6 Kings
reduced to Streights, ever involved in dark and mean Intreagues, ibid. Wise
Ones therefore have retreated as soon as possible from so dangerous a Step, 8
But in Case of Negligence, how the Wisdom of the Laws have provided for them, 9
By inflicting severe Punishments on such as deceive him, ibid. Especially on
such who break their Trust, ibid. And by Resumptions, 10 However it is always
difficult to keep the Prince from being Robbed, ibid. The People repine not to
see a Prince conser his Favors upon deserving Men, if with Moderation, 11
Those who Rob him, try to be safe by their Numbers, 13 But yet they have been
reached, ibid. How Maladministration sometimes gets Footing, but is
afterward corrected, Page 14 Our Happiness under a stout and wise Prince, 17
The present Disorders to be attributed to the Corruptions of the Times, 20 The
King's Character, with a Description of his Actions and Virtues, 20 to 24 A
Prince who would reform the State must expect to meet with great Difficulties,
25 What Artifices such as are guilty will* use, 26 What they will allege in
their Defense, 28 The false Colors they will endeavor to give to their
Actions and Councils, 31 They will poison the Prince's Ear with false Whispers,
and misrepresent to him his best Friends, 33 Whither it is Politic to nourish
Factions in a Court, 34 Why some People in certain Junctures withdraw from
public Employments, 38 How all the ablest Men may be induced to embrace the
Service of the Government, 39 A Prince who will correct Abuses seldom wants
Assistance, 40 The Author's Reason and Inducements to handle this Matter of the
Grants, 42 The Method he intends to observe in discoursing upon this Subject,
43, 44
SECT. II. OBSERVATIONS on the Management of the Romans in their Public
Revenues.
VAlerius Publicola first lodged the public Money of Rome in the Temple of
Saturn, Page 46 As the Empire extended the Romans more sollicitous to gather a
public Stock. This done that they might not burden the Plebears, 47 The exact
Fidelity of their Commanders in bringing the Spoils gained by War into the
Common Treasury, ibid. Till some time after the last Punick War none thought of
growing Rich by Spoils gotten in the War, 48 They who did it were Men who
hatched wicked Designs against their Country, ibid. The Romans made every War
bear it is own Charges, 49 Instances of great Sums from Time to Time brought
into the Common Treasury, 49 to 52 No Empire strong enough to carry on a long
War singly upon it is own Revenues, 53 The immense Treasure gathered by
Augustus, and which Tiberius left behind him at his Death, 57 All which
Caligula consumed in less than a Year, ibid. The Difference the Roman Emperors
made in the public Revenues and the Prince's private Patrimony, 58 Profusion
in wicked Princes the first Spring of all their other Vices, 62 The prodigious
Debt into which Rome was plunged in the Course of Three bad Reigns, 63 The
Debts of the Empire forced Vespasian, a good Prince, upon dishonorable Courses
of raising Money, 64 The vast Treasure gathered and left by Nerva, Trajan,
Adrian and Antoninus Pius, 66 Antoninus Pius would not account the public
Revenues to be his own, ibid. What had been gathered in Five wise Reigns was
wasted by Commodus in less than Thirteen Years, ibid. The Profusion of
Caracalla, 72 A Brief Account of the Roman Coin, 73, 74 Coin the Pul^e of a
Nation, 77 When the Romans began to buy Peace, 78 What a Number of Reigns Rome
saw in 89 Years, 79 When the Goths began to invade the Roman Dominions, 80 The
Care of Mesitheus, chief Minister to the Emperor Gordian, 81 Original of the
Ruin of the Roman Empire, 83 The Division of the Empire one Cause, 85 But the
principal Cause was that Poverty which the Profusion of their Emperors had
brought upon the Provinces, 87
SECT. III. Of RESUMPTIONS.
A Brief Account of the Original of the English People, and of the Ancient
Constitution of this Kingdom, Page 89 to 96 The Original of the Ancient Tenures
in England, 98 High Customs and Excises not thought on in the Gothic
Establishments, 101 These sort of Duties made use of by the Romans, and set up
again first in Italy, ibid. In all the Gothic Settlements, the Prince's
Revenue consisted in Land, 103 In forming this Constitution, our Aucestors took
Care to make ample Provision for maintaining the King's Crown and Dignity, 104
When those Lands and Revenues were parted with, which were allotted for his and
the States Service, Parliaments have seldom failed to restore and relieve his
Affairs by Acts of Resumption, ibid. Of Doom's-Day Book, 105 Of the yearly
Revenues of William the Norman, ibid. The Number of Manors then belonging to
the Crown, ibid What was called Terra Regis in Doom's-day-Book, anciently
esteemed not alienable, 106 William Rufus a profuse Prince, 107 Henry the First
provident, he punished Ranulphus, Bishop of Durham, who had been the Minister
of his Brother's Extortions and Profusions. Resumed what had been lightly given
away by Duke Robert in Normandy, ib. An Account of King Stephen. He was brought
to a Composition with Henry Fitz Empress, in which Agreement one Article was,
That he should resume what Crown-Land he had alienated, 108 Which Agreement
Henry the Second took care to see put in Execution: And he rid the Court of
Foreigners, calling several of his Officers to an Account, 109 What an immense
Treasure his provident Care had accumulated; which was consumed by Rich. 1st,
in the Holy Wars. Rich. compelled to resume his own Grants, 110 The Money
raised in England in Two Years of this Reign, 112 An Account of King John, 113
Henry the Third resumed what had been alienated by King John; and at the
Instance of the Barons he banished the Foreigners. In this loose Reign the
Money of England corrupted, 114 In the Reign of Edward the First, the whole Set
of Judges punished and fined for their Corruptions, 116 In the Reign of Edward
the Second, an Ordinance to prevent Alienations of the Crown-Revenue. And a
Resumption made. The Records for this. 117 Great Profusion and Misgovernment in
the Reign of King Richard the Second. The Rapine of the Ministers of those
Times occasioned Acts of Resumption; several Records produced to this Purpose,
from 119 to 127 In the Reign of Henry the Fourth, the Commons pray that a
Resumption may be made. The Record, 127 In the Fifth of this Reign, the Commons
pray that the King will take Care for the Repair of his Castles, in particular
Windsor Castle, and of the Maintenance of his Parks. And complain that the
Lands assigned for the Repair of Windsor Castle are granted away, praying they
may be resumed. The King's Answer. The Record for this, 128 Lands and Manors
annexed to Windsor Castle 31 Henry 8th, 131 The same Year of Henry 4th, the
Commons pray that Lands alienated from the Duchy of Cornwall may be resumed.
The King's Answer. The Record. 132 In the 6th Year of the same Reign, the
Commons again pray for a Resumption. The King's Answer. The Record, 133 What
^ort of a Resumption was then made, and the Reasons for it. The Record, 140 In
the Seventh and Eighth of this Reign the Commons pray that the Lands to be
conquered in Wales, may not be granted away the first Quarter of a Year. The
Record, 143 In the same Year the Commons pray, that certain Foreigners by Name,
may be banished, which is granted and the King orders an Account to be
delivered in Chancery of what Grants they had obtained. The Record, 144 In the
11th of this Reign the Commons pray, that no Alienation of the Crown-Revenue
may be made, to which the King assents. The Record, 145 What sort of Resumption
was made in the Reign of Henry the Fifth. The Record, 148 A Resumption made 28
Hen. 6. The Record. 149 to 158 The Exceptions or Savings inserted by the King
in this Resumption, 159 to 178 Another Resumption the 29th of this Reign, 181
Another Resumption the 33th of the same Reign, 193 A Resumption the 1st of
Edward 4th. The Record, 208 Another Resumption 3d and 4th of the same Reign,
210 In the 7th Edward 4th. The King invites his People from the Throne to make
an Act of Resumption, 214 A Resumption 7th Edward the 4th. The Record, 216 The
King by the Mouth of the Chancellor thanks the House of Commons for this
Resumption. 221, 222 In the 13th of the same Reign there passed another Act of
Resumption, 222 The Method which was taken in this Reign to pay the King's
Debts. See the Record, 225 In the 1st of Henry 7th there was one General Act,
and afterward other particular Acts of Resumption, 232 What Sort of Resumption
was made Ann. 6. Hen. 8, 238 The Author has himself examined at the Tower the
French Records cited in this Book, 243 All the Resumptions recapitulated, 244,
245 Several Observations upon these Acts of Resumption, 245 to 248 The Effects
these Acts of Resumptions produced, 249 In what Posture the Crown-Revenue
stood, 28 and 29 Hen. 6. ibid. How it stood in the Reign of Hen. 7. what Taxes
he had, and what an immense Sum he left behind him, 249, 250 The Acts of
Resumption principally put the Crown-Revenue into the State Hen. 7. left it at
his Death, 250 The State of the Revenue, Anno 12. Eliz. 252 The Reason why no
Resumption could be proper during her Time, ibid. Resumptions talked on in the
Reign of King James the First, ibid. What Steps were made toward a Resumption
in the Beginning of King Charles the Second's Reign, 253, 254 State of the
Revenue at King Charles's Restoration, 255 Sir John Fortescue's Opinion
concerning Resumptions, out of a Manuscript in the Bodleian Library, 257 to 262
When the Debtors or Accomptants to the King have been unreasonably discharged,
Privy-Seals have been revoked. The Record, 263
SECT. IV. That several Ministers of State have been Impeached in Parliament,
for presuming to procure to themselves Grants of the Crown-Revenue.
WHat sort of Power our King's anciently had to alienate the Crown-Revenue, 274
The Opinion of some Authors upon this Subject, 275 Observations upon the
Scaccarium and Hanneperium, ibid, In Alienations the King trusted as Head of
the Commonwealth, 278 The Danger if Alienations might not be inquired into, 279
It Is manifest the Legislature has a Power to inquire into Grants, ibid.
Resumptions an extraordinary Exercise of the Legislative Authority, 280 What
Provision the Wisdom of the Law has made, that there may not be occasion for
'em, ibid. If this does not do by calling corrupt Ministers to an Account, 281
The Care Hen. 4. took in the Revenue, and the good Laws thereunto relating,
ibid. The Effect it had, 283 The Care our Ancestors had long before taken in
this Matter, 284 1st, By regulating the Expenses of the King's Court, ibid.
2dly, By desiring the King to employ wise and able Men, 285 3dly, By procuring
the Banishment of Strangers, who were become a Burden upon the Court, ibid.
4thly, By appointing Commissioners to inspect the public Accounts. The Record,
287 5thly, By enquiring into the Management of particular Branches, 290 The
Provisions which our Constitution has established, that the King may not be
deceived, 291 The Progress Grants ought to make, 292 First in the Treasury. The
Treasurer of the Exchequer, or Lord-Treasurer's Duty and Oath, ibid. From
thence the Grant goes to the Attorney General. His Duty, 204 From thence to the
Secretary of State. His Duty, 295 From the Signet it should go to the Lord
Privy Seal. His Duty and Oath, 296 From the Privy Seal it goes to the Lord
Chancellor. His Duty and Oath, 297 All this enforced by a positive Law 27 Hen.
8. 298 The Force of the Laws enervated by Clauses of Ex certa Scientia, Graetia
Speciali, and Mero Motu; and by Clauses of Non Obstante, 301 Matthew Paris his
Opinion of these Clauses of Non Obstante, 302 Of the Destinction the Lawyers
make between Directive and Coercive, 305 When Ministers have broke through the
Laws in this Matter of Grants, our Ancestors have proceeded by Impeachments,
307 Ranulphus, Bishop of Durham, accused for Maladministration. His
Character, 308 Pieres Gaverton impeached for procuring Grants, The Record, 309
Henry de Beaumont accused, expelled the Council, and banished by Parliament
from the King's Presence, upon the same Account, 313 The Lady Vescie accused
and banished the Court in the same Manner, and upon the same Account, 314
Procuring Grants, one of the principal Heads of Accusation against Hugh
Spencer, Earl of Gloucester, 315 In the 4 Edw. 3. Articles were exhibited in
Parliament against Roger Mortimer, Earl of March; for having procured to
himself Grants of the Crown-Revenue. The Record, 316 In the 10 Rich. 2. Michael
de la Pool was impeached, for that being Chancellor, and sworn to the Kiug's
Profit, he had procured to himself Grants of the Crown-Revenue. The Judgment
against him: The Records, 317 to 323 In the 11 Rich. 2. the said Michael de la
Pool was again accused, Articles exhibited against him, for procuring Grants of
the Crown-Revenues. The Judgmeut. The Record, 324 Simon de Beurle, Lord
Chamberlain, impeached by the Commons, among other Crimes, for having persuaded
the King to make Grants of the Crown-Revenue to Foreigners. The Record, 333 The
First Article against Richard the Second, when he was Abdicated, That he had
given the Possessions of the Crown to Persons unworthy, 338 William de la Pool,
Duke of Suffolk, impeached by the Commons 28 Hen. 6. for having procured to
himself, and those of his Alliance and Party, Grants of the Crown-Revenue, from
340 to 352 The Judgment against him, 353 An Act of Resumption could not be
obtained till the corrupt Minister was impeached and banished, 356 Articles
against the Duke of Buckingham, 385 to 364 Character of the Duke of Buckingham,
365 How Favorites since have differed from him, 366 An Article against the
Earl os Strafford, ibid. An Article against the Lord Chancellor Clarendon, 367
Articles against the Earl of Arlington, 368, 369 Articles against the Earl of
Danby, Lord Treasurer of England, 370, 371 How a Statesman is to behave himself
when he finds his Prince in danger of being hurt by his Liberalities, 373 A
Minister who cannot prevent the doing of irregular Things, ought to quit his
Employment; what Simon Normannus did upon the like Occasion, 374 A faithful
Minister ought to be contented with moderate Rewards, 378 Why Attaindures have
been repealed in England, 380 Other Countries as well as England have resumed
the Crown-Revenues. The Authorities for it cited by Grotius, 380, 381
Maladministration in the public Revenues punished in other Countries, 381
The Crimen Peculatus, ibid. In France several have been capitally punished for
Frauds committed in the King's Revenue, 382 Girard de Possi made a Restitution
of his own accord, ibid Engherand le Portier punished capitally for Frauds
committed in the Revenue, 383 Peter de Remy, Sieur de Montigny pnnish'd in the
same Manner, 384 John de Montaigu capitally punished for the same Crime.
Mezeray's Character and Description of this Man, 384, 385
SECT. V. That the Forfeited Estates in Ireland ought to be applied toward
Payment of the Public Debts.
AN Account of the Deficiencies, 387, 388 The Nation engaged in Honor to make
'em good, 389 Fonds very difficult to find, ibid. The usual Ways and Means of
raising Money considered, 390 Remote Fonds dangerous to Liberty 391 Of
Exchequer Bills, ibid. Whither a Resumption of the late Grants, especially the
forfeited Estates in Ireland, may not save England the Land Tax, 393 Three
Points therein to be considered, 1st, How far it may be consistant with the
Honor of a Prince to promote an Act of Resumption. 394 The most Magnanimous of
our Kings the most free in doing good to the People. Examples of it, 394, 395
Henry the 4th desired his Privy Council might be named and appointed in
Parliament. The Record, 395 Good Kings frugal of the Nations Treasure. Examples
of it, 397 Galant Princes desire to make their People easy, instanced in Henry
the 4th of France, ibid. Clamorous Debts dishonorable to a Prince, 401 How
many great and warlike Kings in England have resumed, 402 2dly, What Interest
the People of England have in the Lands granted away, 403 How far a Prince can
alienate, etc. The Opinion of several eminent Civilians in the Case, 403, 404
What a Prince conquers at his private Expense, is at his own Disposal, 407 But
it is otherwise if the Expedition be made at the common Expense of his People,
409 An Account of the Expenses for the Reduction of Ireland, 410, 411 The Four
Millions expended in this War, give the People of England a Title to the Irish
Forfeitures, 411 Whether this Title be lost or lapsed for want of putting in a
Claim, 416 Proceedings in Parliament, in relation to the Irish Forfeitures, 417
to 427 3dly, How far in an Act of Resumption it is just and reasonable to look
backwards, 428 How the Presidents run, 428 to 430 The generality of the
Presidents reach only to the present, or the Reign immediately preceding, 431
Whether by the Rules of Justice, the Grants made by King Charles the Second may
be resumed, 440, 441 The Difference stated between his Grants and these lately
made, 442 to 444 Conclusion, 446
ADVERTISEMENT.
THis BOOK having been Printed off in haste, some Litteral Errors may probably
have escaped Correction; which the Reader is desired to amend with his Pen.

BOOKS Printed for, and sold by J. Knapton, at the Crown, in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
DIscourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England. In Two Parts,
viz. I. Of the Use of Political Arithmetic, in all Considerations about the
Revenues and Trade. II. On Credit, and the Means and Methods by which it may be
restored. III. On the Management of the King's Revenues. IV. Whether to Farm
the Revenues, may not, in this Juncture, be most for the Public Service? V. On
the Public Debts and Engagements. By the Author of, The Essay on Ways and
Means. Part 1. To which is added, A Discourse upon Improving the Revenue of the
State of Athens.

Discourses on the Public Revenues, and on the Trade of England; which more
immediately treat of the Foreign Traffic of this Kingdom, viz. I. That the
Foreign Trade is beneficial to England. II. On the Protection and Care of
Trade. III. On the Plantation Trade. IV. On the East India Trade. By the Author
of, The Essay on Ways and Means. Part II. To which is added, the late Essay on
the East India Trade. By the same Hand.

An Essay upon the probable Methods of Making a People Gainers in the Balance
of Trade. Treating of these Heads; viz. Of the People of England; or the Land
of England, and in what Manner the Balance of Trade may be thereby affected.
That a Country cannot increase in Wealth and Power, but by private Men doing
their Duty to the Public, and but by a steady Course of Henesty and Wisdom, in
such as are trusted with the Administration of Affairs. By the Author of, The
Essay on Ways and Means.

Dampier's Voyages. In 2 Vol. 80

Wafer's Descriptions of the Isthmns of Darien. In Octavo.

Hacke's Collection of Voyages. In Octavo.

Clark's Essay. In Octavo.

Reflection on Amintor.

Wingate's Arithmetic.

The Memoirs of Monsieur Pontis, who served in the French Armies 56 Years.
Translated by Chapter Cotton, Esquire Fol.

Malbranch's Treatise of Morality. In Octavo.

A DISCOURSE UPON GRANTS.
SECT I. INTRODUCTION.
ALL Governments, well and wisely constituted, as soon as they began to form
themselves into a Politic Existence, have separated from Private Use a certain
Proportion of their Wealth, and assigned it to the Uses of the Public: And
this has not only been thought a point of Wisdom by Particular Nations, but
Confederated Cities and States have done the same; for the Grecians had a
Common Treasury kept in the Temple of Apollo Delphicus, ready at all times to
supply such Affairs as they managed with united Councils.

It Is so necessary to particular Nations, that there never was a Commonwealth
without a Public Stock, which was either great or little; sometimes according
as the State continued in Peace, or was harrass'd with Wars; but most commonly
according to the Prudence or Weakness of such as Governed; for there have been
Examples (as shall be shown by and by) of States wisely ruled whom Wars have
enriched, and of others loosely managed that have been impoverished in times of
the profoundest Peace.

Commonwealths either in their first Institution have allotted part of their
Territory, or in their further Progress have assigned part of the Lands coming
to 'em by Conquest for the constant Services of the State, both in War and in
Peace; and this they probably did, that they might not be compelled, at every
turn, to call upon the People for Contributions.

Where the Government has been by a Single Person, the Prince has had his
Portion of Land for his domestic Expenses, as appears in the Instance of
Tarquin, whose Fields upon his Expulsion were made Public; but the Burden of
any War lay upon the whole. In the Kingships settled by the Hunns, Goths and
Vandals, where the Expedition was at the Common Expense of all, the Conquered
Country was divided. The Prince had his Proportion, his principal Captains and
Commanders had theirs, and the Common Soldier was not without his Share: Thus
Genserick King of the Vandals, when he prevailed in Africa reserved to himself
the Provinces Bizacena, Azuritana, Getulia, and part of Numidia; and to his
Army he distributed by way of Inheritance Zeugitana, and Africa Proconsularis.
In the Establishments made by the Northern Nations, in consideration of the
Lands so held, certain Services were due from the Soldier to his Captain, and
from the Captain to the Prince; and upon the strength of such Tenures, in after
times, the Descendants of these People, and their Kings, did subsist and make
their Wars: but of this in another place.

What they thus took, or what was allotted to 'em as their Share by Compact
among their Followers, Good Princes have always reckoned as belonging to the
Public, and they always made a Distinction between what they held in their
Private Capacities, and what they held as Public Persons, and Heads of the
Commonwealth. And tho in the Eastern Monarchies erected by Force, and which
were Invasions upon the Common Rights of Mankind, the Prince might account
himself Supreme and uncontrollable Lord of the whole, and not bounded by any
Laws; and tho these Tyrants looked upon the People as no better than so many
Herds of Cattle, yet it was not so in the Roman Government as 'twas modeled by
Augustus, and as he meant it should be transmitted to his Successors; and most
certainly it was otherwise in the several Kingdoms erected by the Hunns, Goths,
and Vandals, upon the Ruins of the Roman Empire. All which shall manifestly
appear in the Series of this Discourse.

Good Princes have not only made a Distinction between what was their own
Patrimonially, as the Civil Law Books term it, and what the Stte had an
Interest in, but many of them, as we shall show by and by, in Care of the
Public, and right Economy, have equaled the most prudent Commonwealths.

And no doubt such Thrift was always esteemed a Point of the highest Wisdom,
because, the expenses of War considered, even in the remotest times, shattered
indigent Governments, and wanting Princes, have been seldom known to compasa
great things; besides, being without Money, the Nerves of War, they are
obnoxious to the Insults and Invasions of their Neighbors; not but that
wealthy Countries have been and may be invaded, but we mean that those Nations
are most liable to be overrun, and conquered, where the People are Rich, and
where, for want of good Conduct, the Public is poor. Moreover, there are
infinite Examples in History, of Kings, whose Necessities have made Taxes, too
often repeated, the only Fault in their Reigns, and who have thereby lost the
Affection of their Subjects.

But setting aside the Dangers, Foreign and Domestic, that arise from
Profusion in what belongs to the Public, it depraves all the different ranks
of men; for in profuse Governments it has been ever observed that the People
from bad Example have grown lazy and expensive, the Court has become luxurious
and mercenary, and the Camp insolent and seditious.

Where wasting the Public Treasure has obtained in a Court, all good Order is
banished, because he who would promote it, and be frugal for his Prince, is
looked upon as a common Enemy to all the rest; Virtue is neglected, which
raises men by leisurely steps, when Vice and Flattery will in a little time, in
a Ministry who mind not what is given away, bring a man to a great Estate; nor
is Industry cultivated, where he does his business sufficiently, who knows
which way to apply, and how to beg in a lucky and critical moment: And, at such
a Season, many of the Peoples Representatives lose their Integrity, when they
see others running from every Bench to share in the universal Plunder of a
Nation.

Kings reduced to Streights, either by their own, or by the negligence of their
Predecessors, have been always involved in dark and mean Intreagues; They have
been forced to court such as in their Hearts they abhor, and to frown upon
those whose Abilities and Virtues they secretly approve of and Reverence,
instead of being Heads of the whole Commonwealth, as in Law and in Reason they
ought to be, they have often been compelled to put themselves in the Front,
sometimes of one, and sometimes of another Party, as they saw it prevalent: A
Policy in the end ever fatal to Rulers. Being entangled, they have been
constrained to bring into the chief Administration of their affairs Projectors,
and Inventors of new Taxes, who being hateful to the People, seldom fail of
bringing Odium upon their Master: And these little Fellows, whose only skill
lies that way, when they become Ministers, being commonly of the lower Rank of
Understandings, manage accordingly; for their own Ignorance in matters of
Government, occasions more necessities than their Arts of raising Money are
able to supply; but wanting States make use of these sort of men, and Princes
often think they are well served by such, because now and then they can
palliate present Evils, but they do but film over a Sore, which breaks out
afterward with greater Rancour; whereas able Statesmen would obviate the
Mischief in its growth, and, by wholesome Councels, restrain their Masters
Bounty before he has nothing left to give, and before his People are weary of
feeding endless Expenses: But one of the worst Effects of Poverty in a State
is, that it frights such as are able to mend things, men of sublime Skill,
Integrity, and Virtue, from meddling in Affairs; for they well know how
clamorous, slippery, and difficult the Ministerial Part of Government proves
when a Nation is plunged in Debts, which generally, in all times, have produced
so many Hurricanes, and popular Storms, as have made wise men, at such a
season, not desire to hold the Helm; and this has fatal Consequences, for then
the Ship is left to the Guidance of giddy and unskilful Pilots.

All this good Princes have ever observed; and when either the greatness of
their Minds, or the Benignity of their Nature, has led them to be too open
handed, they have retreated as soon as possible from so false and dangerous a
step. But lest they should be careless in a point so necessary to the Common
welfare, and so much for their own Preservation, the Wisdom of the Laws has
provided for their Safety in this matter, which fence the Prince's Revenue with
diverse Constitutions and Restrictions, all intended to preserve it from the
Rapine of those about him; in order to which the Politic of well near all
Countries has contrived that his Gifts should pass and be registered in several
Offices, to the end that either some faithful Minister should put him in mind,
or that he himself should have leisure to repent of Liberalities detrimental to
the Public.

Not only the Law of this Kingdom, but of other Places, and the Roman Laws,
provide that the Prince should not be deceived in his Grants; for he whose
Thoughts are employed in the weighty Cares of Empire, is not presumed to
inspect minuter things, so carefully as Private Persons; The Laws therefore
relieve him against the Surprises and Machinations of Deceitful Men.

For his further Security the Laws likewise inflict severe Punishments upon
those who defraud him in his Stores, Treasure, or Revenues, counting such
Public Robbers more Criminal than petty and common Theives.

But the Laws seem chiefly levelled against those in whom he reposes the
greatest Trust, therefore the Legislative Power of all Countries has rigorously
animadverted upon such Ministers and Officers, through whose Fraud, Negligence,
or Crime, his affairs have suffered any damage, of which in its proper Place we
shall give variety of Presidents.

And when he has been exhausted by the too great Munificence of his own Temper,
and through the false Representations, and subtle Contrivances of those about
him, and when thereby the Public has become weak, ruined, and unable to
protect it self, he has been assisted by the Laws, and such as have been
vigilant for his safety, jealous of his honor, and careful for the common
Good, have thought it their Duty to look into his Gifts, and to resume his
Grants, of which we shall give diverse Instances and Examples.

But notwithstanding the Wisdom of the Laws, and of Lawmakers, it has been
always a Point of the highest difficulty to keep within its proper Veins this
Lifc*blood of the Body Politic, so prone have corrupt Ministers ever been to
urge Princes to needless and destructive Bounty, especially when they
themselves are to be the largest sharers in it.

Kings are the Fathers of their Country, but unless they keep their own
Estates, they are such Fathers as the Sons maintain, which is against the order
of Nature, who makes all these Cares descend, and places Fostering,
Nourishment, and Protection in the Parent; but the Prince is our common Father,
and therefore all that tends to his Safety, Ease, and State, is due to him,
however the less he is necessittaed to depend upon his Children, the more he is
respected.

And Kings are not to account themselves Fathers of a Party only, or of none
but those who rush into the Presence and whisper to 'em, they are Fathers of
the whole Body of the People; They are not to reckon themselves Fathers of of
their Favorites only, as Harry the 3d of France did, who said he Would grow a
good husband when he had marrye^ his Children the Dukes of Joyeuse and
Espernon: Their Paternal Affection is to reach to all their subjects. And as in
a private Family, Partiality to one Brother begets Hatred and Divisions, so in
a Nation it produces Discontent and Heartburnings to see three or four, without
any superior Merit, lifted high over all the rest, enriched with the Universal
Spoils of a Country, and wallowing in Luxury and Wealth, while the whole People
groans under heavy Burdens.

Not that Mankind repine that the Prince should have Friends, with whom he may
communicate his Thoughts, and unbend his Cares, nor to see such Friends the
better for his Favors, it is warranted by Examples in the best Reigns; Mecaenas
and Agrippa, cherished, enriched, and promoted by Augustus, were yet as dear to
the rest of Rome, as they were to that wise Emperor: But they behold with
Indignation Men exalted, who return not to the Prince reciprocal kindness, who
abuse his Favors, who sell his Words, who, by false Representations, traduce
all others, that they may engross him to themselves; who arrogate to themselves
all the Good, and lay upon him the blame of unfortunate Councils, who have no
regard to his Honor, when their own Safety is in question, whose Advices tend
to their own private Profit, without Consideration of their Master's, or the
Public Welfare; who draw all Lines to their own corrupted Center, whose
Ambition is not gratified with any Honors, and whose Avarice is not satiated
with multiplicity of Employments, nor with repeated Gifts and Grants out of a
stripped Revenue, and an exhausted Exchequer. It Is such a sort of Favorites and
Ministers that the People hate, and exclaim against, and whose Heads they
commonly reach at last.

Without any regard whither or no it be between Sun and Sun, if the Prince is
robbed the Country pays it; and therefore when the Hue and Cry hotly pursues
the Robbers, Governments are not to wonder: It Is true, they now and then
escape, especially when in their Depredations upon the Public there are a
great many concerned, and when they have made so large a Booty, that they
become safe by the multitude of those who have been Partakers in it (for it has
been the constant Course of Ministers who would rob a Nation with Impunity, to
give to all that ask, and to refuse no man who has either Interest or Parts,
that fortified by a strong Confederacy they may bear down all sort of
Inquisition and outbrave the Laws) but very often the wants of the people,
crying aloud, have awakened good Patriots, and bold Spirits, whom neither the
Power, nor the Number of the Offenders, could affright; and these Lovers of our
Constitution, in many former Reigns (as shall be shown in the progress of this
Discourse) have courageously attacked, and brought to Condemnation, persons in
the highest places of Authority, who, in breach of their Trust, had presumed to
procure to themselves Grants of the Kings Lands or Treasure, and who had
converted to their own use what was given and intended for the Maintenance and
Preservation of the State.

Princes, when they come to know the true state of things, are not unwilling to
prevent their own Ruin, which is manifest from this, That the most Wise,
Valiant, and most Heroic of our Kings (as shall likewise appear by and by)
have given way to Inquiries of this nature, and not thought it inconsistent
with their Royal Dignity and Honor, to resume even their own Grants, when they
have been represented by the whole Body of their People as hurtful to the
Commonwealth.

In Democratical Governments War did commonly unite the minds of men; when they
had Enemies abroad they did not contend with one another at home, which
produced one good effect, that then the Administration of Affairs was left to
the best and ablest Hands. They chose for their mutual Strivings, for setting
afoot Factions and dangerous Brigues, times of the profoundest Peace, and at
such seasons men grown Popular by wicked Arts, ambitious Pretenders, light
Orators, and the worst sort of Citizens, had the most sway and Authority among
the People, which occasioned Phocion to utter these memorable words to one of
this stamp, I am at present against War, tho it puts the Power into my Hands,
and tho such turbulent and naughty Spirits as you are, govern all things in
times of Peace. But notwithstanding it has thus happened in some Commonwealths,
it has proved otherwise in mixed Governments, where the several parts of the
Constitution have their distinct Powers, Rights and Privileges: And
particularly in this Kingdom it has been seen that men's minds have been most
disunited, when there was the greatest need of Concord. Among us heretofore
foreign Wars, instead of allaying Factions for the present, have set 'em in a
higher Flame, and, contrary to ancient Prudence, when we wanted the best, the
worst men have got to be at the Head of business: All which did chiefly proceed
from the Necessities to which our Princes were reduced by their Expeditions
abroad: For War occasions Taxes, Taxes bring Want, Want produces Discontent,
and the Discontents of the People were ever the best Materials for designing
and ambitious men to work upon; when the People is grieved and sullen, Parties
are easily formed; when Parties are formed, at first they let themselves be
advised and ruled by such as have true Public Zeal and Virtue, but of those
they grow quickly weary, and then they fall into the hands of such as only make
a false Profession of it, and in a little time they are entirely directed by
Persons, whose sole drift is to build their own Fortunes upon the Ruins of
their Country; in the mean while the strength and number of their Party makes
these leading men powerful, and gives 'em such weight that they must be
courted, preferred and bought; often they must have one half to procure the
other; and so considerable do they grow, that if they are suffered, they
presently invade all Offices and Employments, in which when they are securely
planted, they likewise give to one another all the Lands and Revenues of the
State: And our Histories show, that in former times, Princes reduced to
streights by War, have been forced to wink at this, and to permit these busy
men, then thought necessary, to do all, engross all, Rob the Public, share the
Crown Lands, and in short to commit what other waste they please. Thus as in
Commonwealths the worst men are most powerful in times of Peace, under Regal
Governments they are strongest and ablest to do hurt in times of War: But
whereas in Commonwealths Peace has brought sundry Mischiefs, in the Government
by Kings it often produces good order, and better Administration; for several
of our Princes, whose Necessities compelled 'em to endure the Rapine of their
Ministers in time of War, have, in times of Peace, divested those Public
Robbers of their unlawful and outrageous Plunder.

We have now upon the Throne a King willing and able to correct the Abuses of
the Age, Willing from the wisdom of his Mind, and the goodness of his Temper,
Able from that Power and Strong Interest which his Courage and his other
numberless Virtues have procured Him in the Hearts and Affections of his
People. Men readily obey and follow him whom they reverence, for which reason
some Philosophers have placed the Original of Power in Admiration, either of
surpassing Form, great Valor, or Superior Understanding; Heroic Kings, whose
high Perfections have made 'em awful to their Subjects, can struggle with, and
subdue the Corruption of the times; A Hercules can cleause the Augean Stable of
the ^ilth which had not been swept away in thirty years. Princes whom their
Effeminacy, Weakness, or Levity have rendered contemptible, may fear Idols of
their own making, and stand in awe of Men become terrible, only by greatness
derived from them. They may be afraid to pull down Ministers, and favorites,
grown formidable by the united Councils of their Faction, by the Number of
their Followers, and strength of their Adherents, and so let
maladministration proceed on, as thinking it too big to be amended; but
magnanimous Kings, who have the People of their side, need entertain no such
Thoughts and Apprehensions: they know that these Top-heavy buildings* reared up
to an invidious height, and which have no solid Foundation in Merit, are in a
Moment blown down by the breath of Kings. Good Persons indeed, grown great and
popular from the ^ame of their real Worth and Virtues, may perhaps be dreadful
to bad Rulers, but bad Men, let 'em have never so much seeming Greatness, and
Power, are very rarely dangerous to good Princes.

The Cabals of a Party, the Intreague^ of a Court, nor the Difficulties some
may pretend to bring upon his affairs, never terrify a Wise and Stout King,
bent to reform the State, who has the love of hi^ People, and whose Interest is
one an^ the same with Theirs. We have never yet heard of a Tumult raised to
rescue ^ Minister whom his Master desired to bring to a fair Account; On the
contrary, to see upstarts, and worthless Men, inrich^ with Spoils of a Country,
has been the Occasion of many popular Seditions, which wise Kings have appeased
by a just and timely Sacrifice.

None are so able to mend what is amiss in State as Kings who enjoy their Crown
from the Subjects Gift; May be it has been sometimes thought harsh in those who
were born in Purple to look into abuses with a Stricter Eye than their
Predecessors; But Elected Kings are presumed to come in upon the Foot of
Reformation, and so are justified, by the Voices of all Mankind, in pursuing
the Ends for which they were called by the People; If therefore such Kings are
severe in looking into their Accounts, If they are frugal of the Public Money,
If they examine into the Corruption of their Officers, If they enquire into the
sudden and exorbitant Wealth of those who have had the handling of their
Treasure, If they rigorously punish such as in breach of their Trust, and
contrary to their Oaths, have converted to their own use what belongs to the
State, If they abandon and resign into the hands of Justice such as have robbed
them and the Public, If they resume what has been obtained fraudulently by
surprise, and upon wrong suggestions, and If they take back what was too great
to give, and much too great to be asked, it is with the universal Applause of
the People, whom this Care relieves from frequent and heavy Taxes.

There is no Good which may not be expected from the Wisdom and Resolution of
the Prince who now fills the Throne: When he came over hither he found many of
the Chief Rank and Figure overwhelmed in Public and Private Vices, and in a
Country so corrupted, 'twas difficult to have a virtuous Court. They who should
have helped him to mend Things, were readier to promote the Disorders by which
they might thrive, than to set afoot a Frugality, under which they could not so
well do their own business; If they had Preached up Thrift, as necessary to
carry on a long and expensive War, with what Face could such a Great Man have
begged such a parcel of the Crown Lands, one a vast sum of Money, another this
forfeited Estate, One so much Timber out of the Forest, his Friend such a
Reversion, his Friends Friend such a large Pension? And if they had held the
Purse close shut up to others, they must have blushed when they were begging so
much for themselves.

All these disorders are to be attributed to the Corruption of the Times, and
to the necessities thereby introduced, when Parties were to be gratified, when
turbulent Spirits, who could obstruct affairs were to be quieted, and when too
many expected to be paid for preserving themselves, and their own Country from
a foreign Enemy; Insomuch that when our Story comes to be read hereafter,
Posterity will wonder (where the Subjects were so craving at Court, and in
another Place) how the Prince could save, from such a Number of Spoilers,
wherewithal to carry on his Wars abroad.

The Kings admirable Conduct has waded through all these Difficulties, He has
given as a Peace when the continuance of the War was desired by too many at
home, as better conducing to their dark designs. At his first coming over he
saved that Religion which our mean Compliance under former Princes had put in
danger. His prudence kept for ten years a People, divided amongst themselves,
united against the Common Enemy. All the Misfortunes in his Reign have been the
Result of our proper Corruptions, all the Good the Effects of his own Wisdom,
and his Virtues will at last bear down, and master all our Vices.

He first formed that League which has preserved the Liberties of Europe. He
has with a Confederate Army managed a long War, and brought it to a good
Conclusion, of which there are but few Examples in History; for tho the
beginnings of Confederacies have been always vigorous, and successful, their
Progress has been generally feeble, and Event unfortunate. By his Interest and
Power he has made a King of Poland, an Elector of Collein, and erected a ninth
Electorate in the Empire. He has restored the Duke of Lorraine, and taken the
Bridle off from the Heads of the Italian Princes, by having been the Cause that
Cazal and Pignerol were demollish d. He has procured advantageous Terms for all
his Allies. He has caused fortified Towns and large Provinces to be restored,
which had been couquer'd long before He forced his Potent Neighbor to make the
the first Advances toward a Peace, which is more than Wise Men, when the War
began, could promise to themselves in their most Sanguine Hopes. He made
himself be sought to when his Enemies prosper'd, and when the Confederate
affairs declined. All which are manifest Proofs that he is as Great in the
Cabinet as in the Field.

And, to Crown all his Glories, by one Act he has shown his Goodness to humane
kind, and given a Demonstration that he never desired Power but for the Benefit
of others: His so cheerfully disbanding the Army at the request of his
Parliament, is a Proof, beyond all Contradiction, that he both Loves and Trusts
his subjects, and that his Noble Mind, conscious of no ill is apprehensive of
no Danger.

While Tyrants, who inslave their Country, are afraid tho environed with
Numerous Troops, He knew himself to be sufficiently guarded by the Affections
of his People: Many Princes who have taken up Arms to relieve an oppressed
Nation, have made it appear, in the course of their Proceedings, that they were
incited to it by some Ambitious Ends, and not alone moved by a true desire of
that Fame which follows virtuous Deeds, and the People they came to redeem have
afterward found that they did no more than change one bad Ruler for another;
But this Heroic King has followed the Pattern of Timoleon the Corinthian, who
not only rescued the Sicilians from Tyranny, but likewise left 'em in full
Possession of their Freedoms: He has squared his Actions by those of T.
Quintius Flaminius, who when he had subdued the Macedonians, and reduced King
Philip to Terms of Peace, erected an eternal Trophy to his future Renown, when
he pronounced by the Voice of a Herald, That Greece should thence forward be
exempt from Taxes, Impositions, and Garrisons, and Free to Govern it self by
its own Laws. The same Liberties did the King in effect Proclaim for ever to
all England when he delivered us from the Expenses, and (which lay more heavily
upon us) from the Terror of a Standing Army.

His happy Reign has not only freed our Persons, but likewise set our Minds at
Liberty, which had for many Years been enslaved by wrong Principles of
Unlimited Obedience due to the unlimited Exercise of Power: Notions with which
the Schools had poisoned our Youth, and which only served to draw the Prince on
to Govern amiss, but proved no security to him when the People were grown weary
of ill Government. The late Revolution, justified by its Necessity, and by the
Good it has produced, will be a ^asting Answer to all that foolish Doctrine; so
that, with the other Blessings of this King's Accession to the Throne, the very
President is not to be accounted among the least: Insomuch that what we did at
that time, not only freed us then, but has set Liberty it self upon a better
Foot, and cured us of those blind Errors, and dark Mists which our own
Luxuries, and the Craft of Courtiers, had brought upon our Understanding.

A Prince thus adorned, feared for his Courage, admired for his Wisdom, and
beloved for the Good he has done his People, must certainly be able to surmount
the greatest Difficulties. It Is not a B^ffl^d and disheartened Party, lingering
may be after their former Bondage, can give him any Opposition Much less need
he apprehend the Mercenary and inconstant Crew of the Hunters after Preferment,
whose Designs are always seen through, who are dispis'd as soon as known, and
who only lead one another.

But a King who would reform the State for the general Ease and Benefit of his
People, must expect to meet with some Difficulties, especially if a great many
of those about him are Partakers in the Abuses he would correct: All sort of
Rubbs will be laid in the way, and the Fears of such as may be called to an
account will make 'em set all kind of Engines at work.

First they will put a high Value upon their own Deserts, and arrogate to
themselves the Single Merit of the many Millions which the whole Nation has
both freely paid and Granted: They will produce Presidents of other Ages, and
show long Lists of Grants obtained under former Reigns; but, at the same time,
they will take care not to mention how such Proceedings have been always
Resented, and often Punished in this Kingdom.

They will endeavor to blast the Reputation of such as would enquire into
their Actions; and tho perhaps there are no other possible Ways and Means left
to supply the State, but by making 'em disgorge, and but by bringing them to a
Restitution, yet they will pretend that all Motions leading thereunto, and all
Inquiries of this nature, are nothing but the Effects of Discontent, and the
Result of Faction.

And because, in all their Doings and Councils, they have never had any view
but their own private Profit, they will do their best to persuade the World,
that no man acts upon Principle, that all is swayed by particular Malice, and
that there is not left in the Kingdom any Party of men which consult the
Public Good.

They who are conscious of their Guilt, and apprehensive that the Justice of
the Nation should take notice of their Thefts and Rapine, will try to give all
things a false Turn, and to fill every place with false Suggestions: Sometimes
they will accuse Innocent Persons, that so, by putting the People upon a wrong
Scent, they may avoid the Pursuers, and escape unpunished: At other Seasons they
will boast of the Number of their Friends and Adherents, thinking to awe both
the Court and Country with an Opinion that their Party is too Strong, and too
Powerful to be resisted.

And, that the knowledge of their Crimes may never reach the Prince's Ear, they
will endeavor to engross him to themselves, by misrepresenting all others that
are not of their Cabal, either as disaffected to his Person, or as Enemies to
Kingly Government. Thus they did heretofore; and tho there were truly but two
Parties in England, consisting of those who would promote maladministration,
because they got by it, and of those who desired things might be well Govern*d,
that they, and such as they represented might be eased; which two sides were
heretofore distinguished by the Names of Court and Country Party; to which
likewise they could have put an end, whenever they had pleased to have
minister*d less occasion of Complaint; yet they will revive old Names of
Distinction, giving odious Appellations to the best Patriots, pretending there
are dangeroes Factions formed, so to frighten the World with Phantoms of their
own Creation. These false turns they will give, and these wrong Suggestions
they will make, in order to drive all Power into what they call their own
Party, as if any Prince could be safe that should rely upon so narrow and
Rotten a Bottom.

And when their Actions shall hereafter come to be examined in that Place to
which our Constitution has entrusted the Inquiry into, and the Punishment of
such Offenses, It Is probable That up will rise some Arrogant Man more Zealous
for Himself than for his Master, and cry, All that we have given among one
another we have deserved by our Services, and Labors in the State; what
Projects have we not set afoot, and what sums have we not procured? Did not
the Ministers in King Charle s's Reign give away the Crown Lands; Recall those
Grants, and we are ready to surrender ours, Resume all or none: It Is next to
Demonstration that these Clamours arise from a Dis ontented Party, who would
disturb the Government; they who lookinto our Proceedings act out of Malice,
because of the great thing we have done against France; what if such a one got
a hundred thousand pound at once, did he not save the Nation? If we are used
thus, what Encouragement will there he to serve Princes? For my part I will
never meddle more in your Business; All this tends to lessen the Monarchy,
invade the Prerogative, and to set up a Doge of Venice. I Sir (perhaps there
may be added) and the Majority are of this Opinion. By this high Bearing, and
these false suggestions, heretofore, well meaning Persons have been frightened
from reaching at great offenders, and even the best Patriots, by seeing with
what warmth and Zeal the smallest Corruptions are defended, have been wearyed
into Silence; And this has made some of our Kings believe that either the
Offenders were grown above the Laws, or that the People consented ^o those
things which they did not think fit to punish. But wise Princes see through all
this, They know that an honest and faithful Minister will be contented with
moderate Favors; That very often nothing but the ill Contrivance of the Aid
belongs to those he employs, and that the Gifts come from the free Affections
of the Subject; That Patterns to Rule by are to be sought for out of Good, nor
loose Reigns; That Inspections which look too far backward produce nothing;
That a few may complain without reason, but that there is occasion for Redress
when the Cry is universal; That no Military Action, or other Merit, can give a
Man a just Title to Rob the Public; That even good Ministers are thought no
more on when they are out, and that certainly Bad ones may retire without being
mist; That absolute Power is not a Plant that will grow in this Soil, and that
Statesmen who have attempted to cultivate it here have pulled on their own, and
their Masters Ruin. A wise Prince likewise does not care to see Corrupt
Officers so earnest to save one another, for it is always at his cost; Nor does
he like that his Ministers, when attacked, should be able to protect themselves
in their Crimes by the Power of a (...) for they who are strong enough to bear
down the Law, may presume, in time, to think they subsist by their proper
Strength, and that they stand upon their own Legs, and so come at last to
slight his Authority.

Bad Men have ever given a false Color to their Proceedings, and covered their
Ambition, Corruption, and Rapine with the pretense of their Masters Service;
They make him believe their Greatness advances him, whereas truly it tends to
his diminution, and he is often weak for want of that Wealth and Power which
they share among one another: Their Riches has frequently brought Envy upon the
Prince, but we can hardly meet with an Instance of any who in his Distress has
been assisted from the Purses of his Ministers, for they are commonly the first
who fly from his Misfortunes: And tho they pretend that his Power is revered in
them and that they make him Strong by the Benefits he lets them bestow, yet a
Wise King sees through all this Artifice, and knows* That he who would reap any
Advantage from his Favors in the Opinions of Men, must make 'em sensible that
they owe them singly to his Goodness, and not to the Intercession of those
about him.

But of all the false Suggestions made by those who have arrived at great Power
by wicked Arts, none have proved so dangerous as these, which, in former
Reigns, have been frequently insinuated in the Cabinet. Sir, we are your only
Friends, stick by us and we will stick by you. Our Measures are displeasing to
the People, so were those of former Ministers. A few well united, and in one
Bottom, have guided this Nation, and with hard Reins, as Witness the Times of
Cromwell. Mind not the Qualifications of any man for this or that Office in the
State, Is he with us? If he be hearty it ought to cover all other Defects. Turn
out, and discountenance such as are not entirely with us in all our Councils
Make your Court of a piece. Let none presume to be directed by his own
Conscience, or Reason; ought they to be in your service who dare think your
Ministers can be in the wrong? Why do such and such Great Men refuse such and
such Employments, is it not plainly out of Lisaffection to the present
Government, or that they like Popularity better than any favors you can bestow
upon 'em? Many are infected with Republican Principles, and several have an Eye
toward the other side of the water. Have not other Hands been tried and found
resty; but we stick at nothing. The other Party has been made use of, but 'twas
thought fit to lay 'em aside. It Is indeed pretended that with them is the
Integrity, the good Opinion of the Nation, the Substance, Learning. Parts,
Knowledge, and Experince in affairs; however we are more diligent, and better
united. But does not there lie a kind of Necessity upon you to make use of us,
and of u^ only? Does the other side make any Offers to come in? Loaded as they
say we are with the Public hatred, and tho we may be thought unfit to carry on
your Business, yet it is better joining with us than to stand alone. Is not the
other side cold and reserved, and do not the best men among 'em refuse to
meddle in the Administration? with such like false whispers, in former Reigns,
the Ears of Princes have been poisoned, And by these pretended Friends they
were induced to Purge, as they call it, till the Body Politic was quite
exhausted of all its good Spirits: Such a one, who had done a thousand faithful
Services, must be laid aside, because his just Fears would not permit him to
give into the last bad Measures. This Man was against me; we suspect such
another; Some are too cautious, some too discerning, Others left us in such an
important Vote; And they grow to that Presumption, by degrees, as to advise
that a whole Party should be frowned upon, depressed, and utterly trodden down;
And thus they Lop, and Lop, on this, and that hand, cutting away the Tall,
Sound, and Substantial Timber that used to shelter 'em from the Winds, till, in
the End, they leave the Government a Trunk naked, defenseless, and obnoxious to
every storm; But when they proceed so far as to get the Prince to declare
openly for one, and against the other Side, they lay the Ax to its very Root.

Some Kings have thought it Politic to nourish Factions in their Court, but
then they preserved themselves Neuter, and so made both sides subservient to
their Designs, and even this has been rather esteemed Subtlety than Wisdom; but
no Prince, that could help it, did ever let Faction grow National; However, if
'twas out of his Power to prevent this Mischief, it was never thought Prudent in
him to list himself on either Side; And Henry the 3d of France is a memorable
instance, how fatal it is for the Sovereign to become the Head of any Party.

Partiality is the little Weakness of Private Men and unbecoming the Greatness
of a Prince, whose Favor should shine upon the whole Body of his People as the
Sun sheds his benign Influence upon the universal Face of Nature, not warming
one Part of the Globe only; If it can be compassed, He should quite root out
Faction, but if the Disease be too inveterate to be cured, without doubt it is a
Point of the highest Wisdom for him to bear himself evenly between both, so
that neither Side may despair of Favor, or at least so carry it that both
Sides may remain in full Assurance to find equal Justice. Nor is it impossible
to contrive Matters so as to beget an Emulation in Parties which may produce
good Effects, that is, by wise Governing it may be so ordered, that both Sides
shall be at strife, not which shall flatter most, but which shall do the Prince
and the Public the most honest, and the most faithful Service; And this is
done, when, without any regard under what Banners, in a divided Country, Men
had listed themselves, those Persons are pitched upon for the Ministerial Part
of Government, who are most remarkable for their Capacity, Experience,
Integrity, and Knowledge in Affairs; And a Prince who makes such a Choice of
Ministers, will soon beget a Virtuous Emulation between the Factions, and set
both Sides upon striving which shall serve most cheaply, with the fewest
Selfish Designs, and which shall handle his, and the Nations Money, with the
cleanest Hands: But when by the favor of those that Rule, one side is become
much superior to the other, this Virtuous Emulation ceases, and both sides
contend, only to put one another in the Wrong, each side obstructing what the
other moves, let it be never so much for the Public Good: But when the
Mischief is grown to such a height, that being of a Party, is to be the
Principal, if not the only Recommendation, then the Hottest Men, who are
generally the worst, and Corruptest Members of it, are sure to have the most
Power; and when the Administration is in their hands they proceed without
Comptrol, for the side which should oppose them is discountenanced, frowned
upon, out of Credit, and discourag d from inquiring, because their Inquiries
are blackened and misrepresented; And when all this happens, They who have the
Power, rob the Prince, waste his Treasure, and run him into immense Debts: Thus
Kings heretofore who showed themselves partial to a Party, had the service only
of the worst part of their People, and their Reigns were commonly anxious and
unquiet because when engag d with a side, they were often forced, against the
Nature of their Office, to protect the Bad against the Good, and even to defend
the Maladministration by which they suffered.

They who were for Engrossing the Prince to Themselves, and who endeavored to
make him Suspect all others, gave their pernicious Advice this false Turn, That
because many Great Men retired, and because neither They, nor such as were
called of their Party, showed any Inclination to meddle in Business, it must be
that they meditated something else, and bore ill will toward the present
Government. Indeed, the Ambition of Mankind considered, it was a wonder, in
former Reigns, to see Persons the most conspicuous for Understanding, deep
Reach and Experience, employ their time with their Books in making Gardens, or
in Building, and that they should not rather seek those Dignities, to which
their Birth and Superior Abilities did in a manner give 'em a just Right. Why
did they let the chief Offices of the State be polluted by mean Hands? Why did
they suffer others to ruin that Country which was in their Power to save? And
why all this Philosophy in so light and busy Times? Why has there been now and
then a kind of a Press issued out for Ministers, so that as it were the
Vagabonds and Loyterers were taken in? Why have some Men been condol'd by their
Friends for having been drawn in to take a Great Place, and why have others
been universally Congratulated when turned out, tho with Marks of Displeasure?
when all this happened it could not be without a Reason, there must have been
some Strong Inducements that should move the Prime Persons of a Nation to shun
Employments attended with Power and Profit. No doubt, in former Reigns, it was
Because they did not like the Administration of affairs, nor the Persons with
whom they were to be joined; Because they perceived dark Designs carried on
against our Liberties, and that they were not willing to mix in desperate
Councils, nor to participate in the Blame of what they should not be able to
hinder; Because they saw the Prince Robbed by those about him, his Crown Lands
all shared and given away, and his Treasure wasted, and Because they saw Things
done that would bear no Inquiry, and that could never be justified before the
People.

They knew that our Laws put little Difference between a Minister who contracts
actual Guilt himself, and him who permits others to commit a Crime, which by
the Authority of his Office he might have prevented; Therefore when bad Things
were in Agitation, and when destructive Advices were promoted, Some have
refused Employments, others have laid down White Staves, the Secretaries Seals,
the Privy Seal, the Great Seal, and other Offices of high Trust, rather than
Act against their Masters true Interest, and the Constitution of their Country.
And for these Reasons, in former Reigns, the Ablest and Greatest Persons in the
Nation, and sometimes whole Parties of Men, have refused to meddle in the
Employments and Business of the State.

But when these Errors may be corrected, which a few commit at the Expense of
the whole Kingdom, when things will bear a right Administration, when the
Nations Money may be frugally managed, when the Thefts upon the Public can be
looked into and Punished, when those Servants may be called to an Account who
have broken their Trust, and in their Offices consented to the Plunder of their
Master, When true Order is promoted, When that Thrift can be set afoot which
will ease the People in their Taxes* When the pleasant Work of doing Good is to
be performed, and When they have not before their Eyes the frightful and heavy
Task of supporting ill Conduct, All Persons will embrace the Government, All
Parties will cheerfully come in, and the best Men will be the most Eager to
assist the state with their Purses, Councils, Endeavors, and Affections.

And thus we hope to have fully answered their Arguments who would deter a
Prince from looking into their Corruptions, by making him believe, that thereby
he will injure his only Friends, and who would narrow his Interest by confining
his Favors to their Party.

A King never wants Assistance who will look into abuses, and their Faction
whose Interest it is to protect Maladministration, will be found very weak
when He is earnest to have what has been amiss amended, because but a few are
Gainers by Misgovernment, and a Multitude are injured by it.

But as all Seasons are not proper for Physic, so all Times are not fit for
purging the Body Politic; Times of Action and War are not so convenient for
such Councils as tend to correct Abuses in the State. Perhaps, during the late
War, some Things may have been done in England, which the King, in his high
wisdom, may think necessary to animadvert upon now when He is at leisure from
His Business in the Field; And no doubt when He goes upon so good a Work, He
will be assisted by all the best Men of all Parties, and by the whole Body of
His People.

The Writer of these Papers has constantly endeavored to make his Studies tend
to the Service of the Public, and his Aim has been to incite in Young
Gentlemen a Desire of being acquainted with the Business of the Nation, and
this knowledge lying under abundance of Rubbish, his Scope has been to remove
this Rubbish, and to dress up crabbed Matters as agreeably as he can, and to
give, as it were, short Maps of Things which others will not take the Pains to
travel through themselves: In order to which he has devoted his Hours of
Leisure to Inquiries into the Trade and Revenues of this Kingdom; And not
serving his Country in an Active Life, he hopes to make his Solitude and
Contemplation of some use, so as to show himself not altogether an unprofitable
Member of the Commonwealth.

And the Parliament having last Sessions Constituted Commissioners for
Inquiring into, and Taking an Account of all such Estates, both Real and
Personal, within the Kingdom of Ireland, which have been Forfeited for High
Treason by any Person or Persons whatsoever, during the late Rebellion within
that Kingdom. And the House of Commons (as appears by their Printed Votes)
having directed that the Grants of the Crown Revenue in England should be laid
before 'em; And it being Notorious that almost all the Land remaining in the
Crown of England at the Revolution, and that much the largest Share of the late
forfeited Estates in Ireland, are now got into Private Hands; And the People at
this time lying under a great Variety of New Taxes, And the Necessities of the
State being very pressing, And the Public lying under many heavy Engagements,
and the Honor of the Nation being in a manner at Stake to make good several
Deficiencies, All Ways and*Means of Raising Money being likewise difficult to
the last Degree, It appearing also reasonable to consult the Land Interest, and
at last to give the Landed Gentlemen some Ease, who have born the chief Burden
of the War; And no Fond being large enough to come in the Room, and Place of
Land, except the late Forfeitures in Ireland; And all Men thinking it but just
and fair that the War in Ireland should pay some part of its Expense, Our Debts
likewise being so immence, that every thing should be looked into, and all
possible Thrift thought upon, Mankind also abhorring to behold a Few enriched
with the Spoils of a whole Country, and to see Private Persons accumulating to
themselves vast Wealth in this Poverty of the Public, And the Universal Voice
of the People seeming to call for some kind of Resumption, The Writer of these
Papers thought ^t might not be unseasonable to Publish a Discourse upon Grants,
in handling of which Subject he purposes to take the following Method.

First, he will show how the Greatness of the Romans took its Rise from the
Thrift that was shown in all Matters relating to the Public, That this Wise
Nation made almost every Foreign Expedition bear its own Charge, That the best
of their Emperors were the most Frugal, That such Emperors did not look upon
the Treasure and Revenues of the State to be their own, and absolutely at their
Disposal, but always thought that the Public, and the Commonwealth, had an
Interest in it, That when the Treasure and Revenues of the State were exhausted
by Prodigality, it made way for the Invasions of the Northern People, and at
last produced the utter Ruin of the Empire. This will be the Subject of the
Second Section.

In the third Section he will show how careful our Ancestors in England were at
the forming this Constitution, to make ample Provision for maintaining the
Kings Crown and Dignity, And that when those Lands and Revenues had been parted
with which were allotted for his, and the States Service, Parliaments have
seldom failed to relieve, and restore his Affairs by Acts of Resumption.

In the fourth Section he will show how our Ancestors have handled such
Ministers of State, as in breach of their Trust, did presume to procure to
themselves Grants of the Kings Lands, And how both this Nation, and other
Countries, have proceeded with those who did imbezzle, or convert to their own
use the Revenues of the Prince.

In the fifth Section he will state the present Deficiencies in diverse Fonds,
and offer several Reasons why the Forfeited Estates in Ireland ought to be
applied toward Payment of the Public Debts.

SECT II. Observations upon the Management of the Romans in their Public
Revenues.
IT may not be amiss to give the Prospect of a vast Empire, raised to its
Greatness by Wisdom and Frugality, and ruined by Profusion and ill Conduct: the
only use of History being, To give us good Rules, by which we should square our
own Actions, and to mark out the Shelves, and Rocks, upon which other
Governments have split, that thereby we may learn to steer our own Course
better, and to avoid the like Dangers.

Macrob. l. 1. Saturnal. c. 6.
Valerius Publicola was the first who ordered that the Revenue accruing to the
Commonwealth should be laid up in the Temple of Saturn, perhaps that the
Reverence of the Place might make it be held the more Sacred. They ledg'd there
two sorts of Treasure, the one in daily use, consisting of Tributes and
ordinary Payments, the other was called the Tit. Live. l. 27.
Aurum Vicesimarium, which was not to be touched but in cases of the last
Necessity. It Is true, for some Ages the Public had but little occasion for
Money, because, till the Siege of Veies, which was about Three Hundred and
Fifty Years after the Foundation of the City, their Soldiers had no stipend.
However to have a Reserve, which might answer any great Emergency, well suited
with the Foresight and Wisdom of that People. As their Empire grew, and as they
entertained Thoughts of enlarging their Dominion by distant Conquests* they
became more sollicitous to gather such a stock as might uphold the State in
times both of War and Peace, without burthening the ^lebeians (a matter by them
ever carefully avoided) in which they were very much assisted by the virtue of
those to whom they entrusted the Command of their Armies, of which for a long
time every one behaved himself like a faithful Steward to the Commonwealth,
accompting exactly for such Spoils as were made upon their Enemies. To the
Common Treasury were brought the Riches of Carthage, Sicily, of the Cities of
Asia, of the Kingdom of Macedonia, and of the other Conquered Provinces of
Greece. Their Generals, as well as their Statesmen, did not think of building
up Fortunes to Themselves, but of enriching the Commonwealth: And till some few
years after the last Punick War, we hardly read of any one who grew wealthy by
the Plunder of Provinces. In the following Age indeed several began to convert
to their own use part of the Spoils gotten abroad, but they were Men that
hatched wicked Designs against their Country, and who thought Private Wealth an
Engine very needful for such as purposed to overthrow Public Liberty; of which
number were Marius, Sylla, Pompey, and Caesar: Among these Robbers of the World
Lucullus may be reckoned, who perhaps had the same Intention as the rest of
inslaving Rome, but it is probable the Mutiny he found among his Soldiers after
his famous Victories, and wonderful conduct, made him out of love with Action,
so that he employed in a quiet Life, joined with excessive Luxury, what the
others made subservient chiefly to their Ambition: Not but that his Riotous
Pomp had in its Example Effects very dangerous to Liberty, since it is a
necessary Ground for all free Governments, that as well the manner of Living,
as the Estates of the Citizens, should bear some sort of Equality. However, tho
these men minded their own Concerns more than became good Patriots, yet all of
'em enriched their Country, and the vast sums of Gold and Silver brought into
the common Treasury, made a principal part of their Triumphs.

Besides, they who had the Management of Affairs took Care that every War
should at least maintain itself; which they did by laying a Tribute upon the
Conquered Nation. Fabritius having overcome the Lucani, Brutij, and the
Samnites, Di^nisii Fragm. Lib. 6.
Militem ditavit and quadringenta Talenta in Aerarium retulit, whose Example
Ammian l. 24.
Julianus proposed to himself and and Soldiers. Scipio in his Treaty of Peace
with the Carthaginians, obliged them to the Payment of ten thousand Talents in
fifty years; Tit. Live. l. 30.
December M Talentum Argenti descripta pensionibus aequis in annos L solverent;
over and above which, Argenti tulit in Aerarium pondo Centum Millia XXXIII. And
in the Treaty between T. Quintius Flaminius and K. Philip, one Article was,
Tit. Live. l. ^3.
Mill Talentum daret Populo Romano: dimidium presens, dimidium pensionibus
december annorum. Nor did Spain afford an ill Crop from one part of which
Cornelius Lentulus brought Ibid.
Auri Mill and Quingenta pondo quindecim, Argenti Viginta Millia, Signati
Denarios triginta quatuor Millia, and quingentos quinquaginta: And from the
other part, L. Stertinius quinquaginta Millia pondo Argenti. And from whence
not long after Helvius brought Tit. Live. l. 34.
Argenti infecti quatuorde^im Millia pondo Septingenta triginta duo: and
Signati bigatorum XVII Millia XXIII. and oscensis Argenti CXX Millia
CCCCXXXVIII. And Q. Minutius within two months after, Ibid.
Argenti pondo triginta quatuor Millia octingenta: Bigatorum LXXVIII Millia,
and oscensis argenti CCLXXVIII Millia. For which reason Porcius Cato, who was
at the same time in Spain, sent back the Purveyors who came from Rome to
provide Corn for the Army, with this memorable saying, Bellum seipsum alet. The
same T. Quintius Flaminius, when he made Peace with Nabis Tyrant of Sparta,
obliged him to pay Ibid.
Talenta centum ^rgenti in praesenti, and quinquaginta Taenta in Singulos annos
per annos octo. ^orcius Cato when he Triumphed for the Conquest of Spain lodged
in the Public ^reasury Ibid,
Argenti infecti XXV millia pondo, ^igati centum viginti tria millia, oscensis
uingenta quadraginta: Auri pondo mill uadringenta. T. Quintius Faminins when
^e Triumphed for the Victories in Greece, ^rought home Ibid.
Infecti Argenti december and ^cto millia pondo, and ducenta LXX facti, ^ auri
pondo tria millia septingenta qua^ordecim, besides an infinite mass of over
Treasure. The Conditions proos'd by Scipio Affricanus to the Amassadors from
King Antiochus, and which were afterward accepted with ery little alteration,
were Tit Live. l 37, ^^.
Pro impen^s deinde in bellum factis Quindecim mil^a Talentum Euboicorum
dabitis. Quin^nta presentia, duo millia and quingenta, ^m Senatus Populusque
Romanus, pacem omprobaverint, mill Talentum per XII nnos. Lucius Scipio when
he Triumphed or the Conquest of Asia brought home ^ Argenti pondo CXXXVII
millia; and Tit. Live. l. 37.
^CCCXX. besides Plate, and Gold and ilver coined. Cn. Manlius when he Trimph'd
for his Victories in Gallo-Graecia, ^esides other Wealth, brought home Tit.
Live. 1. 39.
Argenti pondo CCXX Millia: auri po^do MMCIII. And it is observed that when
Aemilius Paulus had subdued K. Persen^ (...) V^^. Paul. Aemil.
he lodged in the Public Treasury suc^ a mass of Wealth, that there was (...)
need of raising any kind of Taxes till (...) Consulship of Hirtius and Pansa.
S^ after the two Battles with Archelaus (...) Lieutenant of Mithridates near*
Chaero^ and Orchomenus, laid a Fine upon A^ Plut. vit. Sy^^ae.
Minor of * twenty thousand Tale^ which answers to near four Millions Plut.
vit. Cato. (...).
our Money. Cato V^isensis broug^ from Cyprus Seven Thousand Tale^ (above
thirteen hundred thousand Pou^ of our Money) which he made by (...) Sale of the
Jewels, Plate, Housholdst^ and other Riches, of the Ptolomy w^ poisoned himself
in that Island* and ^ Exactness with which Cato proceeded that Commission, is a
Noble* Pattern ^ such to follow, as will handle Matters Government with
Integrity and Virtue

The Design of these Papers being Stir up in the Minds of Young Men Zeal their
Country, and a love to Public H^nour, we thought it not amiss to lay ^fore 'em
these Examples of ancient The and Economy, by which Rome was ^ abled to manage
so many, and so exp^sive Wars: From whence may be very w^ inferred, that this
Commonwealth had never reached to so high a Pitch of Greatness, if their
Commanders abroad had been permitted, without any Account, to convert to their
own use the whole Spoil; Or if at home the Consuls, Praetors, Aediles, or
(which is yet worse) if the Quaestors, or Treasurers, had been allowed to
procure Grants to themselves; from the Senate, of such Lands, as, from time to
time, accrued to the State by right of Conquest. On the Contrary, had this sort
of negligent and foul Conduct been suffered in their affairs that Ruin must
have happened ^ong before, which came upon 'em as soon as they grew corrupted.

No Empire was ever great and strong enough to carry on long Wars without any
other Fond but its own Revenues, and those Nations which have attempted it,
have been quickly exhausted; For a tedious Course of high Taxes raised to
maintain Armies abroad, will as much impoverish the Invaders; as the Excursions
and Depredations of a sudden War destroy the Invaded; and where matters are not
so wisely ordered, as that the Invaded are compelled to pay the largest part of
the Reckoning, the Conquerors will, in no long Tract of time, be brought to as
bad a Condition as the Conquered People.

The Romans took their Measures better They made very few barren Expeditions*
And tho Dominion and Glory might (...) their principal Aim, yet it is evident
they ha^ something else in view, or at least tha^ they generally took care to
be paid their Expenses, which they brought about sundry ways; From some
vanquished Nation they took part of their Territory, sendi^ thither Colonies of
their own, by which at one and the same time, they disbu^ then'd themselves of
a great many Indige^ People, and Planted so many Strong Ga^risons to secure
their Conquests. Oth^ Countries they reduced to Provinces, ta^ing to themselves
part of the Tribut^ which the Natives before paid to their Tyrants. To other
Places they alotte^ the Payment of a Certain quantity ^ Corn, from others they
required the fu^nishing of Ships of War, and Ships ^ Burden: P^ut. vit. Sy^^^e.
Sylla compelled Mithridates, their Interview in Troas, to deliver to him
seventy Galleys with all their Trim They took either Arms, Ships, Soldiers
Mariners, or Provisions, from well nigh all the Nations that were honored with
the Title of Allies and Friends to the People of Rome, who were no better than
Tributaries under a softer name.

By these Courses, as they enlarged their Empire, they increased the Public
Revenues. * Pompey by his Victories brought ^ Plut. vit. Pomp.
the ordinary Income of the State from what before answered to about 1,250,000
l. of our Money, to 2,250,000 l. per Ann. which was yet farther augmented
afterward when the Gauls and Egypt became Provinces of Rome.

The Money locked up in the Temple of Saturn was rarely touched; we do not find
any considerable sum drawn from thence till Hannibal had been in Italy ten
years, about which time twelve of the 30 Latin Colonies refusing to give any
Assistance to the Common wealth, In this danger, Tit Live. l. 27.
Caetera expedientibus quae ad bellum opus erant Consulibus, Aurum
Vicessimaerium, quod in Sanctiore Aerario ad ultimos Casus servaretur, promi
placuit Prompta ^ad quatuor millia pondo Auri. But when Caesar invaded the
Liberties of his Country, this sacred Treasury was ransacked. Appian Alexandrin
says, Bell. (...) 1. 2.
Intactas ad id temporis Pecunias abstulit. Florus says, speaking of this
Action, (...) l. 4. ^. ^.
Nec Pompeius ab Italia quam Senatus ab Vrbe fugatur prior, quam poene vacuam
maetu Caesar ingressus Consulem Seipse facit, Aerarium quoque Sanctum, quia
tardius aperiebant Tribuni, jussit effring^, censumque and patrimonium populi
Romani antea rapuit, quam imperium. Some pretend to tell the exact sum which
he drew from thence. Freculph. Lexoviens says thus, Tom. 1 Chronicles. l. 7. c. 8.
Caesar Romam venit negatamque sibi ex aerario Pecuniam fractis foribus invasit
protulitque ex eo Auri pondo quatuor millia centum triginta and sex, Argenti
pondo nongenta Millia.

The ordinary Revenue of the Empire arising from the Colonies and Provinces,
was likewise without doubt very much impaired by the Civil Wars between Caesar
and Pompey, and between Caesar and Pompey's Sons, as also by the Civil Wars
which Augustus maintained with Brutus and Cassius: And certainly the Provinces
were enough harrass'd when they were divided between Augustus and Marc Anthony
(whose Luxury alone was sufficient to impoverish many rich Nations) and the
Ruin of these miserable People was yet more increased when Augustus, and
Antony, in a long Civil War, contended for the Dominion of the whole; but when
he began to Reign alone (which he did 44 Years) and as soon as he entertained
Thoughts of transmitting the Empire to his Family, he set himself to put the
Revenue in order, and to enrich the Public, as other Great (...) had done
before him. But beari^^ (...) he did, a great Mind, his principal (...) was to
embellish the City with magnificent Buildings, * Vrbem neque pro M^j^state
(...) D. Oct. Aug.
Imperii Ornatam and inundation ^hus incendiisque obn c^^iam, excoluit ad^o, ^t
jure sit gloriatus, marmoream se relinquere quam lateritiam accepisset.
However, he did not neglect to gather Treasure, of which the Money Tiberius
left behind him is a manifest Proof, for Tiberius himself, among his other
Vices, was not Covetous, Satis firmus ut soepe memoravi adversum Pecuniam. It Is
true, a great Estate did now and then tempt him to Cruelty, but this happened
rarely, and yet at his Death there was treasured up a prodigious Sum, Tacit.
l. 3. An.
Vicies ac Septies Millies HS. which reduced to our Money makes 21,093,750 l. A
wealth even in this Age perhaps not to be equaled by any of the Eastern Kings,
all which his Successor Caligula squandered away in less than a Year, Suet.
Calig.
non toto vertente anno absumpsit. Tiberius was a wary man, and no waster, but
it seems very probable that this immense sum was chiefly gathered together
under the long and peaceful Reign of Augustus, who had one Quality that never
fails to make a Prince rich, which was that he looked after the Public
Accounts; for of the three Books he left deposited in the Hands of the Vestal
Virgins, one was Suet. D. Oct. Aug.
Breviarium totius Imper^i, quantum militum sub signis ubique essec* quantum
Pecuniae in Aerario and fiscis and vectigaliorum residuis. Adjecit and
Liber^orum Servorumque nomina a quibus racio exigi posset. From which Place of
S^e^onius two things are observable, 1st, That this wise Prince in the Rules he
le^t behind him for future Government (these Books being of that Nature) (...)
that there might be a difference made between the Aerarium and the Fiscus,
reckoning one the Revenue of the Commonwealth, and the other his own private
Patrimony, out of which he gave those* Legacies that he bequeathed to Tiberius,
Livia, Drusus, Germanicus, and to the People of Rome. 2dly, That he left a kind
of an Intimation that he would have his Successor call such of his Servants and
Ministers to Account as had any ways defrauded the Public. That he made the
foreme^tion'd Distinction is plain from this, tha^ tho he left the Commonwealth
in so flourishing a Condition, yet in his Will he excused the smallness of his
Legacies from the Streightness of his Private Fortune; * Ibid.
Excusata rei familiaris mediocrit^te; alleging there would come very little
to his Heirs, tho he had in twenty years inherited from his Friends
quaterdecies Millies, that is, 31,250,000 l. and tho he had succeeded to two
Paternal Patrimonies, all which he had expended in the nccessary Services of
the State. The Distinction between the Prince's and the Public Revenue
continued under all the good Reigns, and the better the Prince was, the more
carefully he minded that Poverty should not grow upon the Public, as the only
means a good Ruler has to avoid burthening the People with Taxes. This
Distinction appears from many Passages in the Roman History, we shall take
notice only of some: Spartianus speaking of the Emperor Adrian, says, Spartian.
in Adriano.
Damnatorum bona in Fiscum Privatum redigi vetuit, omni summa in Aerario
Publico recepta. Pliny in his Panegyric upon Trajan says, At fortasse non
eadem Severitate Fiscum, qua Aerarium Cohibes? Imo tanto majore, quanto plus
tibi licere de tuo quam de pub lico credis. Tacitus says, Tacit. l. 6. An.
Et bona Sejani ablata Aerario ut in Fiscum cogerentur tum retulere Scipiones.
Haec and Silani and Cassii iisdem ferme aut Paulum immutatis verbis
adseveratione multa censebant. And in another place, Lib. ib.
Post quos Sex: Marius Hispaniarum ditissimus defertur incestasse Filiam and
Saxo Tarpeio dijicitur, ac ne dubium haberetur Magnitudinem pecuniae malo
vertisse aurariasque ejus, quanquam publicarentur, sibimet Tiberius seposuit.
Nero, among other things promised the Senate, Tacit. An. 13.
Nihil in Penatibus suis venale, discretam domum and Rempublicam, Teneret
antiqua Munia Senatus; That nothing should be Venal in his Palace; That his
own, and the Revenue of the Commonwealth should not be confounded together, and
that the Senate should enjoy its ancient Privileges. This Speech he made at
the beginning of his Reign, when he was guided by the Counsels of Seneca, who,
as Tacitus takes notice, penned the Oration. And no doubt there could not have
been laid down to a young Prince a better Platform for his future Government;
And there is Reason to think that the Philosopher, who had well enough Sounded
the Inclinations of his Pupil, had then a mind to suggest to him, that his
Paternal Fortune, with the Infinite Wealth which was to descend to him from his
(...) Agrippina, would be sufficient to ^^pply those Pleasures to which he saw
his Youth addicted, and that it would be for the safety of his Empire to set
aside the Public Revenue for the Uses of the Public: While he kept to these
Rules, his Reign, tho not quite Innocent, however was not so Monstrous, but
when his Flatterers had made him believe that the whole world was Caesar's
Patrimony, then he ran headlong into all sorts of Cruelty and Riot; For he
thought all things were permitted to him, who was Lord of all, and that no
Prodigality of his could exhaust such a Revenue as the Dominion over the whole
Earth must yield: These Imaginations made him enter into Prodigious Expenses in
Banquets, Buildings, and upon his Minions; So that he wasted in a short time
what had been hoarded up by his Predecessor Claudius, the infinite Riches he
had from his Mothers Succession, and what came to him from the Confiscation of
Seneca's Wealth, which amounted Tacit. 13. An.
to 2,343,750 * Ter Millies HS. And when his Gifts were looked into by Galba,
it was found that he had this way consumed what answers in our Money to
17,187,500 l. Tacit. l. ^ Hist.
Bis and vicies Millies HS. Donationibus Nero effuderat.

Tho the Servile part of Mankind are apt to extol profuse Princes, yet whoever
considers the Story of the Roman Emperors will find, that their Vices took rise
principally from this profuse temper, and by contemplating their Lives he will
see, that Prodigality drove 'em into Want, Want into Rapine and Extortion; when
they had oppressed the People they became Odious, when they were Hated they
grew Fearful and Suspicious, Fear and Suspicion made 'em immediately dip their
hands in Blood, and this ever was, and ever will be the Natural Progress of
Tyranny, as particularly appears by the Actions of Caius Caligula, Nero,
Vitellius, Domitian, Commodus, Julianus, Antoninus* Caracalla, Heliogabalus,
and those other Monsters under whom the World groaned for many Years, and who
by their Profusion were first led into Rapine and Murder.

And as a further Instance how fatal the Prodigality of Princes is to their
Nations, The Roman Empire was so distressed by the Riots and Expenses of Nero,
Otho, Vitellius, (who altogether) (including Galba's time) reigned but fifteen
years and eight Months, according to Dion Cassius) that when Vespasian took the
Government in hand; he declared the Commonwealth could not subsist, unless Ways
and Means were found out of rais^^g what answers to 312,500,000 l. of our
Money, Suet. T. Fl. Vesp.
Professus Quadringenties Millies opus esse ut Resp. stare possit. Into such an
immense Debt was the Empire brought by Tigellinus, Nymphidius, Patrobius,
Polycletus, Vatinius, Elius, Titus Vinius, Cornelius Laco, Icelus, Caecina,
Fabius Valens, Asiaticus, Marcellus Eprius, and the other Rapacious Ministers
of State, who under those dissolute and negligent Reigns, devoured the
Commonwealth; Insomuch that Vespasian, a most excellent Prince, who came to
rescue his Country out of these destructive hands; when he went about to
disengage the Public, and to put the Empire into a posture of Defense, was
fore'd, against his Inclination, and the Goodness of his Nature, to oppress
Ibid.
the People with Taxes; * Ad Manubias and Rapinas necessitate Compulsus, summa
Aerarii Fiscique inopia; by which it appears how much it imports the Ruler of a
Nation, with careful Eyes, to look after his Treasure, since the want of it may
compel him to Actions, for which, at the time and in after Ages, his Virtue
will be censured: For tho this Wise Emperor had nothing in his thoughts but
the good of humane kind, and tho this Character be given of him, That I^ld.
male * Partis optime usus est; In (...) Genus liberali^simus, explevi^ Censum
Senatorium, Consular inopes sus^entavit, pluri^nas per totum orber^ civitates
terrae molu, aut incendio afflictas* restituit in melius. Ingenia and Arts ve^
maxim fovit. And tho these and many other Noble things are said of him, yet he
is reproached with his ways of raising Money, for not only he set up again
several Impositions abolished by Galba, but he added new and more heavy
burdens, he augmented the Tributes of the Provinces, and in some Places
doubled 'em, He himself exercised diverse sordid Monopolies; He made an open
Traffic of Honors, Employments, and Pardons; He put into Offices of Trust the
greatest Harpies he could find, that himself might afterward have the
squeezing of 'em for their Oppressions; All which doings are so many Blots upon
his Fame. If then the wants of the State could force the best of Men upon the
worst of Actions, how carefully should Princes avoid being reduced to such
Necessities.

How far Vespasian proceeded in disengaging the Public from the Debt of
312,500,000 l. History is Silent, but we may presume he and his Son Titus (who
between 'em governed upwards of twelve Years) went a good way toward putting
things in order, however all was again unravelled by the younger Son Domitian.
But the Golden bunch of Flesh which Domitian dreamt grew out behind his Neck,
that is, the Succeeding Emperors, Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, and Antoninus Pius,
whose Rule took up about Sixty four Years, gave the Affairs of the Commonwealth
a better Complexion: They had been so careful of the Public Revenue, that when
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus came to the Empire, he found in the Treasury what
answers in our Money to Xiphil. ex Dione Partin.
21,093,750 l. This Marcus Antoninus, tho in his Nature very bountiful, having
given to the People a larger Donative than they had ever seen before, was yet
so frugal of the Public Money, that when he was going upon an Expedition
against the Seythians, he would not draw any Sum from the Treasury with^^^
first having permission from the Senate, affirming Xiphil. ex Dion. M. Anto.
That such Money and every thing else belonged to the People of Rome; and
saying before the Fathers He had nothing in particular, no not so much as the
House beliv'd in: This Prince and Philosopher another time before, being
pressed by his Army for a Donative after a Signa^ Victory, refused it* with
this memorab^^ Saying, The more I give these young Soldiers, the more I must
oppress their P^rents. What had been collected in fiv^ wise and frugal Reigns,
was dissolutel^ wasted by Commodus in twelve Year and Nine Months, Insomuch
that when Pertinax came to the Empire he foun^ in the Treasury (as he declared
before the Senate) but what answers in our Money to Xiphil. ex Dione. Pertin.
7812 l. 10 s. Whereby it is seen that the Prudence of a whole Age may be
defeated in a short space of time, if the Prince be either bad in his own
Inclinations, or if he let himself be misled by ill Statesmen* But whoever
considers the Lives of such as have ruled tyrannically, and oppressed the
People, will find that but few of 'em were wicked through an innate temper of
their Minds, for the Beginnings of the worst Reigns were generally blameless,
which is a proof that the Dictates of Nature were right enough. How comes it
then to pass that so many have governed ill, and why have most of 'em rather
inclined to bad than Good? Gnari Meliorum and quae Fama Clemen^iam Tacit. ^. 4.
An.
sequeretur, tristiora Mall^. The reason is obvious enough, They were corrupted
by those about 'em; for tho their Persons are made Sacred, and defended by
innumerable Laws, tho they are set so much above the rest of Mankind in Titles
and Privileges, tho their smaller Faults are either forgiven or approved of,
tho they have ample Provision made for their State, Pomp, and Safety, and tho
all manner of ways they are sufficiently recompensed for the Troubles and Toils
they suffer in their Great Office, yet few of 'em will perform it by
themselves, but fatally choose rather to commit it to others: Not many of 'em
are like Severus, who, as he drew his last breath, called out, Xiphil. ex Dion.
Sever.
Is there any Public Business to do? Give it me, that I may dispatch it before
I go. They rather choose what they call a Partner of their Cares; Minions,
Favorites, and Ministers, most commonly first known to 'em in their Pleasures,
and afterward called in to their chief Business: To these they leave the whole
Affairs of the State, rarely looking into any thing with their own Eyes; And
few being able to defend themselves against those they love and trust, these
false Friends lead their Master which way they please, but most commonly into
the worst, as best suiting with their private Interest. If the Prince be young,
they corrupt him with Luxury and Riot; If Old, they try to make him Suspicious,
Cruel, and suggest to him designs against the Liberties of his Country, not so
much to augment his Power, as to increase their own; They endeavor to shut him
up as much as they can from the sight of his People; not considering how
dangerous Solitude is to Princes, as in the instance of Tiberius, * Quisolus
and nullis Tacit. 1. 3. Ann.
voluptatibus avocatus maestam vigilantiam and malas curas exercuit. But be the
Prince Good or Bad, Young or Old, they promote and encourage in him negligence
in all public Concerns, but chiefly such as relate to his Income and Expenses,
that with less Observation, and more Impunity, they may prey upon him: For tho
Care of Accounts, and in Revenues, does not require a Sublime Understanding,
and suits best with the middle Capacities, yet few Princes have minded a Matter
so important to themselves, and so much for other Peoples ease, no doubt
diverted from it by such as have had the Management of their Affairs. All the
Riots, Expenses, as well as the Cruelties of such of the forementioned Reigns
as proved bad, were principally promoted by the Ministers those Princes had
about them; And even the Fell Disposition of this Commodus, of whom we spoke
last, was urged on to greater Excess and Rage by Cleander, who taken from the
Xiphilinus Ex. Dion. Commod.
Lees of the People, was mounted up to the highest Honors, and for a time had
the disposal of all Dignities and Offices, till at last he was slain in a
popular Tumult.

But to follow this matter of the Revenue of the Roman State as far as Herod.
1. 2.
we can trace it in their Histories: Helvius Pertinax who succeeded Commodus did
not Rule quite three Months, He endeavored to prevent the Rapine of the Freed
Men and Officers of the Court, and to hinder the Robberies and Violence of the
Praetorian Bands, but he was killed in the attempt, the Court and Camp being
then both so depraved that they could not bear a grave and frugal Reign, which
should be a warning to all Governments, that have any Freedom left, not to let
Corruptions of this Nature grow till they are too big to be corrected. Julianus
came next, having bought the Empire, He endeavored by excess of Liberality to
gain that Affection which was not due to any Virtue he had, but Princes who
endeavor this way to become Popular gain a few at the cost of many, and so are
hated by the Major part: He consumed as much as one could do who governed but
two Months. Severus was next elected, whose Reign of near eighteen years was
mostly taken up in Civil Wars, first with Niger, and then with Albinus for the
Sovereignty, and in Foreign Expeditions into Parthia, Arabia, Palestine, Egypt,
and lastly into Britain: And tho this was a Reign of War, and tho Severus was
expensi^^ in Public Buildings, and magnifice^^ ^o his Soldiers, having at one
time made a Donative to them of what answers to 1562,500 l. of our Money, yet
he left Xiphil. ex Dion. Sever.
to his Successor an immense Treasure, which we must attribute to the
indefatigable Application he showed in the universal Business of the State. And
though he may be reckoned among the Cruel Emperors, yet it is observed of him
that he never hunted after Confiscations, from whence we may infer he grew rich
by mere Economy, his Story being an Instance that neither Liberality, War, nor
any other Expense, will hurt a Prince who minds his own Affairs.

His Son Antoninus Caracalla succeeded, who lavished among the Soldiers what
his Father had so carefully laid up, having for above six Years together robbed
the whole World to enrich them, plundering, confiscating, and murdering the
best Men of the Empire, to seed the licentious Appetites of his Men of War, and
yet he was killed in Mesopotamia, in the midst of that Camp he had so much
courted and favored; from whence may be observed, that the Love of Subjects is
not to be bought with Money, but to be obtained by wise Government, and that
all sorts of People, even Soldiers, reverence a Prince more who by good Conduct
keeps something in his Power to give, than they do him who gives all away;
Expectation and Hope often carrying Men much further than the Sense of past or
present Benefits.

Among the rest of Caracalla's Monstrous Xiphili^us Ex. Dio. Ca^acal.
Actions, one was to * utter false Money, issuing out Lead Silvered over, and
Copper gilt, as legal Coins. And perhaps it will not be foreign to our present
Subject in this place to make some short Observations upon the Roman Coin; and
the first that occurs is, That the Coin was best and most weighty in the time
of the Commonwealth, and afterward best and most weighty under the best
Princes, as under such the Revenue of the State was most carefully looked
after. Marc. Anthony the Triumvir began first to debase the Roman Coin, his
Example was afterward followed by the Caesar's. Plin. l. 33. c. 9.
Miscuit denario Triumvir Antonius ferrum, alii a pondere subtrahunt cum sit
justum octoginta quatuor e libris signari. Silver was first Coin d in Rome 585
ab V C. Q. Fabius being Consul, 5 years before the first Punick War; They did
not Coin any Gold till 62 Years after. The Denarius was the Silver Species most
in use among them, under the Consuls they Coined 84 Denarij out of the Roman
Plin. l. 3. c. 33.
pound of Silver, that is, Seven from the Ounce, but in the Reign of the Twelve
Caesar's they coined from the Pound *86, 88, and in process of time they came to
make 96 from the Pound, that is 8 from an Ounce. As to their Gold Coins the
Aureus was double the weight of the Denarius; and, for a good while, when they
diminished the Silver Coin, they diminished the Gold Coin in Proportion, so
that whereas under the Consuls they Snellius in Erotost-Batavo.
Coined from the Roman Pound of Gold 42 Aurei Nummi, under the Emperor they came
to Coin from the pound 48 From Augustus to Vespasian the Silver Coin from time
to time lessened in weight. From Vespasian to ^lex. Severus it stood at a stay*
in respec^ of weight. Under Severus and Gordianus it recovered its ancient
weight, and so continued till Justinian, with little difference in the weight,
bu^ frequent Change and Abasement by Alloy. But after Justinian, when the
barbarous Nations made Eruption upon the Empire, they brought universal
Confusions upon the Coins, (...) they did upon all other things tha^ related to
good Polity. The Gold Coin did likewise suffer its change^ ^ Greaves of the
Roman Foot and Denarius.
and diminution; For * Greaves, who in his Travels had weighed many of the Aurei
collected in curious Cabinets abroad, and not impaired by time, found 'em from
the first to the last of the Twelve Caesar's, to weigh from 123 to 112 Grains
English, and from Nerva to Heraclius, from 111 to 69 Gr. English. This in
general may be observed, that with the Empire the Roman Coins declined,
necessity driving the Prince, as the Species grew scarce, to put a higher value
upon it. When we reflect upon the vast Sums mentioned in their Histories, we
must be driven to own, that about the time of Tiberius Money was as plentiful
in Italy as it is as this day in any part of Europe, and that it bore the same
proportion with other Commodities as it does at present; And that a Sum of
their Money answerng to ours would maintain a Man in the same Port as the same
Sum does Tacit. 13. Ann.
now; As for Example, Nero allowed ^a^erius Messalla, of a most noble Family,
great Grandson to Corvinus the Orator, by annual Pension Quingena ^estertia,
which in our Money answers to ^6^96 l. Quibus Messalla paupertatem ^nnoxiam
sustent^ret. Ves^asian maintained ^uch Senators as were of Consular Dignity,
and had fallen to decay, with ^he like Annual Pension, Suet. T. Fl. Vesp.
Consulares in ^pes Quingenis Sestertius annuis Sustenta^it, which shows that
what was then about 3906 l. would support a Man of the best Quality in an
honorable way of living, and not less, for Vespasian, who looked to what he
did, would not have given so much, if less would have sufficed. That the
Species abounded then in Italy as much as it does now in any Country, appears
by many other Instances too tedious to be here inserted. But this will not seem
strange to such as consider, that the Wealth of all the known Parts of the
World had for several Ages been drawing thither to center in one City, And
there it might have continued, and in the near adjacent Provinces, and this
Wealth might, for ought we know, have preserved the State to this day, if, as
in the times of the Commonwealth, or, as was done under wise Reigns, they had
preserved a sufficient Proportion of it treasured up for the uses of the
Public. But when the Emperors, and when, after their Example, the People fell
into an Excess of Luxury, to feed that Luxury, Foreign Countries, in the way of
Trade, soon got back that Gold and Silver which the Romans had before taken
from them by Force of Arms; And when the Public was so exhausted, and when
Private Men were so impoverished as not to be in a condition to help the
Public, the Empire was left naked and defenseless: For a great Dominion is to
be secured but two Ways, either by Virtue, or Force; by Virtue such as the
Romans and Athenians showed in the beginning of their Commonwealth; By Force,
such as the Persian Kings, and the Roman Emperors were Masters of, which
consisted in Immense Treasures laid up, large Tributes arising from the People,
great Fleets and Armies; But when Countries are effeminated by Luxury, and
impoverished by Riot and ill Conduct, that is, when they have neither Virtue
nor Strength remaining, they presently become a Prey to the Warlike Nations
that will invade them.

We have made this short Digression, and given Instances of several Changes in
the Roman Money, To show how much the Coin of a Country is its true Pulse; and
That if it beats irregularly, it is a Symptom that the Body Politic labors
under some dangerous distemper; That if the Prince be compelled to diminish its
weight, it is a Token that the Species begins to be drawn out of his Dominions;
That if he be forced to substitute something else in the room of Gold and
Silver, as Caracalla did Lead, and Copper, it is a mark that a great Part of it
is gone; That if the Species comes to be drain d away, or universally
corrupted, as it was toward the latter end of the Roman Empire, it is a
Demonstration that the ruin of the State is coming on apace. But to resume our
Discourse.

After Caracalla, Macrinus was chosen, who tho obscurely born, and rising to
Greatness by leisurely Steps, yet could not avoid plunging himself into the
Volupruous courses of his Predecessor: Warring with the Parthians he was
defeated in two Battles by Xiphil. ^x Dion. Macrin.
Artabanus, and forc d to purchase a Peace at the Expense of what answers to
156^ ^0 l. of our Money, a thing very strange to the Romans who were wont to
sell, and not to buy Peace; but this Gap being opened, their wealth afterward
more than once flew out the same way. After this ignominious Treaty, Macrinus
was soon overthrown by an Army led by a Woman, Maesa Sister to Julia the Wife
of Severus, who placed upon the Imperial Seat Antoninus Heliogabalus her
Grandson. This Monster exceeded all that ever went before him in Rapine,
Cruelty, and Riot. He was Slain for his detestable Vices; His Mother Mammaea
had persuaded him to adopt his Cousin German Alexander Severus who succeeded,
Lampridius in Alex.
He governed well and wisely; In this Reign, which la^^ed thirteen Years,
endeavors were made to reduce things to some Order, But the times could not
bear a good Prince: He was slain by his Soldiers in Gau^^*

After his Reign there were mauy Revolutions in the Empire, and much confusion,
till Constantine took the Government upon him. Alexander Severus was kill d in
the 988th year ab V. C. and Constantine began to rule alone Anno ab V. C. 10^7.
And whereas two good Princes Edw 3d, and Q. Eliz. ruled in this Kingdom above
94 years, Rome between the time of Alex. Severus and Constantine, which was but
89 Years, saw Nineteen Reigns, and more than twenty Emperors, many during that
space having usurped the Title; not to reckon the Thirty Tyrants who set up
themselves in several Provinces in the Reign of Gallienus, to such Miseries and
Changes are Corrupted Countries obnoxious.

During this time many things happened, which tended to the Impoverishment and
weakening of the Zosimus l. 1.
Empire, under Trajanus Decius the Goths began to invade it, and soon after the
Scythians: Vibius Gallus, who succeeded Decius bought a shameful Peace of the
Goths with Eutropius l. 9.
Money. Under Gallienus the Germans got into Italy as far as Ravenna; Macedonia,
Pontus, and Asia, were invaded by innumerable Troops of the Goths and
Scythians, Daci^ beyond the Danube threw off all Subjection; the Quadi and
Sarmat^ possessed themselves of Pannonia, and the Parthians having seized upon
Mesopotamia made Inroads into Syria.

But to save the Empire from utter Ruin, during this time there were some good
Reigns; Valerius Aurelianus, a Warlike Prince did almost Restore it to its
Ancient Limits. Probus, who was Chosen against his will, went a great way
toward Repelling the Barbarians, and under him the Roman Affairs flourished;
but afterward by bad Reigns Things were again brought into Confusion: However
all along, while either the Prince, or the Ministers were good, some Care was
taken of the Public. It Is true, where there were so many Changes, and so
frequent Civil Wars, it is not probable any Money could be laid up; but other
Provisions were made whereby the People might be Relieved in Peace, and
Defended in time of War. Severus had Magazines of Corn. Spartianus in Sever.
Severus Rei Frumentariae quam minimam repererat, ita consuluit ut excedens
ipse vita 7 annorum Canonem Populo Romano relinqueret. Mesitheus, who was Chief
Minister, and Father-in-law to the Emperor Gordian, is the true Pattern of a
Wise Statesman careful for the Public. Capitol. in Gord.
Cujus viri tanta in Republica dispositio fuit ut nulla esset unquam Civitas
Limitanea potior quae non posset Exercitum Populi Romani ac Principem far;
quae totius anni in Aceto Frumento and Larido atque Hordeo and Paleis condita
non haberet; Majores vero Vrbes aliae 30 dierum, aliae 40, nonnullae 2 mensium,
quae minimum 15 dierum. So that when the Luxuries and Riots of preceding
Times, had partly drein'd the Empire of its Gold and Silver, they made Stores
of another Kind; Though indeed from the beginning there was little drawn but
Provisions from several Provinces; for Trajan had Ordered, That the Leptitani
in Mauritania, should furnish Oil: That Part of Galia and the Spaniards,
chiefly those of Baetica, should Provide Horses, besides Materials for
Clothing, Oil, and Bacon: In Italy the Lucani, were to find Hogs, and the
Brutii Oxen: Moreover, from the time they were Subdued, Sicily, and Egypt,
were to provide a certain proportion of Corn, which varied according to the
Necessities of the Public. Thus from many Countries, they drew the Tributes in
Kind, which were partly made use of for the Peoples Relief, or stored up in
good Times, and in bad Times dissipated, no benefit thereby arising to the
Commonwealth.

Constantine proceeded a great way toward remedying the Disorders which had
crept into the Empire, under the loose Reigns that preceeded his. He corrected
Rapine and Oppression in the Ministerial Parts of the Government, by a solemn
Vid. L. 4. de Accustat. C. Theod. Lib. 9. Tit. 1.
Edict, inviting all sorts of People to Accuse such of his Ministers and
Officers as had been corrupt: He restrained Usury by severe Laws, which is one
certain way of Enriching both the public and private Men; for where immoderate
Usury has been suffered, Poverty was always National and Universal: He
likewise, Regulated the Roman Mint.

But the Wisdom of Two or Three Reigns avails little to preserve an Empire, the
Foundation of whose Ruin is already laid; their Ancient Virtue was long since
gone, Power and Wealth remained for some time after, Martial Discipline, from
whence their Greatness took its Rise, was slackened under Effeminate Princes,
and at last quite corrupted by Civil Wars: However, upon so strong a Basis was
this Commonwealth Built, that neither the Madness of the Emperors, nor the
Vices of the People, could probably have Destroyed it so soon, but for other
Accidents which helped on its Ruin.

Though M. Antoninus Philosophus had Associated into the Empire Lucius Verus, and
though Severus had done the same with his Son Antoninus Caracalla, yet there was
no Actual Division made, and the Body of the State remained one, though with Two
Heads. But between Probus and Florianus, the Territories were in a manner
parted. Eutrop. L. 9.
Afterward Dioclesian Ruled alone, who Associated into the Empire Maximianus
Herculeus, they two Governed jointly; but when they Deposed themselves, the
Empire was again divided between Maximianus Galerius and Constantius Chlorus,
who Ruled each their separate Provinces; but at last, all fell into Constantin
the Son of Chlorus; but it was again divided among the Sons of Constantin. But
Constantius the Second Son surviving his Brothers, Reunited again all into
himself, and it continued one Empire till Valentinian, who divided it again
between himself and his Brother Valens. But the Sons of Valentinian dying
Childless, the Empire came again entire to Theodosius; who again divided it
between his Two Sons, Arcadi^ and Honorius; and so it stood divided till the
Western Empire was quite Subverted.

This Division of its Territory, places of Strength, Tributes, Revenues and
Legions, was most fatal to that Commonwealth which had been founded with so
much Wisdom, and for many Ages, defended with such Courage, and which the
Gauls, Carthaginians, and the Cimbrians, had in vain attempted. But its Ruin
was not presently compassed; and so strongly was this Frame built, that to pull
it a pieces was the work of above One hundred and fifty Years. The Empire being
weakened and divided encouraged Alarich to invade Italy; who at first was
bravely Vanquished in two Battles, and repulsed by Stilico; but afterward the
Senate was forced to purchase the Retreat of Alarich at the Expense of Four
thousand pound weight of Gold; who not long after broke the Peace, besieged
Rome, took and Sac'kd it, An. ab V. C. 1163. And about this time the Hunns
invaded Pannonia; The Vandals, Alans and Swevi, and the Goths who had formerly
invaded Gaul, did then with the Burgundians fix themselves there. Not long
after Africa was miserably harrass'd by the Vandals, and Carthage was taken by
Genserich; and in a little time Attila with his Hunns made an Attempt upon the
Empire, whose first Irruption was stopped with Six thousand Pound weight in Gold;
but in a few Years he again invaded the Western Provinces. Gaul felt his Rage;
then he came and laid all Italy wast, destroying many Populous Cities, so that
of them there remains nothing now but their Names. After this, Genserich King
of the Vandals landed in Italy, Plundered Rome the Second time, carrying away
all which even the Rage of Alarich had left: In this Century Theodorick King of
the Goths fixed himself and his People in Spain, and the Franks obtained a firm
Footing in Gaul after a long Contest with the Natives, and the Romans: At last
Rome was for the Third time taken and Sac'kd by Barbarians, conducted by
Odoacer Prince of the Heruli; who was Proclaimed King of Italy. And thus an End
was put to the Roman Dominion, after it had continued under Kings, in a
Commonwealth, and under Emperors; about 1228 Years, reckoning from the first
Foundation of the City.

And now to recapitulate the Reasons of this Great Peoples Ruin. First their
Luxuries extinguished ancient Honor, and in its room introduced irregular
Ambition* Ambition brought on Civil Wars; Civil War made Single Persons too
considerable to remain afterward in a private Condition; so that the
Foundation of their Destruction was laid in the Century wherein Caesar invaded
their Liberties; However they might have continued a Powerful and Flourishing
Nation for many Ages, if the succeeding Princes had imitated either Caesar or
Augustus: But many of those that followed assumed to themselves, unlimited
Athority, and when bad Emperors came, they pulled down what had been building
up by the Wisdom of all their Predecessors: They seized upon that Treasure
which the Frugality of preceding Times had set aside for urgent Occasions,
They accounted the Public Revenues to be their own particular Property, and to
be disposed of at their Pleasure, such as were Lavish squandred away among
their Minions and Favorites, that which was to maintain the Dignity of the
State. When their Profusion had reduced them to Necessities, they fell to
laying exorbitant Taxes, and to Pillage the Remote Provinces; when those
Provinces were harrass'd and exhausted by continual Payments, they became weak
and unable to resist Foreign Invasions: In those naked and defenseless
Provinces, the Barbarians nested themselves, and, when they were grown Strong
and Powerful, from thence they made Irruptions into Italy, till at last they
came to Invade and Conquer Rome it self, the very Head and Seat of the Empire.

From this brief Account of the Roman Affairs perhaps it will appear, That to
let Ministers Wast the Public Revenues, or to suffer any Negligence and
Profusion of the like Nature, is of dangerous Consequence both to the Prince
and People.

SECT. III. Of Resumptions.
Grotius Prolegom. in Hist. Goth. Vand. etc.
THE Southwestern Parts of the Roman Empire were invaded and possessed by that
Torrent of People which anciently issued out of Scanzia, a very large Tract of
Land, bounded on the North and East by the Sea, and on the West and South by
the Botnick Bay, and Baltic Sea, as likewise by Rivers which empty themselves
into the Botnick Bay and the Russian, or White Sea. These Nations when they
first left their Native Soil, for a great while had no certain Seats, but
traversed from one Region to another, till at last they came to fix themselves
in those Provinces they had entirely Conquered. Of these the Visigoths and
Ostrogoths were the most considerable. The Ostrogoths to whom all Pannonia had
been assigned by the Romans, extended their Territory far and wide, till they
seized Italy it self, under Theodorick. The Visigoths seized on Part of Gaul,
Planting themselves in Aquitaine, and having cantoniz'd in other parts of the
Country, there they continued for some time. They likewise formed a Dominion in
Spain, which lasted above Three hundred Years; reckoning from Athlaufus the Son
of Alarick (who by consent of the Roman Emperor Honorius, was settled in the
Borders between Gaul and Spain) to Roderick, who was totally subdued by Tariff
the General of Vlit Miramamoli^ the Moor. Part of these Visigoths fixed
themselves likewise in this Kingdom of Britain; for from the Ancient Scanzian
were derived the Vid. Sheringham Discept. de Orig. Gentis Angl.
Jutes, Gutes, or Getes who nested in part of Germany, and were afterward
called Saxons, and who from Germany came and took Possession of this Island.

Of the same Scanzian, or Gothic Race were likewise the Danes, who about Two
hundred Years before the Norman Conquest, invaded England, planting Colonie^
and gaining such Footing here from time to time, that at last they wholly
Master's both the Saxons and the Natives.

From this Soil likewise, barren o^ Provisions, but fertile in producing Men
did spring the Normans, who under the Conduct of Roll left their own Soil;
first touching upon our Coast, and finding no Reception here, they were content
upon Terms, to depart, and carry the Terror of their Arms elsewhere, which they
did into France, where by their Valor they obtained that Tract of Land, which
from them was called Normandy, from whence in One hundred and Twenty Years they
came, and in one Battle Conquered England.

Thus by these Swarms from the North, of Men seeking new Seats, the best part
of Europe came into the Possession of a rough Warlike People, whom the Luxuries
of Asia, Greece and Rome, had neither corrupted nor refined; And these new
Inhabitants changed every thing, introducing in all Places new Customs, other
Manners, Languages, different ways of making War, new Laws, and new Forms of
Government.

And these several Branches, springing from the same Stemm, it must follow,
that the Fruit they bore would be near of a Taste; by which we mean that in
their Manners, Laws, and principally in their Politic Government, they must of
consequence, as indeed they did, very much resemble one another.

And whoever looks into the Ancient Constitutions of England, France, Spain,
Denmark and Sweeden, will find, that all these Nations, had one and the same
Form of Government; and though they might vary in some Circumstances, yet they
all agreed in certain Fundamentals, which were, That the People should have
their Rights and Privileges; That the Nobles, or Men of chief Rank, should
have some Participation of Power, and That the Regal Authority should be
limited by Laws.

It Is true the German Emperors have some shadow of, and pretend Succession to
the Roman Empire; but whoever contemplates their Laws, Constitution, and Form
of Government, will find all strongly impregnated with the Gothic Tincture.

However, he who considers the Migrations of these Men, will perceive, that the
Governments which they established, were the necessary and unavoidable
Consequence of their Expeditions, and that People seeking new Seats could not
properly put themselves under any other Form.

For so vast a Design as that of leaving one's own, and invading a remote
Country, must fall into some Bold and Great Mind, that could first conceive,
and then be able to go through with such an Undertaking; and he who was thus
qualified with Courage and Conduct, easily obtained Supreme Authority over all
the rest; from whence came, That these People chose to be governed by Kings.
But the first Expense of this Expedition being very great, and he who projected
it not being able to bear it all himself, he Associated to him certain of his
Principal Countrymen, who had likewise Followers and Dependants of their own;
These in Consideration of what they contributed toward the Common Design, were
not only to share, in the Conquered Lands, but in these Lands to enjoy certain
Powers and Privileges, and to have Names of Honor, by which they were to be
distinguished and set above the rest: From whence came, That these Northern
Nations had among 'em the Titles of Peers, Pallatins, Barons, Earls, Grantz,
Graffs, Notables, Grandees, and Dukes. And the Persons of prime Rank under
these or the like Appellations, were a distinct Part or Member of the Body
Politic, and were to protect those who had come under their Banners, and
followed their Fortune, and were vested by the Constitution with eminent Power,
that they might be a Skreen between the Prince and People. But the Labor and
Dangers of these Expeditions were to lie upon the Common People, by whose hands
the Battles were to be fought; and no doubt they had not been tempted abroad if
they could not have promised themselves a better Condition than what they had
at home, and if they were to be only Beasts of Burden to the Great Ones: For
which Reason, by Compact with those whom they followed, they were likewise to
have a certain Share in the future Conquest; from whence came, That in the
Settlements made by these Northern Nations, respect was had to the Interest of
the People: There was reserved to 'em their distinct Rights and Privliedges,
and Part of the Conquered Lands were Assigned to them, in which, the better
Sort had Freeholds, and those of inferior Degree, held of their Captains,
Lords, and Leaders.

Their Military Constitution, gave likewise Form to their Civil Government:
Their King as he was Head of the Army in the moving Camp abroad, so, when they
came to settle, he was Head of the Commonwealth: And as the Principal Officers
and Chief Captains had been his Council of War, so when they had Peace and
Rest, they could not be easily persuaded to quit that Share in the
Administration of Affairs, of which they had tasted in the Field; and their
Titles and Lands being to descend, they became, by Virtue of their Tenures, his
hereditary and standing Council; and as in the Field they had wont to advise
him in difficult Matters, for the common Good of the whole, and to lay before
him the Necessities and Grievances of their Followers and Dependants, so at
home it grew their Right to do the same. But when these Nations came to fix and
mingle with the Natives, and when they had made Compacts and Agreements with
those Natives, this united Body (which likewise increased in Wealth and
Possessions) soon became so Considerable as to make it necessary, That what was
properly called the Commons, should be a distinct Part of the State, and that
it should be Represented by Persons and Members chosen from among themselves.
Thus in all these Northern Establishments, there has been what was called
either the Estates, Assemblies, the Cortez, Diets, or Parliaments.

This was the Original Constitution, in most of the Establishments made by
these Northern Nations, and under this Form of Government they continued
without any material Change, till the Two last Centuries.

But in process of Time, the Soil alters the Nature of Man, as much as it does
that of Plants; warmer Climates did by degrees soften these rough and Warlike
People. Too much Sun produces that Effeminacy, which is the proper Matter for
Arbitrary Power to work upon: Therefore all the East and Southern World has
been Enslaved, while colder Climates seem more tenacious of their Liberties.
The French were the first who stooped to the Yoke of Regal Authority, not
limited by Laws; Spain soon followed, to whose Kings their Foreign Acquisitions
gave more Greatness than consisted with the Freedom of their People. At last it
grew a Mode among lesser Kingdoms to imitate what had been done in larger
Empires: So that the Danes and Sweeds were content to make and put on their own
Fetters: And we in England were desiring to be like the other Nations round
about us; had not the Virtue and Courage of a Few saved us often very narrowly
from the Corruption and Madness of the rest, The bad Example of former Kings,
the Vices of their Courts, nor our own Riches, have not softened and depraved
us quite; and this Island having been planted by the most Warlike of all the
Northern Tribes, and having still preserved a few of its old Inhabitants who
retain somewhat of the ancient Britton Courage; and this Soil having always
bred and nourished Men of Heart and Stomach, it happens that we still continue
Free, and that we keep the main Parts of our Original Constitution.

Ancient Conquerors have in the same manner divided their Acquisitions, between
the Prince, his Chief Fellowers, and the People; but the Tenures, or Rights, by
which these Lands were to be Held, seem particular to these Gothic
Settlements, and with admirable Polity contrived to preserve the Links of
Protection and Obedience, which should hold Prince and People together; for
it is Natural for Men to Cherish and Protect their Dependents; and as natural,
to Love and Obey those by whom we are Protected. Thus to make all Hold of the
King, was almost as far as Human Wisdom could go, to hinder this chief Landlord
from committing Waste in his own, and from injuring those by whose Service he
was to receive Assistance. But this Division of Property would not have quite
sufficed, unless there had likewise been made such a Partition of Power, as we
have mentioned; for the Greater would have encroach'd upon, and swallowed up
the Less, if the Power of each Part of the Constitution had not had certain
Boundaries, as well as the Fields and Grounds had Landmarks, of one kind or
other.

Our Ancient Government having its Foundation in such Tenures as the Goths
introduced, it will be necessary to say something upon that Subject.

This way of holding Land by certain Services was brought in by the Lombards,
who descended of the Groti. Prolegom. in Hist. Goth. Vand. and Longobard.
Gepidae, a People tha^ quitting Scanzia, were left upon an Island of the River
Vistula, where increasing in Numbers, they were compelled to seek new Seats,
and who after many Rovings and Adventures came at last to fix in Italy. What we
call Fee, and what in modern Latin's called Cujacius ^eud. l. 1. Tit. 1.
Feudum, had its Original from the Kings of Lombardy, whose Custom (...) was to
grant Territories, Towns and Citi^ to their Captains and principal Followers
who were to have a kind of Usufructuary Right therein, or more properly the
Vtil^ Dominium; but of these Lands the Prince reserved to himself the direct
Dominion It Is true, the Romans had something like (...) Lamprid. in Sever.
this, as the Coloni Glebae adscriptitii: And Alexander Severus, and after him
Constantix distributed Lands upon the Borders to their Soldiers, and their
Heirs, upon Condition of Defense. But that which properly constitutes the
Feudum, viz. The peculiar Oath of Fidelity and Homage, was an Institution of
the Lombards, who did not only assign Lands upon the Limits, but distributed
whole Countries to be held by Fidelity and Service. These Tenures were first at
Will, afterward for a Term; then they came to descend to one Son, afterward
to be an Inheritance. He that held the Fee was obliged upon Summons to arm
himself and follow his Lord's Banner, and to stand by him in all Dangers:
Besides he was Subject to the Payment of Tributes, Aids or Subsidies. As the
Prince conferred these Fees upon great Lords and Barons, so these Barons came
to confer 'em upon others. The Germans had anciently something of the like
nature; but from Italy, they passed into France, and from France into England.
And certainly it was a wise Institution, To give a new People, who were to be
continually upon their Guard, either against the Natives, or Foreigners, some
Interest in those Lands, for whose Defense they were so often to expose their
Persons.

When these Northern Expeditions had Success, and that a Country was subdued,
there was assigned to the Prince, or he took to himself, part of the Land,
which he Held in Demesne, from which, and by the Profits and Strength the
Tenures produced, he maintained himself in War and in Peace, without laying, in
Ancient Times, any other Burden upon his People. And without doubt, our Kings
were most happy when they lived upon this Revenue of the Crown, which was
neither grievous by its Weight, or Novelty. What the Prince thus received came
cheerfully, because the People had good Bargains from the Crown. It Is true,
they who Held by Military Service, were at more Expense in time of War; but
it was the nature of their Tenure, and they bore it; nor did a Warlike Race of
Men, dislike now and then to be in Action. And it is probable, our first Princes
chose to subsist from a Revenue that would be Paid without murmuring, and which
they might call their own, rather than upon the Manufactures and Trade of their
Subjects, as was practiced by Eastern Kings and the Roman Emperors, who were
always laying fresh Impositions upon their People, which ill suited with the
free Genius of the Men these Northern Princes were to Govern.

Those Loads upon Industry, high Customs, and what we call Excises, were afoot
in the Roman Empire, but not thought of in these Gothic Settlements: It Is
true, from the time Kings have desired greater Armies than their Crown-Revenues
would maintain, such Impositions have been revived in these Parts of Europe.

These Kind of Taxes, from which this side of the World had been exempt for
several Ages, were renewed by Ambitious Princes, who had great Thoughts, and
small Territory; of which kind, were Ferdinand and Alphonso of Aragon, Kings
Guicciard. L. 2. and 4.
of Naples, and Lodowick Sforza, Duke of Milan, who harrass'd their Countries
with these sort of Duties, to such a degree, as at last it produced an
Universal Defection of their People. By these Ways and Means of Raising Money,
Lodowic Sforza had heaped up such a Mass of Wealth, that not Eight Years before
Milan was taken, he showed several Foreign Ministers, by way of Ostentation,
besides Jewels, and other sort of Riches, in no small quantity, to the Value of
One million, five hundred thousand Ducats: A vast Sum for those Times. The
Kings of Naples, had likewise scraped up a great Treasure, by the like Methods.
But what did all this end in? These Exactions, had so provoked the People, that
neither the Innocence, nor Virtue of Ferdinand, Alphonso's Son, nor the dark
Wisdom and Subtilties of Lodowick, could avail 'em in time of Danger, insomuch,
that they both lost their Dominions to the French, without hardly striking a
Stroke. The Necessities, introcuc'd by the long Wars in Italy, brought these
sort of Taxes more in Vogue, and they were chiefly made use of by the little
Princes there, who Erected to themselves Tyrannies in several Cities. Not long
after, this way of Raising Money got footing in Spain, and the Tax was called
the Baudier l' Aminist. du Card. Ximen. Cap. 3.
Alcabala, by which, the King was to have the Tenth part of all that was Sold,
or Exchanged; it was first laid toward defraying the Expenses of the Wars of
Granada, against the Moors, and continued for some time, though the War was
ended; but by the Authority of that Great Minister, Cardinal Ximenes, it was
Abolished. They had likewise, Taxes upon the Consumption, long ago in France,
as in the Reign of Mezeray vie de Chilp.
Chilperic, which the People thought so burdensome, that many therefore
deserted their Country, and we hear not of 'em again in their Histories, till
some Ages after, and the manner by which they are now Collected in that
Kingdom, came from Italy. But the Ancient Revenue of the Kings of France,
consisted in Land. Vie de Clotaire.
Mezeray, says, Le Revenue des Rois consistoit en Terres ou Domains, and en
Imposts qui se prenoient sur les Gaulois seulment, car il estoit odieux d'en
prendre sur les Francois, on les levoit quelques uns en argent, quelques-autres
en denres. Quand on fit l'arpantage ou partage des Terres, les Rois en eurent
pour leur Portion quantite des plus belles specialement aux environs des
grandes villes. Dans toutes ces Terres* qui'ls apelloient, Villae Fiscales, ils
avoient des Officers ou serviteurs, qui se nommoient Fiscalins, and celui qui
leur commandoit Domestique. On amassoit les Provisions de bleds, de vins, de
fourages, de Chairs, specialement de Venaison, and de Porc.

And as to Excises, Gabels, and high Duties upon Trade, they were unknown,
among the Founders of the English Government, or of the Kingdoms round about us.

We have been compelled to look thus far backward, and to repair to the
Fountainhead, and Original of this Government, in order to illustrate, what we
are going to lay down in this Section, which is,

I. That in Forming this Constitution, our Ancestors took care to make ample
Provision for Maintaining the King's Crown and Dignity.

II. That, when those Lands, and Revenues had been parted with, which were
allotted for his and the States Service, Parliaments have seldom failed to
Relieve and Restore his Affairs, by Acts of Resumption.

William the Norman, when he had subdued Harold, and got quiet Possession of
the Crown, made a general Survey of the whole Kingdom. There was already a
Survey, remaining at Winchester, which had been taken by King Alfred's Order,
about Two hundred Years before William's Survey, was called, Doom's-Day-Book,
in which there was set down a Catalogue of all the Tenants in Capite, or
Serjanty, that Held Lands in every County. In this Account, the King is always
placed first, and His, and the Crown Lands, described under the Title of Terra
Regis; and in every one of these Counties the King had Lands and Manors. The
Great and Little Doom's-Day-Book, contained the Description of all England,
Westmoreland, Cumberland, Northumberland, and part of Wales excepted. There
were Appropriated to the Crown Vide Domes-day Book.
1422 Manors, or Lordships, besides Lands and Farms in Middlesex, Shropshire,
and Rutlandshire; over and above which, there were Quit-Rents, paid out of
several Manors. Insomuch, that Fol. 523
Ordericus Vitalis, says, William the Is It. had coming in L 1061-10-1^ per diem
of Sterling Money, which, the Value of Money in those Days considered, was a
prodigious Income. Jervais of Tilbury, says indeed, That at * Jerv. Tilb. Dial.
de Scacc.
that time, all the King's Tenants, paid their Rents in Kind: But this will
appear manifestly otherwise, to any one that looks into Dooms-Day-Book.

And though Ordericus, may have given us an Account somewhat too large, yet
considering the Number and Value of his Manors, and the Number of Knights
Fees, which were Sixty thousand, out of which Escuage might be Levied in times
of Action, he had without doubt, a very great Revenue, either for Peace or War.

* Cotton. Post. pa. 179.
Sir Robert Cotton says, The Article of Terra Regis, in Dooms-Day-Book,
consisted in such Lands as K. William found Edward the Confessor had been in
Possession of, and that to Alienate this Revenue from the Crown, was held
Impious, by our Forefathers.

Most certainly, in this Universal Survey, there was inserted whatever the
Kings had claimed to the time of Edward: But there was good Reason to think
that he added to the Terra Regis, such Lands as he pretended were Forfeited by
those who had engaged in the Battle of Hastings, and the Estates of the Barons,
and other great Men who afterward from time to time Revolted from him: Part of
which Lands he annexed to the Crown, distributing the rest, with a reservation
of certain Quit-Rents, among his Norman Followers.

By this Account it appears, That this Founder of our present Government, left
to succeeding Kings a fair Inheritance, sufficient to maintain their Estate and
Dignity at Home, and capable to Defend the Realm against Invasions from Abroad.

But this Model of a Politic Constitution, easy both to King and People, was
somewhat shaken, even by his next Successor, William Rufus, who not only wasted
the vast Treasure left by his Father, but also run into such Profuseness, as
forced him to Harrass the whole Kingdom. He alienated the Crown Lands: And Dan.
p. 44.
Daniel says, He was compelled to resume his own Grants. William of Malmsbury,
speaking of this Prince, says, Will. Malms. p. 122.
Plures Patrimonia sua effudere inconsulte largiendo. Quid vero est stultius
quam quod libenter facias, curare ne diutius facere possis? It aque quidem cum
non habent quod dent, ad Rapinas convertuntur, majusque odium assequntur ab iis
quibus auferunt, quam beneficium ab iis quibus contulerunt.

Henry the Is It. who succeeded, had all the Qualifications belonging to a Wise
and Provident Ruler. He brought to Punishment Ranulphus Bishop of Durham, who
had been the chief Adviser of all the Irregularities, Profusions, and Exactions
of the last Reign: Ord. Vit. Fol. 822.
He likewise took into his own Possession, all his Father's Lands and Lordships
in Normandy, which his Brother had squandered away, and by the Judgment of Wise
Men, made those Gifts void which imprudently had been bestowed upon undeserving
Persons.

After the Death of Henry, Stephen, the Third Son of the Earl of Blois, by
Adela the Fourth Daughter of William the I* was Elected King. He found in his
Uncle's Treasury 100000 l. besides Plate and Jewels of an immense Value; Having
no good Title to the Crown, he was forced to purchase the good Will of the
Principal Men by Gifts Will. Malms. Hist. Nov. pa. 180.
Multi siquidem, quos vel Nobilitas generis, vel magnitudo animi, vel potius
viridioris aetatis audacia ad illicita praecipitabat, a Rege hi Praedia, hi
Castella, postremo quaecunque semel collibuisset, petere non verebantur; And
with these Grants he bought the dissembled Affection of his Courtiers. ibid.
Malmsbury calls it Simulatam ad tempus Pacem; for all this Liberality could
not make the Nobles faithful to him, his whole Reign, having been nothing but a
Scene of Treachery and Bloodshed. At last he was forced to come to Terms of
Agreement with his Kinsman Henry Fitz-Empress, of which one Article was, That
he should resume those Grants, M. Par. p. 86.
Regalia passim a Procerib^s usurpata Rex in sua Recipiet.

And persuant to this Agreement did Henry the II. act when he came to the
Crown, which is to be the more admired in him, because he was a Stranger born,
Son of the Earl of Anjou, and succeeding by Maud his Mothers Title, and because
the Crown Revenue was got into powerful hands, able to give him strong
Opposition; but nothing could stand before his Courage and Perseverance: He
resumed the Lands which King Stephen had given among his Followers. William
Earl of Albemarl pretended to oppose him in Northumberland, but he brought him
to restore what belonged to the Crown, as he did likewise Hugh Mortimer,
Chronicon Johannis Brompton Col. 1046.
Considerans autem Rex quod Regni redditus and Dominica per Molliciem regis
Stephani ad Dominos multos jam devenissent, praecepit ea cum omni integritate
infra tempus certum a quibuscunque detentoribus resignari and in jus statumque
revocari. He also took upon him to banish Foreigners, particularly the
Flemings, who had nested here in hopes of Booty under a loose Reign: Rex tenuit
* Gerva. Chron. Col. 1377.
Curiam suam apud Beremundesiam, uhi cum Principibus suis de statu Regni and
pace reformanda tractans, proposuit animo alienigenas gentes de Regno
propellere. Matthew Paris speaking of this Prince, says, M. Par. p. 92.
Qui continuo in Regem promotus, caepit in jus proprium revocare Vrbes,
Castella and Villas quae ad Coronam spectabant; Alienigenas, and maxim
Flandrenses de Regno expellendo, and quosdam Pseudocomites quibus Rex Stephanus
pene omnia ad Fiscum pertinentia minus caute contulerat, deponendo. So that we
have here the Instance of a Warlike King (for such a one Henry was) greater in
Revenue and Extent of Foreign Dominion than any of his Predecessors, who
thought it no Derogation to his Honor to look into these Matters.

And this provident Care of his had such an Effect, that his Son and Successor
Richard the I. at his coming to the Crown, found in the Treasury above L.
900,000 besides Plate and Jewels M. Par. 152.
Inventa sunt plura quam nongenta Millia librarum in auro and argento, praeter
Vtensilia and Jocalia, and lapides pretiosos. But this and much more was
presently consumed in the mad Humor which at that time had seized all the
Princes of Europe of making War for the Holy Land. To furnish himself for this
Expedition Richard, sold several Parcels of the Crown Revenue. Hoved. p. 658.
Hoveden says, Rex exposuit venditioni omnia quae babuit, scil. Castella, Villas
and Praedia; But the Lands thus granted away he did resume. Dan. p. 105.
Daniel says, that after his second Coronation, which was at Winchester, he not
only resumed the Manors he had sold to the Bishops of Winchester and Durham,
but whatsoever other Sales he had made of the Demayns of the Crown, Alleging
that it was not in his Power to alien any thing appertaining to the same
whereby his State was to subsist, Graft. Chron. p. 90.
Grafton says, That after his second Coronation he called a Parliament, by the
Authority whereof, he resumed again all Patents, and Annuities, Fees and other
Grants before his Voyage by him sold and granted, and caused the Parties to be
contented with such Revenues and Profits as they had received of the said
Offices or Lands, in the time of his Absence: And spared not for any
sufficiency of Writing that by him before was made. But, to confirm this,
Authors may be produced of more Antiquity than either of these. Hen. de
Knyghton. Col. 2408. No. 40.
Knyghton says, Post ejus Coronationis solennia quicquid prius leviter datum aut
graviter venundatum fuerat repetiit, nomine commendati, fructus perceptos pro
sort computans, cessante pacto, titulo and instrumento quocunque. Brompton
says, Denique quod * Chron. Johan. Brompt. Col. 1259. No. 10.
cum ipse iter versus orientem arriperet and regnum ipsum multipharie sciderat,
ad integritatem satagebat pristinam revocare. Quicquid enim ab illo tunc fuerat
datum vel ponderose venundatum, sub nomine repetiit commodati; and Regiarum
possessionum emptoribus dicens, Non decet sublimitati Regiae foenerari. Illi
autem emptores mox regio metu attoniti, nulla habita quaestione de sort non
percepta, confestim omnia resignarunt.

In Two Years of this Reign, viz. Ann. 1195 and 1196, there were actually
raised in this Kingdom Eleven hundred thousand Marks, which is more than was
really levied in any Two Years of the Late War; for if we consider the value of
Money in those times, and the Proportion it bore with other Commodities, Eleven
hundred thousand was more then, than Eleven Millions are now. Hubert the
Archbishop of Canterbury writing to the King for leave to quit the Ministry
shows. To. Hovedon, pa. 767, 768.
Quod infra biennium proximo praeteritum adquisierat ad opus illius undecies
centena Millia Marcarum argenti de Regno Angliae. The raising this vast Sum is
an evident Sign how willing the People of England, have in other Ages been to
give Aids and Subsidies to Martial Princes.

After Richard, King John was Elected. This was a Reign of Civil War, Taxes,
and Profusion; and the Character Robert the Clerk gave of this Prince to
Miramamolin the Moor, was very true and Remarkable. M. Paris. p. 244.
Potius fuit Tirannus quam Rex; potius Subversor quam Gubernator; Oppressor
suorum and fautor alienorum. Leo suis subditis, agnus alienigenis and
rebellibus, qui per desidiam suam Normanniae ducatum and alias multas terras
amiserat; and insuper Angliae regnum amittere vel destruere sitiebat. Pecuniae
extortor insatiabilis; possessionum suorum naturalium invasor and destructor.

But these Wastes were looked into in the Reign of Henry III. King John's Son
and Successor, not by the Prince himself, who was no better a Manager than his
Father; but by the Barons. Knyghton says, That after Lewis and the French were
driven away Knyghton Col. 2429. No. 40.
Omnes Alienigenae ejecti erant de Anglia and omnia Castella quae Rex Johannes
donaverat and tradiderat in Custodiam Alie^igenarum fuerunt reseisita in manu
Regis. This King laying open his Necessities to the Barons and his Council,
said, The Crown-Revenues, would scarce afford him Meat and Drink. To whom they
answered, He might be Rich out of his own, if he would set some Bounds to his
Liberality, and look into his own Affairs, and into the Proceedings of some of
his Officers: They named no body to hlm, ^ut he understood whom they meant, and
called several of his Ministes to Account., and brought them to Restitution.
The Words of the Historian in this place, are very Observable, when the King
had laid open his Wants. M. Paris p. 376.
Tunc Consilarii Regis responderunt, Si pauper es tibi imputes, qui Honores and
Custodias ac dignitates vacantes ita in alios transfers, and a Fisco alienas;
quod nec in divitiis auri vel argenti, sed solo nomine Rex debeas appellari.
Nam antecessores vestri, Reges magnifici and in omni divitiarum gloria
ditissimi, non aliunde, sed ex Regni redditibus and emolumentis, Thesauros
impreciabiles congesserunt. At Rex ab eis instructus, quos nominatim exprimere
tutum forsitan non esset coepit a Vicecomitibus and Ballivis, aliisque
Ministris suis, de redditib^^ and rebus omnibus ad Fisci commodum spect
antibus, ratiocinium exigere: Et quoslibet d^ fraud convictos, a suis Officiis
deponens, exegit ab eis pecuniam suam, etiam cum usurii^* and tenens coarct
abat eos, donec reddere^ debitum universum. This Prince was the first who
brought Strangers into his Councils, and the management of his Business*
Poictevins and Britons, to whom he gave all the Power, and among whom he
lavished all his Crown-Revenue, and the * Ibid. p. 386.
Treasure of the Kingdom. Invitavit p^latim tot Pictaviensium Legiones, quod
^^tam fere Angliam repleverunt, quorum R^^ agminibus quocunque pergebat,
vallatus ince^sit. But in 1234 he was compelled by his Barons to Banish these
Strangers: Yet he returned quickly to the same bad Measures, insomuch, that his
Brother Richard, Earl of Cornwall, told him, That he Robbed his own Country to
give it to Strangers, and the Kingdom's Enemies. In this Loose Reign, the Ibid.
p. 733. 747.
Money of England was corrupted: But nothing angered the People more than the
immoderate Wealth he bestowed upon Foreigners, namely, his Brothers by the
Mother, and particularly to his Poictevins Ibid. p. 850.
Eschaetas and Reditus vacantes, Alienigenis ignotis, illiteratis, scurrilibus,
and penitus indignis non destitit distribuere, ut sic suorum naturalium corda
insanibilius sauciaret. While Things were thus Governed, Private Men enriched
themselves with the Public Spoil, as for Example John Mansel, * M. Par. p. 859.
who brought his Estate to Four thousand Marcs per Annum. But at last at a
Parliament Held at Oxford, Ibid p. 973.
Peter of Savoy, William de Valence, and the Bishop of Winchester, the King's
half Brothers, with the other Foreigners, were Banished. Vbi statutum erat
Knyghton Col. 2445. No 40.
quod ad Terras suas quas in partibus transmarinis habebant transfretarent. And
that immoderate Wealth they had gathered here, was not permitted to be carried
away, but was M. Par. 973.
Seized upon, and Confiscated to the King's use. In this Colloquy, the Barons
told him, That he was in Debt, and Ruined by the Strangers about him, who had
Consumed all, so that he was forced to give Tallies for the Victuals of his
Table. Knyghton Col. 2445. No 10.
Domine Rex, inter manus Alienigenarum res utique tua male agitur and
diversimode tractatur, nam consumptis universis multo jam deprimeris, e^
alieno, and datis pro cibariis tuis Tallei^ versus es in scandalum in omni
populo tuo* The Consequence of this Profusion, was grievous Taxes; the Taxes
produced Discontents, these Discontents, encourag'^ Simon Montford, and others,
to begin the Civil War, in which this King had bee^ lost, but for the Courage
and Conduct (...) his Son.

In the Reign of Edward the I. we (...) not find there was any Resumption; b^
Annn Dom. 1289. the Legislative Authority did very wisely interpose in
Corre^ing the Abuses of Westminster Hall, Vide Dan. p. 160, Mat. West. p. 414.
No 10, and Knyghton Col. 2466.
Fin^ing all the Judges for their Corruption and Extortions. Sir Ralph Hengham
(w^ had been Chief Justice of the high^ Bench, and Commissioner for the
G^vernment of the Kingdom, in the King Absence) paid Seven thousand Marcs;
(...) Edward Stratton paid Thirty four thousand Marcs; Thomas Wayland, found
the greatest Delinquent, Forfeited all his Estate: The whole Set paid among 'em
(...) Hundred thousand Marcs; which for those Days, was a prodigious Sum.

The next Reign of Edward the IId* gives the prospect of Civil Wars, Treachery,
Bloodshed, and a view of all the Calamities, that are the Consequences of ^
Riotous and Profuse Court.

The unbounded Favor of this Prince o his Minion Pierce Gaveston, made Earl of
Cornwall, and the Waste which the said Earl had made in the Crown-Revenue, so
provoked the Peers, that they never restd till they had obtained an Instrument
mpowering several Ecclesiastical, and ^ay Lords, to make certain Ordinances ^or
the good of the Kingdom, which nstrument, and Ordinances made by Virue of it,
were afterward ratified in Parament.

Among other things, it was then ordered, That the Crown-Revenue should ^ot be
Alienated. Derecheif ordein est Rot. Ord. 5 Edw. II. No. 3.
pur les dettes le Roy acquitter, and son estate relever, and le plus
honourablement mainteiner, qe null don de Terre ne de Rent, ne de Franchise, ne
d' Eschete, ne de Guard ne Marriage, ne Baillie se face a null des ditz Ordenours
durant leur poer del dit ordeinment, ne a uul autre sauns Conseil and assent
des ditz Ordenours, ou de la greinder party* de eux au six de eux au moins,
mes totes les chooses desquex profits poit surdre soient enpruees al profit le
Roy jusques son estat soit avenantment releve, etc.

There is this Remarkable in the Record, That they bound up themselves, as well
as others, from receiving any part of the King's Lands, as we may suppose, not
thinking it fair for them who had the Power, to keep the Purse shut to others,
and to open it for themselves.

They took likewise Care of a Resumption. Ibed No 7.
Et puis derecheife pur se qe l^ Corone est tant abeissee and demembree p^
diverses donns, nous Ordinons, qe to^ les donns qe sont donez au damage d^ Roy
and descresse de la Corone, puis (...) Commission a nous fait, des Chasteam*
Villes, Terres, and Tenements, and Bayle^ Gardez, and Marriages, Eschetes, and
Rel^ queconques queles soint, aussibien (...) Gascoin, Irland, Gales and
Escoce, co^ me en Engleterre, soint repelleez and no^ les repellons de tout,
sanz estre redonn^ a meismes ceux, sanz comun assent (...) Parliament: Et que si
tieu manner des dom ou Reles soint Desormes donez enc^^tre la form avantdit,
sanz assent de so^ Barnage, and ce en Parliament, tant qe (...) dettes soint
acquittees and son estat^ avenantment releves, soint tenus po^ nuls, and soit
le pernour puny en Parliament par Agard del Barnage.

It Is true, these Ordinances were revoked in the Great Statute Roll from H.
III. to 21 Ed. III M. 31. Bibli. Cott. Claud.
Parliament which this King held at York, the 15th of his Reign, just after he
had Defeated and put to Death Thomas Earl of Lancaster, with many other of the
Barons. But his Rigid Proceeding with those who had Fought in Defense of their
Countries Freedom, and his immoderate Favor and Bounty to the Spencers, Earls
of Whinchester and Gloucester, with all his other Mis-government, lost him both
his Crown and Life, in a short time after.

It Is to be presumed, That what the Parliament had done in Edward II. Reign, to
hinder the Favorites from making Depredations upon the Crown-Revenue, had
effectually stopped the Evil, because we do not find there was any need of an
Act of Resumption in Edward the III's Time.

There is no part of our History more remarkable, than the Life of Richard II.
Grandson of Edward III. And no Times afford so many Presidents of Liberty
asserted, and of the Excesses of Regal Power, with the Corruption of bad
Ministers, as this unfortunate Reign: But Misgovernment will of Necessity bring
on good Laws in the End: The lavish Temper of this Prince, his unreasonable
Favor to the Duke of Ireland, to Michal de la Pool Earl Suffolk his
Chancellor, and others, with his loose and careless Administration, produced
the Parliaments of 10th 11th and 13th Richard II. by which his Power was
circumscribd and bounded. It Is true 21 Richard II. he procured a Repeal of what
had been formerly settled by Parliament for the Welfare of the Kingdom, in
which Sessions he got Iniquity established by a Law; but the Conclusion of all
this Misgoverment was, that he incurred so much the Public hatred as to be
deserted by the whole People, and in a solemn manner to be deposed.

The Excesses of the Court, and Rapine of the Ministers in those days, and
toward the latter end of Edward III. produced Acts of Resumption.

The Commons pray that all kind of Gifts whatsoever, made by King Edward III.
may be examined, if worthily bestowed, to be Confirmed, if otherwise to be
Revoked. Rot. Parl. 1 Ri. II. No. 48.
Item ils Prient, pur ceo que la Corone est moult abaisse and demembre par
diverse donns donez en temps de notre Seigneur, que Dieux assoille, and queux
donns il estoit malement deceux and en plusieurs Persons malement emploeis,
come home le poet declarer, a grand damage de lui, and de notre Seigneur le Roi
q'ore est, si bien des Chasteaux, Villes, Terres, Tenements, Baillez, Gardes,
Marriages, Eschetes, and Releves, aussi bien en Gascoigne, Irlande, come en
Engleterre, qe plese a notre Seigneur le Roy, and son Conseil fair examiner
par les Rolls de Chancellerie, du temps notre Seigneur le Roi, qi Dieux
assoile, queux dounes, and a queux, and quelle sum ils amontent qi
aviendront, a trop haut sum sans doubt, and qe sur ceo ils soient sagement
examinez, asqueux ils estoient donez notablement and profitablement, pur le Roi
and le Roialme, and es queux notre dit Seigneur estoit deceux, and ses donns
malement employez, and queux tous ceux asqueux notre dit Seigneur estoit
deceux, and qi sont malement employes, y puissent estre de tout repellez, sanz
etre redonez as memes ceux, ou a uul autre, tanqe ses dettes soient acquites
and lestat de nos tres honors Seigneurs les fitz de notre Seigneur qi Dieux
assoile, qi sont poures a leur estat, y purra avenantement per ascuns des ditz
donns etre relevez, and soit le pernour quensy ad notre dit Seigneur deceux
punis en cest present Parliament, selonc son desert par agarde de Baronage, en
supportation du Charge qe le commune People y convient porter: Ratifiantz and
Confirmantz a ceux qii ont deserve, les donns en manner come notre dit
Seigneur, qi Dieux assoile, leur avoit grantez Considerant a chescun son long
service, and son Desert, and regardant sil please a notre Seigneur, as tous
ceux qe servirent a nostre dit Seigneur, son Aiel, qe sont sans reward pur
lour Service.

Resp. Les Seigneurs de continuel Counseil serront Chargez de veer and examiner
les ditz donns, and les Conditions estates and deserts des Persons and en
ultre fair ce qe reason Demand.

Anno 3 Richard II. The Speaker says, If the King were reasonably governed in
his Expenses, within and without the Realm, he should have little need to
charge his Commons, who were already much Impoverished. Rot. Par. 3 Rich. II.
No. 12.
Did qe lour sembloit a la dite commune, que si lour Seigneur lige eust este
bien and reasonablement governez en ses despenses par dedeins le Royalme, and
autrement, il neust ore besoigne de leur aid, per chargeant sa dite Commune,
quore est trop pour, etc.

Anno 5. Richard II. The King says, He will make no Grant without the Assent of
the Lords of his Council, till he shall be out of Debt. Rot Par. 5 Ri. II. P.
1. No. 74.
Item, Prient les Communes, qil plese au Roy notre Seigneur, qil puisse au
present estre Escript en Roll de Parliament, coment ordenez est, per lui, nos
autres Seigneurs, and toute la Commune, qe dedesore en aprez, null donn de
Terre, de Rent, de Guard, ne de Marriage, ne de uul Manner Eschete soit
Grantez a nulluy, tanqe le Roy notre dit Seigneur soit horse de debt, and horse
des tielx Charges de Guerre, come y ad au present, and si aucune Person
demand aucune donn au contraiere de cette Petition perde les service and
Compagnie notre dit Signeur pur toujours apres.

Resp. Il ne semble mye honest ne chose Honorable au Roy, ne a sa dignitee,
qil se lieroit a tell Guise peront il ent fuist si oultrement constreint, mais
plest au Roy and il voet pur le bien de luy mesmes and de son Roialme, soy
restreindre, and abstenir a doner ou granter a aucune Person, Terre, Rent,
Guard, Marriage, ou Eschete, sans lassent and accord des Seigneurs and autres
de son Conseil.

Anno 6 Rich. II. The Commons among other things pray, That the King will
appoint good Orders about his Person, so as he may live within his Revenues,
and that all Profits and Gifts may be employed upon the Wars, to the ease of
the Commons. Rot. Par. 6 Ri. II. No 42.
Come autrement ordeigner, qe bone Governail soit mys entour votre honorable
Person, si qe vous purres honestement and roialment viver, deinz les revenues
de votre Roialme, and qe toutes Maneres des Gardes, Marriages, Releifs,
Eschetes, forfaitures, and toutes autres Commoditees, puissent estre gardez pur
vos Guerres, and en defens de votre Royalme, and null part aillours donez en
supportation and aid de vos poures Communes and grant honor and profit a vous.

Resp. Le Roy est de bone Voluntee and le desire moelt entierement de fair and
ordonner en ce cas per lavis des Seignede son Roialme ce qe luy semblera mieulx
affair pur son honor and Profit.

Anno 9 Ri. II. It was enacted, That all the Revenues, as well in the
Exchequer, as elsewhere, should be laid up for one whole Year, without any
Diminution thereof by Gift. Rot. Par. 9 Ri. II. N^. 42.
Item qe ordeine soit en especial qe tous les Revenues notre Seigneur le Roy,
si bien en l'Eschequer, comme aillours, soient sauuement gardez per un an
entier sans estre donez a uully per uul Grant, en Supportation de Nostre
Seigneur le Roy, and de son People qe plese a notre Seigneur le Roy de charger
and commander les Seigneurs du Conseil, and ses Officiers en plein Parliament,
que rien ne soit fait au contraire.

Resp. Le Roy le voet.

Anno II Ri. II. The Commons pray, That no Hereditaments, or other Profits,
then escheated to the King, be granted to any during the Wars, and that no
Person presume to crave any of the same. Rot. Par. II Ri. II. P. 1. N^. 24
Item Prient les Communes, qe toutes Maneres de Seignouries, Terres, Tenements,
Rents, Services, Biens, Possessions and Chateaux qeconques, forfaits a notre
Seigneur le Roy, par cause des Jugemens rendus devers les Persons adjugez en
cest present Parliament, and auxint toutes autres Terres, Tenements, Eschetes,
Forfetures, Gardes, Marriages, and autres Profits qeconques queux sont, ou
deviendront en la meins du Roy per qeconque cause demoergent entirement en la
main du Roy nostre Seigneur durant les Guerres, pur acquiter ses dettez and en
eide de meintenir son estat and ensement en eese and supportation de ses
pauvres Communes du Roialme nient contresteant ascun Grant ou Garrant fait a
ascunnys avaunt cestheures and qe null homme greindre ne meindre, en I'Hostiel du
Roy, ne entour la person du Roy ne autre qeconqe, de quel Estat ou Condition
quil soit, en privee, nen appert, soit sy hardy a demander ou preinder de donn
nostre Seigneur le Roy, ascuns des Seigniouries, Terres, Tenements, Rents,
Services, Biens, Possessions, Eschetes, Forfeitures, Gardes, Marriages,
Chateaux, ou Profits susdits, ou autres Profits, ou Revenus qeconques, durant
les Guerres, come dessus, sur peine de forfaire le double devers nostre
Seigneur le Roy, and repelle de mesme la chose issint demandez, and etre reint
and Imprisonnes a la volonte du Roy. Purvus toutes voys, qe si ascun home eit
terres tenements ou Possessions du Grant notre Seigneur le Roy, ou dascuns de
ses Progeniturs, queux furent parcelles de la Corone, qe per bon trette enter
le Conseil du Roy and les possesseurs des tieux Terres and Tenements, mesmes
les Terres Tenements and Possessions poient estre rejoints a la dite Corone, a
Profit du Roy, grantants autres Terres Tenements ou Possessions de les
Forfaitures avaunt ditz en eschange pur les Terres Tenements and Possessions de
la Corone susdite, and sy les Seigneurs ou autres qi ont Terres ou Tenements de
la Corone, come dessus, ne voellent volontairement a ce assentir, ne accorder,
qils eint and enjoient lours terres and tenements de la Corone avaunt ditz, come
ils ont eu a devant, and qe les Grants Officiers du Royalme par avis des
Seigneurs du Conseil, eient Poer de vendre parcelles deles dites Forfetures per
leur bone discretion, and qe le Grant sur tiel vendue soit ferme and estable.

Resp. Le Roy le voet, forpris d' Offices and Baillis, and ce qil a done en
cest present Parliament, issint, qendroit de forfeitures adjuges en cest
Parliament, si ascun pretend davoir droit ou Interest en Icelles, sue au
Conseil, sil luy semble affair, and droit luy sera fait.

The Misgovernment of this Prince not only in his Revenues, but in all the
Duties of his high Office, with his Profusion and Partiality to his Favorites,
made way for a very great Revolution, and drew on so much hatred of the People,
as at last all his Subjects withdrew their Allegiance from him, and chose
another, King Henry the IV. his Cousin German.

Anno 1. Hen. IV. The Commons Pray, That the Lands, parcel of the
Crown-Revenue, granted away by Edward III. and Richard II. may be resumed. Rot.
Par. 1 Hen. IV. N^. 100.
Item, touchant Terres, Tenements, and Rents, ou autres Possessions,
queconques, qe furent parcelle de la Corone, ou des Seignouries de la Corone,
en temps Seigneur Edward le tierce, Roy Dengleterre, ou en temps Richard,
darrein Roy Dengleterre, nient donez per assent du Parliament, ne en eschange
pour autres Terres, ore demurantz a la Corone, qe toutz y ceux soint rejoints
arere a la Corone; purveu toutefoitz, que si ascun Seigneur de lestate
Chivaler, ou Esquire pur son travaille duement deservy, eit pur term de sa
vie, and nient autrement, qil ne soit rebote dicelx, devant qil soit autrement
guerdonez and semblablements seit feat dela Principalte de Galls, de
Cornwailee, and de Cestre, and reservez tout foits, as Citeins and Burgeys,
parmy tout le Royalme, lour Libertees and Franchises, and a lour Heirs and
Successors.

Resp. Le Roy sadviesera, and par bone advys and Discretion ent fera due
remedy.

Anno 5. Hen. IV. The Commons Pray, That the King would provide for the
Repairing of his Castles, and Houses, and namely, for his Castle at Windsor
which was greatly in decay, and not to Grant away the Profits of those Castles,
and Houses, and notwithstanding, to stand to the Repair of the same, without
which, he could not but run to the great Charging of the Commons. Rot. Par. 5
Hen. 4. N^. 10.
Et auxint les dicts Communes monstrerent, coment les Chastellx and autres
Manoirs du Roy sont molt ruineuses, and embusoignant de grand Repris, and
Reperation, and coment les Prosits dicelles sont donez as diverses Persons,
and le Roy supporte les Charges, come per especial, le Chastel de Windesore, a
qel feust assignee certain Commodity, pur la Reparation dicelle, and ore mesme
la Commodity est done as certaines Persons, and le Roy supporte les Charges
and auxint es autres places, les Gentz preignent les Profits de Herbage, and
del vert, deins diverses ses Parkes, and Bois, and le Roy supporte les Charges
de le enclosure dicell, and pur cestes importunes charges, and plusieurs
autres, and pur les plusieurs douns des Chastellx, Terres, and Seignouries, and
des Annuites, faits and donez nient duement, ne descreteinment, and par
especial pur les Grandes Charges and Depenses de le Hostel du Roy, and pur
amendment des tielx meschiefs fair, and pur ouster tielx inconveniences en
apres, en supportation del Commune People, les Communes prierent au Roy moelt
entierment, and cordialement, qe considerez les Perils imminentes, de toutz
parts per ses Ennemys, and Rebelx, comes yont novelx de jour en autre, and
coment le cas est tiel, qe si tielx meschiefs ne soient Graceousement remediez,
and refourmez en cest Parliament y purroit estre qe sur soudeins novelx de
arrival des enemies, ou per autre voix, mesme cest Parliament de necessite seroit
de tout depurtiz, and dissolvez* and jamais les Seignours ni les Communes se
re-assembleroient, pur remedee ne redress fair, sur les meschiefs susdits;
and autres qe Dieux deffende.

It appears by the Purport of this Petition, That there were certain Lands and
Rents set aside, or assigned for the Repair of Windsor-Castle, that ancient
Seat of our Kings, and Sacred to the Honors and Ceremonies of the Garter, and
therefore particularly provided for with a Revenue, by the Wisdom of our
Forefathers; yet it seems these Lands so annexed to Windsor; were at that time
Granted away to some great Man, o^ craving Courtier: But this the House o^
Commons did not then think reasonable.

And the Remonstrance thereupon made, was kindly taken by the King* For he
answered the Petition in Person * Resp.
from the Throne. Et sur ceo mesme nostre Seignour le Roy moelt graciousement de
son bouche propre, en plein Parliament, chargea and commenda si bien tous les
ditz Seignours, come les di^z Communes, qils faiorient lour diligence and luy
montreroient lours bons and seins conseilx, celle party, pur aid de luy, and
de tout son Roilame.

Et puis apres les dits Communes en mesme le Parliament firent reqeste as ditz
Seignours, qe come le Roy lour avoit done tiel Charge, and mandement, and ceo
en si haute Court de Record, qils fairoient lour diligence bien and loyalment
sans curtosie fair enter eux, en ascune manner, come ils voloient respondere
devant lue Dieux tout puissant, and devant nostre dit Seignour le Roy, and a
tout le Roialme en temps avenir, and qe de sur ceo mesme les Communes ent
fairoient semblablement de lour party, and disoient outre mesme les Communes,
a nostre dit Seignour le Roy, qe cestes matiers ensi faits, and accomplez en
cest Parliament, il lour troveroit foialx and naturelx liges devers luy de
parfaire son plaisir, and voloir a lour poiar par le aid de Dieux.

It Is probable, this seasonable Care of the House of Commons rescued for that
time, the Lands belonging to Windsor Castle, for from that time these Lands
continued in the Demeans of the Crown, till very lately.

And some Years after, Viz. Anno 31. Hen. VIII. there passed an Act of
Parliament expressly to Annex several Manors by name to the Castle and Honor
of Windsor, not to be alienated from it; so careful were our Ancestors that
this Noble and antientt Seat of our Kings, should have some Revenue to keep the
House and Parks in good repair.

In the same Year, of Hen. IV. the Commons rehearsing, how King Edward III. in
the Parliament Holden in the 11th. of his Reign Created his Eldest Son Duke of
Cornwall, and the same Dukedom annexed to the Crown, with diverse Hereditaments
by his Letters Patents, by Authority of the same never to be Dismembered, or
Sold away. They therefore Pray the King to resume and seize, and so to unite
again to the said Duchy, such Lands as were Sold away by Prince Edward, King
Richard, or by the King himself. Rot. Par. 5 Hen. IV. N^. 22. versus Finem.
Non obstants Encorporation o^ Union de qel Duchee per une haute A^thorite ensi
perfaite, puis encea est d^membrez, si^bien per diverses Alienat^ons faitz per
le avaunt dit Edw. nadgaires Prince, come per le darreine Roy Richard, qe fuist,
and per vous.

Qe pleise a vous de vostre haute discretion, ove le Avis de tous Seignours
e^prituelx and temporelx, en cest present Parliament Assemblez, considerantz l^
Union dudit Duchee, en la manner avantdite, fait de requiler tout ceo, ^^dedit
Duchee est demembrez, and per A^thorite de Parliament de reseiser and rejoindre
a dit Duchee, come il fust a devan^ non obstant ascune Alienation.

Qele Petition lue and entendue fuis^ respondus en les parolles quensuent.

Resp.
Accordez est per le Roy, and les Seignours en Parliament, qe le dit
Mounseignour le Prince, per lavys de son Coun^eil, eit briefs de Scir. fac. Ou
autre recoverer le mieltz qil avoir purra, par les Estatutes and leys du
Roialme, solonc ceo qe le cas requiert, etc. Wherein shall be allowed no
Protection, or Praying in Aid of the King, unless it be for Sir John Cornwale
and Eliz. his Wife, late Wife of John Holland Earl of Huntington, and for such
Persons to whom the King is bound by Warrantie. Sinon en cas qe le Roy soit
expressement tenuza la Grantie, etc.

Rot. Par. 6 Hen. IV. N^. 14.
Anno 6. Hen. IV. The Commons Pray, That the King would resume the Crown Lands.
Pleise a tres Excellent and tres redoute Seignour, Nostre Seignour le Roy, pur
profit du Roy, and encresce de sa Corone, and supportation des pauvres
Communes, de vostre Royalme Dengleterre, granter les Petitions qensuent.

Pur ceo qe la Corone del Roialme Dengleterre, est grantement emblemissez, and
anientissez, per grandez and outrageouses dons, faits as diverses Persons, si
bien esprituelx comme temporelx, des Terres, Tenements, Fee Fermes, Franchises,
Libertees, and autre Possessions dycelles, Soit ordeigne en cest present
Parliament, pur profit du Roy, and du Roialme, and supportation des Communes, qe
tous Chateaux, Manoirs, Seignouries, Terres, Tenements, Fees and Advoesons, Fee
Fermes, Annuitees, Franchises, Libertees, and Custumes, queux fuerent membre
and parcelle Dancienne Inheritance de la dite Corone, le an du Regne le Roy
Edward Aiel nostre Seignour le Roy qorest quarantisme, and puis en cea, soint
ils donez a term de vie, ou a term de ans en Fee simple, ou en Fee tail, ou
sur Condition, ou as Seignours Esprituelx, a eux, and a lour Successors,
forsprises Gardes, Marriages, and Eschetes and horspris ceo qest assign a
Reign, en Dower, soint entierement resumes, repris, and seises, es maines
notre Seignour le Roy, and rejointz al Corone avaunt dite, a y celle
perpetuelment demeurer, sans ent per aucune voie ou ymagination estre severez
dicelle, en temps avenir, forsqe ceux qont tieux dons ou Grants qe furent
parcelle del dite Corone le dit an quarantisme ou depuis per Chartre especiale,
faite par Authority de Parliament: Et qe nulles Persons du Roialme, de qel
estat ou Condition qils soient, ne eient, tenient, ne enjoient, parcelle del
Corone avaunt dite, de ancienne enheritance dicelle, alienez, grantez, ou donez,
puis le dit an quarantisme, sans Authoritee de Parliament, sur peine de incurrer
la Forfeiture dicelles Terres and Tenements, ensy parcelle del dit Corone, and
Emprisonement per trois ans: Et qe null Officier de nostre Seignour le Roy face
ne met en execution aucune tiele done ou Grant en Temps avenir, sur peine de
perdre son Office, and de forfaire qanqe il purra forfaire, envers notre
Seignour le Roy, and le Emprisonement de trois Ans: Et qe toutes Maneres de
Persons, ou Officers and Ministres du Roys qeux ont auscun don ou Grant des
ascuns tieux Chastelx, Seignouries, Manoires, Terres, Tenements, Fees,
Advoesons, Fee Fermes, Annuites, Franchises, Libertees, and Custumes, suisditz
qeux issint sont parcelle dancienne Inheritance de la dite Corone, apres ceo qe
les Paiements Affairs pur le Houstiel du Roy ses Chambres and Garderobes
soient pleinement paiez ou assigns, and la Reign paiez de sa Dower, and
duement endowez, soient recompensez a la volontee du Roy de la surplusage, and
residue des Ferms and annuitez suisditz. Purveux toutezfoitz qe toutes les
Seignours esprituelx and temporelx, qi ont aucunes Libertees and Franchises de
don nostre Seignour le Roy qorest, o^ de ses Progenitors puis le dit an
qarantisme, and paient Fee Ferm a la verray value pour ycelles, ou ent rendent
due account al Oeps notre Seignour le Roy, chescun an, a son Eschequer, and
aussi tous les Citees and Burghs deins le Royalme Dengleterre qont Franchises
and Libertees du Grant nostre Seignour le Roy, ou de ses Progenitors, Roys
Dengleterre, and confirmez per nostre Seignour le Roy qorest, pur Fee fermes
annuellement a pay a nostre Seignour le Roy, ou qont fait fyn pur y ceux
Franchises avoir a nostre Seignour le Roy qorest, ou a ses Progenitors ne
soint oustez ne disheritez de lour Franchises and Libertees, mes aient and
entierement enjoient toutes les ditz Libertees and Franchises, and toutes
autres lour Libertees and Franchises, a eux Grantez puis le dit an quarantisme
pur releifuement des Fee fermes, encresce and Fortification des ditz Citees,
and Burghs seloncqe la form and effect de lour Chartres, ent faites, cest
ordeignance nonobstant, Purveu ensement qe nostre tres excellent dame la
Reygne, ne les Fitz du Roy, ne soient contenuz soubs la constreint decest
Estatute, ou Ordeignance, Purveu auxi qe ceux qont Purchasez de Roy Richard
T^rr^s ou Tenements, qeux furent a aucunes Persons forejugez a Parliament tenus
a Westminstre lan unsiesme du Regne dudit Roy Richard ne lour Heirs, soient
oustez ne molestez de lour Terres and Tenements avantditz per virtue de (...)
N^ ^^.
c^tte Ordeignance.

I^em qe tous Tonelx and Pipes des Vyns, des prises de Roy, and autre Pipes and
To^elx des Vyns, grantez a ascunes Persons, de qel Estat ou condition qil
soit, per nostre Seignour le Roy, qorest ou p^r ses Progenitors, a term de
vie, ou a Term de ans, soient entierement resumes es mains du Roy.

Ibid N^. 17.
Item que toutes dons and Grantz des Chastelx, Manoires, Terres, Tenements,
Fermes, Rents, Annuitez, Libertees, and Franchises, ou Possessions qe-conqes,
faitz per le Roy Edw. Aiel nostre Seignour le Roy qorest, ses Ancestres ou
Progenitors, devant le dit an quarantisme del Regne dudit Roy Edw. as Persons
del Roialme si bien as esprituelx, come temporelx, a term de vie, a term de
ans, en fee taille, ou en fee simple, ou as auscuns en mortmaine, a eux and a
lour Successors, ou as Citeins and Burgheis de Citees and Burghs, and as ceux
des Cinq Ports, a eux and a lour Successors, de assent nostre tres graceouse
Seignour le Roy, les Seignours esprituelx, and temporelx and communes en ycest
Parliament assemblez, soient solonc le effect de lour Estates, per Estatutes ent
en cest Parliament affair, confermez and ratifiez sans estre en aprez adnu lez,
repellez, ou revoqez; purveu toutes foitz, qe dons ou Grants des Chastelx
Manoires Terres and Tenements, Feefermes, Rents, Annuites Libertees Franchises
ou Possessions qeconqes faitz devant le dit An quarantisme as auscunes a term
de Ans, term de vie, ou en le Taille, en qele Case la Reversion est reservee
au Roy maintenan^ aprez le estate determine tieux Chateaulx Manoires, Terres,
Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Libertees, Franchises and Possessions qeconqes
soient revertible au Roy come a sa Corone and issint soient rejoint^ a la
Corone sans estre en nulle maner^ departis ou severes en temps avenir.

La Responce fait per le Roy de ladvys and assent des Seignours esprituelx and
temporelx a les Petitions dessus escripts Qeux le Roy voet meter en Execution
en tout le haste possible.

Ibid. No 20.
Responce en Engleis as dites Petitions, And for as much, that the Commons
desiren that the King should live upon his own, as good Reason asks, and all
Estates thinken the same, the King thanketh them of their good desire, willing
put it in Execution, als soon as he well may. And because the Commons desiren,
that all that longed to the Corone the Fort^^ Year of King Edw. and sith, has
be^ departed, should be resumed, to that intent, that the King might better
leve of his own: And foralsmuch that it may noght be known unto the King, which
is of the Crown, and which is not, without more examination ne what has be
granted since the forty Year of King Edw. unto this time, the King's intent is
to Assign certain Lords Sprituels, and certain Lords Temporels, and all his
Justices, and his Sarjeants, and all other such as him list name, for to put in
Execution als far as he may by the Law of his Land or by his Prerogotive or
Liberty all the Articles contained in the Petition of the Commons in all have
that he may in discharge of his People.

But this good Care of the House of Commons for the King's Welfare, had no
other Effect than to procure, That the Lands, Rents, Profits and Annuities so
granted away, should be seized into the King's Hands for one whole Year; but
the Reason of this may be easily seen in the Record it self. A great part of
these Lands were got into the hands of the Clergy. The words of the Record are,
Outrageous Grants made to diverse Persons, as well Spiritual as Temporal.
Outrageouses dons faits as diverse Persons, si bien Espirituelx, comme Temporelx
The People were in that Age very Superstitious, as appears by the severe Vid.
Rot. Par. 8 Hen. IV. N^. 62.
Act which passed two Years after against the Lollards; And where the People is
Superstitious, the Clergy never fail to have the Chief Power; And by their
Interest, in all probability, it was procured, that the Nation could then be
relieved only with one Years Profit from those Grants; And because this
After-act militates so directly with what the Commons had done just before,
there are good grounds to think, that the last Project began in that House,
which was then influenced by the Lords Spiritual. But we shall produce the
Record it self, to show that the Writer desires to handle this Subject
impartially, and to set every thing in a fair Light.

Rot. Parl. 6 Hen. IV. N. 21.
Item a Considerer les Grants faits per Patentes dessous le grant Seal du Roy,
and de ses Progenitors and Predecessors, as diverses Persons si bien a term
de vie, come en Fee simple, ou en Fee taille, on autrement, y ne seroit honest,
ny expedient pur le Roy nostre Seignour, de fair repelle, revocation ou
resumption (...) tielx Patentes, and ceo si bien pur l^ clamor and autre
Inconveniences, qent purront avenir as estranges parties, come deins le Roialme
Dengleterre, Et pur ouster tielx-Meschiefs, accordez est, qe chascun home and
feme, de quel estat on condition qils soient, qe ont ascuns Annuites, Fees ou
Gages, a term de vie, ou des Ans, du Grant du Roy Richard, ou du Roy qorest,
qils soefreront, and chascun de eux soefrera, mesmes nostre Seignour, le Roy
davoir and enjoier les dits Annuites, Fees, and Gages, del Feste de Pasche
darrein pass, tanqal lendemain de Pasche prochain avenir; cestassavoir per un
an entier. Purveu toutesfois qe les Fees, Gages and Regardes de Chancelier,
Tresorer, Gardien du Privee Seal, Justices de lun Bank and de lautre, Barons de
lescheqer, Sergeants du Roy a la Leye, and des autres Officers and Ministres
des Courts le Roy, ne soient restreints per virtue de ceste Ordeinance, mais
qils soient paiez come ils ont este accustumez de estre paiez, devant ces
heurs.

Ibid. N. 22.
Item, Qe chascun home and feme, de qel estat ou condition qils soient qont
ascuns Chastelx, Manoires, Terres ou Tenements, Rents ou autre Possessions,
qel^onques, du Grante du Roy Richard, ou de Roy qorest, qe ils soefrerent and
chascun de eux soefrera mefme nostre Seignour le Roy, de avoir, and enjoier les
Profits de mesme les Chastelx, Manoirs, Terres and Tenements, Rentes and
Possessions qeux ils ont ensi a term de vie, ou des Ans, de le dit Feste de
Pasche darrein pass, tanqa lendemayn avantdit. Et qe le Roy ent seit respondus
a son Escheqer: Forpris Fees and Advoesons, Gardes, Marriages, and autres
Casueletees as Chastelx, Manoirs, Terres, and Tenements Rentes and Possessions
avaunt dits appurtenants: Et forpris les Chartelx, Manoirs, Terres, Tenements,
Rents and Possessions, Fee Farms, Annuities, and les Profits and Commoditees,
Assignees au Reign, en Dower, ou donez ou grantez a les Fitz du Roy, and a
chascun de eux: Et forpris ceux qont ascuns Annutees per Grant ou Confirmation
a eux ou a lour Ancestres, fait en Parliament: Et forprises auxi les Chastelx
assizes sur les Marches Descoce, ou de Gales, ou sur les Coustes de Mer.

But there seems to be given a Power to the King, by his advice of Council, to
Resume his Lands from such as have more than they deserve.

Ibid. N. 23. ^
Item, Qe Proclamation soit fait en Chascun Contee Dengleterre, qe (...) ceux
qont ascuns Annuitiees, (...) Manoirs, Terres, Tenements, Fee Fermes, Fees ou
Gages, ou autre Grant qeconqe, dascune value annuelle, a term de vie, ou des
Ans du Grante du Roy Edw. Aiel nostre Seignour le Roy, puis le an qarantisme du
dit Roy Edw. o^ de Roy Richard, ou de Roy qorest, envoient ou portent devant le
Roy and son Counseil perentre cy and le Feste de Chandeleure prochain a venir,
a pluistard, les Copies de lour Lettres Patentes, a eux faits, per les Roys
suisdits, sur peine de forfaire mesme les Lettres Patentes, au fyn qe nostre
dit Seignour le Roy, per advys de son Conseil, purra ordeigner qe ceux qont
fait bon service eient and enjoient lour dites Lettres Patentes, and les autres
qe nount deservies, soient tout outrement oustez de lours dites Lettres
Patents: Et auxint de ceux qont pluis qe ne ont deserviez, qe le dit Roy, per
advys de son dit Counseil, purra fair Moderation, come mieltz luy semblera.

Anno 7 and 8 Hen. 4. The Commons Pray the King, That no Lands to be Conquered
from the Welsh, should be granted away in a Quarter of a Year, from the time
such Lands should be taken in: The King among other things Answers, That he
will not grant away such Lands till he is informed of their Value.

* Rot. Par. 7. and. 8. H. IV. No 15.
Item, Le dit Mr. John Pria pur les dits Communes, qe les Chatelx Seignouries,
Terres and Tenements, en la Terre de Gales, qe desore, per la Grace de Dieu,
seront conqis, ou gaignez, sur les dits Rebealx, ne soient donnes a uully per
le espace dun qarter dun Apres ceo qils seront ensi conqis ou gains.

A qoy le Roy respendi, qil se veilloit abstenir deascun tiel don fair a uully
tanqe al temps qe il feroit enformez de la value dycelles: Et si ascun ^ie^ don
deslors se feroit, qil le vorroit fair as tielx Persons qe voillent demeurer
su^ la conqest de la Terre de Gales suisdits.

In the same Parliament, the Common^ Pray, That certain Foreigners by Name may
be Banished the Kingdom, which the King agrees to, and in his Writ to the
Sheriffs of London, directs, That such Foreigners should produce such Grants of
Land, as they had obtained from Him, the Queen, or from others. Ibid 29.
Ite^, Samedy le 8 jour de May a les souve^^ priers and reqestes des Communes,
accord^ feust per nostre Seignour le Roy, and les Seignours Esprituelx and
Temporelx, (...) touts les Aliens des qeux les noms (...) comprises en une
Cedule, laqelle (...) livree al Seneschal del Houstiel du Roy, voidant la
Roialme devant un certain jour, compris en le Brief de Proclamation ent fait,
come per la tenure dycell^ brief, enroulle en la Chancellerie, y purra apparoir.

And the King in his Writ to the Sheriffs, Directs among other things, 'Quodque
omnes and singuli Alienigenae praedicti, qui aliqua Terras, Tenementa,
Annuitates, sive Concessiones quaecunque in Feodo simplici, vel Talliato, sive
ad terminum vitae, vel annorum, ex Concessione nostra, sive ex Concessione
charissimae Consortis nostrae Reginae Angliae sive aliorum Ligeorum nostrorum
per litteras, sive scripta, eis inde fact* obtinent, quovismodo, hujusmodi
Litteras sive scripta nobis in Cancellaria nostra liberent indilate, ad finem
quod visis Litteris and scriptis praedictis, inde fieri jubere valeamus, quod
de jure, and secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae, fore
viderimus faciendum.

Anno 11. Hen. IV. The Commons Pray, That for ever hereafter no Grant may be
made of any Hereditament, or other Profits of the Crown, except Offices and
Bailiwicks, till the King shall be quite out of Debt; and unless there be
remaining in his Coffers sufficient for the Provision of his ^amily. To which
the King agrees, directly, without Reservation, till his Debts be paid, or
unless there be sufficient Provision for his Family, and with Reservation for
the Queen, His Sons, and for the Duke of York, and the Lord Gray.

Rot. Parl. 11 Hen. IV. No. 23.
Item, Qe nulles Chastelx Honors Seignouries, Manoirs, Villes, Terres,
Tenements, Franchises, Reversions, Libertees, Forrestes, Fees, Advoesons,
Eschetes, Forfaitures, Gardes, Marriages ou autres Revenues qeconqes, ove lours
appurtenances, forpris Offices and Baillies, en temps ensuivants, es Mains
nostre dit Seignour le Roy ou a ses Heirs, Rois Dengleterre, a eschiers, ou a
venirs, ne soient en nulle manner donez, ne Grantez a ascune Persons, si ne
soit al profit and Oeps nostre dit Seignour le Roy, pur la Sustenance de son
Houstiel, Chamber, and Gard^robe, tanqe tous ses dettes a ses Lieges a present
dues soient pleinement paiez, and deslors enavant continuell^ment reasonable
Substance remaignant e^ mains nostre dit Seignour le Roy, and ses Heirs, Roys
Dengleterre, pur la sustenance and supportation del Houstiel, Chamber* and
Garderobe suis ditz, devant ascun down ou Grant fait al contraire dicelle en
descharges de nostre dit Seignour le Roy, and de son Roialme, (...) temps
avenir: Et si ascune maner^ de Person, de qel Estate ou Condition (...) soit,
eit ou resceive en temps a venir, de down ou de Grante, nostre dit Seignour le
Roy, ou de ses Heirs, Roys Dengleterre, ascunes des Revenues dessuis nommez, a
contraire de cest Petition, qe le avantdit down ou Grant soient outrement
voidez, and come nulles tenus, and le Roy respondu en son Escheqer des Issues
en le mesme temps dycelle provenantz and en temps ensuant a provenir per issint
qe le Chancelier Dengleterre, qi pur le temps sera, soit tenus a certifier en l
Eschequer nostre dit Seignour le Roy des douns and Grants avaunt dits, a tant de
foits come il besoigne.

Resp. Le Roy voet qe touts les Chastelx, Manoirs, Honors, Seignouries,
Villes, Terres, Tenements, Franchises, Reversions, Libertees, Forests, Fees,
Advoesons, and Eschetes, Forfeitures, Gardes, Marriages, ou autres Revenues
qeconqes, ove lour Appurtenances, Forpris Offices and Baillies, qi escheiront
de ce en avaunt, es mains nostre Seignour le Roy, ne soient en null manner donnez
ne grantez, a ascune Person, sil ne soit al oeps and profit, nostre dit
Seignour le Roy, pur la Sustenance de son Hostiel, Chamber and Garderobe, Et si
ascune manner person, de qel Estate ou Condition qil soit, eit ou resceivre
dycest 26. Jour de Avril, en temps avenir, ascun tiel down ou Grant, au
contraire de cest ordeinance, qe le avaunt dit down and Grant soient outrement
voidez, and tenus pur null, forpris que Recompensation soit fait au Reign,
solonc la tenure de ses Lettres Patents, Et forpris les Fitz de Roy, Et auxint
forpris qe recompensation soit fait a Duc d Everwick and a Seignour de Gray
solonc la Form de lour lettres Patentes.

There was no full and direct Resumption during the Reign of Henry the V. Rot.
Par. 1 Hen. V. N^. 40.
except of Lands given away in the Marches of Calais; by which it appears, that
the Care taken in the former Parliaments, had somewhat fenced the King's
Revenues, against the Rapine of the Favorites and Great Men* But though there
was no Resumption, yet i^ was Enacted 1 H. 5th That the King should have 10,000
l. per Ann. out of the Annuities and Pensions formerly granted, which was no
inconsiderable Sum i^ those days, since the whole Revenue o^ the Cot. (...) p.
156.
Crown when he undertook the Conquest of France amounted to but L. 56, 96^ per
Annum.

* Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. V. No. 12.
Item accordez est, and assentuz per ^ Roy and les Seignours, a la reqest d^
Communes en Parliament, qe sur les Pai^ments afaires de les Annuitees, Grant^ as
diverses Persons, per les lettres Pa^e^tes des Roys, mesme nostre Seignour
(...) Roy, pur Sustenance and Supportation d^ son honorable Estate, and de les
Grandes Charges, Costages, and despenses d^ son Houstiel, Chamber, and
Garderobe* soit preferez de dix milles livres annuellement, and yeelle
preferement accompli^* soient les Persons dessuisdits paiez d^ lour dites
Annuitees, solonc les Fourm^ and effect de lour letters Patentes a eux en^
faits. Purveus toutes fois qe les Seignours and autres Persons qont lours
Annuitees enheritab^ement, soient paiez demesme lour Annuitees solonc la form
and effect de lour Chartre, and Lettres Patents, ent faits, non obstant le
preferement avaunt dit.

Anno 28 Hen. 6. Rot. Parl. 28 Hen. VI. No 53.
Prayen the Commons in this your present Parliament Assembled, to consider that
where your Chanceller of your Reaume of England* your Tresorer of England,
and many of the Lords of your Counseill, by your high Commandment to your
said Commons, at your Parliament holden last at Westminster, showed and
declared the State of this your Reaume, which was, that ye were endetted in
CCCLXXII. M. li. which is great and grevouse, and that your Livelode in yearly
value was but V. M. li. And for as much as this V M. li. to your high and
notable Estate* to be kept, and to pay your said dettes woll noght suffice,
Therefore that your high Estate might be releved.

And furthermore it was declared, that your Expenses Necessaries to your
Household, withouten all other ordinary Charges, came to 24000 li. yearly, the
which exceeds every Year in expenses necessary over your Livelode 19000 li.

Also please it your Highness to consider, that the Commons of your said
Reaume, been as well willed to their pore power, to releving of your Highness,
as ever were People to any King of your Progenitors, that ever reigned in
your said Reaume of England, but your said Commons been so impoverished, what
by taking of Vitaile to your Household, and other things in (...) said Reaume,
and noght paid fore, And the Quinszisme by your said Commons, before this time
so often granted, and by the Grant of Tonnage and Poundage, and by the Grant
of the Subsidy upon the Wolles, and other Grauntes to your Highness, And
(...) lakke of Execution of Justice, that your pore Commons been full night
destro^ed, And if it should continue longer in such great Charge, it* cowde
noght* in oney wise be hade or borne.

Wherefore please it your Highness, the premises graciously to consider; And
that ye, by the advyce of your Lords Spirituels and Temporels and by
auctorite of this your present Parliament, for the Conservacion of your high
Estate, and in comfort and ease of your pore Commons, would take, resume, seize
and retain in hands and possession, all Honors, Castelles, Lordshippes,
Towns, Towneshipps, Mannours, Londs, Tenementes, Wastes, Rentes, Reversions,
Fees, Feefermes, and Services, with all their Appurtenances, in England,
Wales, and in the Marches thereof, Irlonde, Guysnes, Caleys and inthe Marches
thereof, the which ye hafe granted by your Lettres Patentes, or otherwise,
sithe the first day of your Reign, and all Honors, Castelles, Lordshippes,
Towns, Towneshipps, Mannours, Londs, Tenements, Wastes, Rentes, Reversions,
Fees, Feefermes, and Services, with all their Appurtenances, the which were of
the Duchy of Lancastre, and passed from you by your Grant or Grauntes; And
ye to have, hold and receive, all the Premises, in and of like Estate, os ye
had them at the time of such Grauntes made by you of them.

And that all Lettres Pattentes, or Grauntes by you, or by oney other Person
or Persons at your request, or desire, made to oney Person or Persons,
of the Premises, or of oney of them, in that, that to oney of the Premises,
be be void and of no force.

And over that, that all manner of Graunts of Rentes, Charges, or Annuitees,
made by you of Estate of Inheritance, for term of Lyffe, or term of Years, to
oney Person or Persons, to be taken of oney of these Premises, or of your
Custumes or Subsidies, or Awnage, or of your Hamper, or at, or in your
Receipts, or in otherwise, or in oney other Place, or oney of them, or of the
Profits coming of them, or oney of them, withinne this your Reaume,
Irlonde, Wales, Guysues, Caleys and the Marches of the same, be void and of
noone effect.

And that all manner of Grauntes, made by you, to oney Person, or Persons, of
Estate of Enheritance, term of Lyffe, or term of Years, of oney Herbage, or
Pannage, Fishyng, Pasture, or Comyne of Pasture, your Warein, Wode, Wine,
Clothyng, Furs to noone Office longyng, nor perteinyng, the seid first Day of
your Reign, nor before, noght yeldyng to you the verray value thereof, be
void and of noone effect.

And over that, like it your Highness, to take, resume and seize, and retain
into your hands, and Possessions, all manner Lettres Patentes, Privileges,
Franchises, Hundreds, Wapentakes, Letes, Rapes, Vewe of Franchises, Fynes,
Amerciaments, Issues and Profits of the same, by you granted, sith the first
Day of your Reign to oney Person or Persons, or Abbot, Priour, Deane,
Chapitre, Maistre or Wardeyne of College, Fraternite, Craft or Gilde. And all
manner of such Grauntes, to be void and of noone effect.

And furthermore; All Grauntes made by you, to oney Person, or Persons, of
oney Offices, the which were noone Offices the first Day of your Reign, nor
before, be void and of noone effect.

And that all manner of Grauntes, made by you, to oney Person, or Persons,
geaving them Power to make or ordeine oney Office, or Offices, of whom the
making and Ordeinance, the said first Day of your Reign, or oney time sith,
longd to you or them, were noone such Office, nor before that, thanne such
Grant as in making or Ordeinance of such Offices be of noone effect.

And over that, That all Grauntes and Relesses made by you sith the first Day
of your Reign, to oney Abbot, Priour, Covent, or to oney other Person or
Persons, for discharge or quytclayme of oney Corrodies, or Corodie, Pensione
or Pensiones, dismez spirituells, or Quinszismes, or dismes temporells, Rentes,
or Services, or oney other charge, be void and of noone effect.

And that no Person nor Persons havyng Estate in Offices, Fee simple or Fee
taille, of your Grant, or oney havyng their Estate, have other Estate in
the said Offices, but term of their lyffes, that now hafe the seid Offices
with Fees and Wages, to the seid Offices, of alde time accustumed oonly, and
noon otherwise.

And that all manner of Grauntes by you made, or to be made to oney Person or
Persons of the Premises, or of oney parcelle, during this your present
Parliament, be void and of noone effect.

And that no Person or Persons, that had oney thing of the premises before
the time of the seid Resumption, be noght chargeable by way of Account, or
otherwise for the same against you, your Heirs and Successors, except thoo
that by your Grauntes before the seid Resumption were accomptable.

This is the forepart of the Act, Word for word, to which the House of Commons
thought fit to add Savings to several Persons, of which we shall give an
Abstract.

First there is Saving to the Queen, for her Dower. [2] For the Colleges of our
Lady of Eaton, and our Lady and St. Nicholas of Cambridge. [3] For Lands
granted in the Duchy of Lancaster to Persons to the intent to perform the
King's Will. [4] For Priories Alien then in the Possession of Hospitals, or
Religious Houses. [5] For the Creation Money, paid to the Peers, but this
Saving is with Restrictions. [6] For those who had made Surrenders to the King,
and taken other Lands in Exchange so as the last Grant exceed not the first in
value or term. [7] A Saving for Lands bought of the King by Henry Cardinal of
England and given to St. Crosses, with a general Saving for the Interest and
Claim of private Persons to the Lands intended to be Resumed. [8] A Saving for
those who had Grants in former Reigns, out of which they were Lawfully Evicted,
and in Consideration of which they had Grants from the present King. [9] A
Saving for those who had exchanged Lands with the King, so as the Lands
exchanged were not also of his own Gift, and so as what exceeded in Value
should be resumed. [10] A Saving for what paid Rent according to the true value
at the time of the Grant. [11] A Saving for where the King was Feoffee in
trust, so as it was not in Lands of his own Gift. [12] A Saving for the Lord
Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, Justices, Barons of the Exchequer, Sergeants
at Law, Attorney and Officers in the King's Courts of Record, for accustomed
Wages, Rewards or Clothing, [13] A Saving for Grants made of their own Lands
to Persons born beyond the Seas, and of English Parentage. [14] A Saving for
All-Souls-College. [15] A Saving for Cities and Buroughs, who by the King's
Charter were to be exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Lord High Admiral or
Warden of the Cinque Ports. [16] A Saving for Bodies Corporate, etc. who by
Charter had Privilege granted of Murage.

These were all the Reservations, the House of Commons thought necessary in
this Act. Then follows.

And that it like your most High and Habundant Grace, tenderly to consider
these Premises, and thereuppon by your high and great Wisdom, and by the
Advyse of the Lords Spirituels and Temporels, in this your present Parliament
Assembled to ordeine, provide, and establish sufficiaunt Possessions, of the
Premises so resumed for the contentyng and Payment of the Expenses, and Charges
of your Household, and all your other ordinary Charges: And to Apply and
Appoint the Possessions, Profits, Revenues, and Commodities of your Town of
Caleys, and of Guisues and of the Marches there, holy to be taken and received
by your Tresorer of Caleys for the time beying, he to apply them to the
Payments of the Souldeours there, and the repair of the Gettes and other
necessary reparations there behowfull; And the seid Tresorer thereof to you in
your Eschequer duly to account; And all the Possessions aforesaid so
severally provided for to abide and endure to you your Heirs and Successors
in perpetuity, to the same end and effect, and noon other, with such peines
and Punishments to be set thereupon, by your wise discretions, that noone of
your Leiges in time to come attempt the contrary thereof, or accept any
parcel of hem, so ordained, for the seid Provisions; so that the seid
Ordeinaunce so made be sent and declared to us your seid Beseechers, during
this your seid Parliament, to the end and effect we to yeve thereto our
assent, so that it can be thought to us for your Honor, profit and welfare
of us, all so to do, that it be authorized in this your high and Roial Court
of Parliament, and by Aucthorite of the same.

Resp. The King by the Advyse and assent of the Lords Spirituelx and Temporelx
in this present Parliament assembled. and by the Authority of the same,
agrees to this Petition and Resumption, and the same accepts and
establishes, Alweys forseyn that all exceptions moderations forprises and
provisions by him granted ordained and admitted, and put in Writing in this
same Parliament, upon the premises, be and stand good and availlable in Law,
after the Form and effect of the continue of the same exceptions Moderations
and Provisions; And that all Lettres Patentes of the King made to oney Person
or Persons named in oney of the same Exceptions moderations forprises and
provisions, be good and effectuel after the Form and continue of the same
Lettres Patentes, by whatsomever name oney such person or persons be named in
oney such Lettres Patentes, the said Act and Petition of Resumption or oney
thing contained therein notwithstanding.

Provided always that it extend not to oney Possessions or other thing made or
granted by the King to oney person or persons in Caleis or in the Marches
thereof or in the Land of Irlond.

These that followen been the Exceptions Moderations forprises and provisions
by the King granted ordained and admitted, and in this same Parliament upon the
Premises put in writing.

First Saving for Merton-College. [2] For Leon Lord Wells, inasmuch as he had a
Pension justly due to him. [3] For the Dower of the Duchess of War. [4] For
Lands exchanged with John Fray. [5] For the College of Leicester. [6] For the
Expenses granted by Patent to Richard Duke of York in the Lieutenancy of
Ireland. [7] For Restitutions of Temporalities, etc. to Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. [8] For the Priory of Henton. [9] For John Stourton, Treasurer of the
Household for 5000 l. to be expended in his Office. [10] For the Prior of St
John's for 15 s. per Annum. [11] For the Friars of Kings Melcombe, upon a
valuable Consideration. [12] For Lands taken in Farm of the King, and improved.
[13] For Jervais le Unlre's Pension of 24 l. per Annum, as the King's French
Secretary. [14] For Lands given to the Abbot and Church of Westminster, out of
which they were to distribute Alms. [15] For the Duke of Somerset's Lands
bought of the King, for valuable Considerations by Henry Cardinal, and sold by
the Cardinal to the Duke. [16] For the Chief Justice. [17] For Oriel-College.
[18] For All Souls College. [19] For the Abbot and Covent of Selby their
Release of Dismes. [20] For Thomas Derling, Sergeant of Arms, his Clothing and
accustomed Wages. [21] For John Waterford the same. [22] For John Bury's
Pension of 12 p. per diem, etc. [23] For the Priory of Brydlyngton, Endowed by
the King in especial Devotion. [24] For a small parcel of Land given to the
Charter House of Sheen, Founded by the King his Father. [25] For Lands only
restored to the College of Knollesmes-House in Pontfract. [26] For John Earl of
Shrewsbury, as to 100 l. Annual Pension for Life and Lands in Waterford, till
then yiedling nothing, being in the Hands of Rebels, the said Earl having had
no other Recompense for his long Services. [27] For the Lord Scales Pension of
100 l. per Annum for his long Services in France, and Duchy of Normandy. [28]
For William Stone's Pension of 26 l. 13 s. 4. granted him last Parliament, at
the Request of both Houses, for great Services as well to the King, as to his
Father. [29] For Richard Welsden's Pension of 10 l. 6 s. per Annum for Life,
out of the Fee-farm Rent of New-biggyng, which Fee-farm had been usually
distributed among the King's Servants from King Edward III's time. [30] For the
City of Canterbury's Charter, in relation to their Officers only. [31] For
Charters of Denization. [32] For Sir John Astley's Pension of 100 Marks, for
Life. [33] For Houses granted to the Dean and Church of St. Steven Westminster.
[34] For Will. Rouse, one of the Clerks of the Crown, as to his Patent for his
Office, and as to 20 l. per Annum out of the Hamper for Execution of his said
Office. [35] For the Collegiate Church of Leicester as to their Ton of Wine.
[36] For Will. Crawen and others their Patent who were erected into a
Fraternity. [37] For the Heirs of the Lord Bardolph on account of Lands
restored to them by good advice. [38] For the Vicounts, Beamont and Bougchier
both as to the Patents for their Honors and Creation-Money. [39] For the Dean
and Chapter of Lichfield, concerning their Patent for certain Liberties and
Priveleges. [40] The same for the Town of Estratford. [41] The same for the
City of York. [42] For the Abbot of Byland, about a small Fee-farm Rent. [43]
For John Vicount Beamount, Ralph Lord Cromwell, and others, in relation to Lands
granted to them, the Value not expressed in the Proviso. [44] The same for John
Fanceby, value not expressed. [45] The same for John Hampton, but 40 l. per
Annum resumed from him. [46] For Ralph Bapthorp, Esquire of the Body, for Lands
given, or sold to him. [47] The same for John Norreis, only there is resumed
from him 50 Marks per Annum Pension and 6 l. 13 s. out of Merston Messey. [48]
For Phil. Wentworth Esquire of the Body. [49] The same for Thomas Danyel, but
the Manuor of Gedyngton of 26 l. 6 s. Yearly Value is resumed from him [50] The
same for Will. Tresham only 20 per Anuum is resumed from him. [51] The same for
Thomas Myner, and others the King's menial Servants, only 20 out of 40 l. per
Annum is resumed from Jenk yne Stanley. [52] For the Earl of Arundel, for Lands
granted to him, the value not expressed. [53] The same for Richard Earl of
Warwick. [54] For Richard Earl of Salisbury, but a Fee-farm taken from him of
24 l. per Ann. and some certain Privileges very extraordinary are taken from
him, and others in Richmondshire reserved to him. [55] A Saving for the Lord
Dudley, as to some Patentes, but other things are resumed. [56] For certain
Priv^leges granted to Sir John Boteller. [57] For Sir Thomas Haryngton on
account of Lands granted to him for good Services, specified in the Provisoe.
[58] For Sir Richard Wyddewil, Lord Rivers, and others, on account of Lands
granted or confirmed to them. [59] For Sir John Talbot, and others, on account
of 20 l. per Annum Pension to be paid to them, or the survivor of them. [60]
For the Lord Clifford for Lands granted to him. [61] The some for Henry
Everingham, so as his Grant exceed not the value of 12 Marks per Annum. [62]
For Rich. Hakedy, the King's Apothecary, as to 40 Marks Yearly granted for his
Life. [63] For Robert Fenys and Thomas Bermingham for Grants made to them, but
form Robert there is resumed 20 l. Feefarm Rent. [64] For Rob. Manfeld and his
Son for Lands Granted or Confirmed. [65] The same for Will. Say and Thomas
Shargyl the Kings Servants. [66] The same for Gilbert Par, but 9 l. per Annum
Feefarm Rent resumed [67] The same to John Trevilian as to some small Grants
expressed. [68] The same for Henry Langton the King's Servant. [69] The same
for John Say, as to a Grant for his and his Wifes lives, but L. 9-2-6. Feefarm
Rent resumed. [70] The same for John Blackney the King's Servant. [71] The same
to Rob. Fowls Hyrst the King's Servant so as it exceed not 10 Marks per Ann.
[72] The same as to a Grant for life of 20 l. per. Ann. [73] The same for John
Down the King's Servant as to two small Grants. [74] The same to Griffith ap
Nicholas as to a Grant of 15 l. per Ann. [75] The same for Henry Manners one of
the King's Servants. [76] The same for John Chyval and others the King's
Servants, but three Pipes of Wine, and 10 l. per Annum Feefarm Rent are here
resumed. [77] The same for Will. Elton and others the King's Servants as to
some Leases or Confirmations. [78] The same for John Sutton Kings Servant. [79]
the same for Robert Wyllyn King's Servant. [80] The same for John Woodhouse
King's Servant. [81] The same for Henry Rosyngton, and others the King's
Servants. [82] The same for John Slyfirst, and several others the King's
Servants, as to their Salaries, which were reduced to 10 l. per Annum. [83] The
same to Thomas Carr the King's Servant. [84] The same to Andrew Low King's
Servant. [85] The same for Thomas Schapp King's Servant, as to 6 d. per diem
Sallary. [86] The same for William Langton, and others of the King's Mynstrel,
as to their Salaries of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. per Annum. [87] The same for Will.
Clarence King's Servant. [88] The same for Bryan Wager, King's Servant. [89]
The same for Sir Richard Roos and others, but in this Proviso several
Resumptions are made [90] The same for Thomas Mongomery Esquire, so as what he
enjoys of the King's Gift exceed not 23 l. per Annum. [91] The same for Thomas
Calbras King's Servant, as to his Salary of 12 p. per diem. [92] The same for
James Hornby and Tho. Osborn Kings Servants as to their Offices, Wages and
Clothing. [93] The same as to Tho. Bradfeld, but here 8 Marks per Ann. Fee
Farm Rent is resumed. [94] The same for Rowland Lenthal as to Lands bought of
or exchanged with the Crown. [95] The same for Rich. Wednyng as to the
Reversion of an Office. [96] The same for Christop. Whittacre as to an Office
and Sallarie of 4 Pence per diem. [97] The same for William John as to a Grant
made upon a Surrender. [98] The same to John Brely as to his Office. [99] The
same for Thomas Lord Egremont as to 45 l. per ann. to him and his Heirs for
Sustentation of the Honor. [100] The same for Wotkyn Bedell King's Servant as
to a Feefarm Rent out of Mills in Herefordshire. [101] The same for Sr. Rich.
Molyneux and his Son as to their Offices and Sallaries and as to some Leases
they had from the Crown. [102] A Saving to the Town of Kingston upon Hull as to
some Franchises granted to them. [103] For Ralph Leigh and others King's
Servants so as the Grant made to them all exceed not 20 l. per ann. [104] For
Sr. John Langton and his Son as to some Leases. [105] A Saving to the Prior and
Convent of York as to some Pardons and Releases made to them. [106] A Saving
for Sr. Edmond Hungerford. [107] Another Saving for Sr. Edmond Hungerford and
Phil. Courtney as to some Manors they held by Lease and for which they paid
Rent. [108] For John Hunt and others, Clerks of the Chapel as to some Grants
so as no Grant made to any of them exceed 20 Marks per ann. [109] For John
Watts and others King's Servants as to some small Pensions for Life. [110] A
Saving to John Merston and others the Kings Servants but with Exceptions. [111]
For John Wesenham King's Servant. [112] A Saving to John Holt for some Lands
(as it seems) rather restored than granted. [113] For Thomas Frank. [114] For
John Arnold and others as to some Tenements they held in Trust for Religious
Uses. [115] For John Rypon King's Servant. [116] For John Brown and Thomas
Catesby as to some Eschetes and Grants of small value which is expressed in the
Proviso. [117] A Saving for John Baker and Rich. Wardale King's Servants. [118]
A Saving to the Lord Hungerford for the Manor of Hungerford out of which there
was a reserved Rent, and in the same Proviso there is a Saving for Sr. Rich.
Hungerford Ld. Molins as to a small Grant. [119] A Saving to the Earl of
Northumberland. [120] A Saving to Tho. Kent as to 100 Marks per ann. in
Consideration that the said Kent had been at great Expenses in repairing the
Port of Southampton, and that by this Resumption he was to loose several Grants
expressed in the Proviso. [121] A Saving for John Green Esquire who had certain
Privileges and Free Chase granted him by Letters Patents in his own Woods.
[122] For the Monks of Sempyngham as to a Pardon or Release of Disms. [123] For
Will. Bulkley King's Servant as to his Salary of 12 Pence per diem who had no
other reward for his long Services. [124] A Saving for John Kingly and Rob.
Whitgrene as to some small Grants. [125] For William Boerly. [126] For Jenkin
Stanley and his Son as to some Grants and for the Vitlership of a Castle. [127]
A Saving for the Lord Vessey. [128] For John Welbeck Kings Servant as to his
Salary of 12 Pence per diem. [129] A Saving to the Town of Notyngham for
certain Franchises provided they increase their present Feefarm Rent 13 s. 4 d.
above what they already paid. [130] For John Turges the Queens Harper as to 10
Mark per ann. for Life which he was to have after the death of another. [131]
For Will. Beaufitz, but here is a Resumption of 15 l. per ann. Feefarm Rent.
[132] For John Peycock as to 6 Pence per diem. [133] A Saving for Sr. Tho.
Fulthorp Justice of the Common Bench value not expressed. [134] For Gilbert
Haltoft Secondary Baron of the Exchequer as to 20 Mark per ann. for his Life.
[135] For the Lord Chief Baron as to 40 l. per ann. Robe Vesture and Furrure.
[136] For John Fowardly as to 20 l. per ann. for life, and John Poutrel as to
20 Mark per ann. for life. [137] For John Sleg and his Wife as to 4 l. 6 s. per
ann. for life [138] For John Prude Kings Glazier as to 12 Pence per diem for
life. [139] A Saving for Colchester and Ipswich as to Franchises and Liberties.
[140] For the Town of Rye as to a Grant made to them. [141] For the Town of
Shrewsbury as to Franchises and Liberties. [142] For the Town of Bridgenorth
the same. [143] A Saving to John late Duke of Somerset as to a Feefarm Rent of
15 l. per ann. [144] For Nich. Semtlo as to Grants so they exceed not 20 l. per
ann. [145] For Giles Thorndon Esquire as to a Grant of 7 l. per ann. for life which
he had out of Lands in Ireland. [146] For Will. Catesby King's Servant as to 10
l. per ann. for life. [147] For John Parkes Kings Servant. [148] For John
Martyn Kings Servant as to 6 d. per diem. for his life. [149] For George Danyel
as to Grants so they exceed not 20 Mark per annum. [150] For John Hoghton and
other Servants at Arms, as to their Patentes, it is to be supposed for their
Employments. [151] For Rob. Wood Clerk as to a Reversion of a Feefarm Rent of
10 l. per ann. [152] A Saving for King's Hall in Cambridg as to a piece of wast
ground and Conduit granted. [153] For Tho. Smith as to his Office and Sallary
of 4 Pence per diem. [154] For Will. Burton Queens Servant as to 100 Shill. per
ann. for his life. [155] For Thomas Derlyng and John Moor Serjant at Arms as to
their Fees. [156] A full Saving for the Colleges founded by the King in
Cambridg and at Eaton. [157] This Saving relates to the same Colleges. [158]
For Will. Bradford and Thomas Kendal Kings Officers as to their Fees. [159] For
Tho. Merton as to 100 Shillings per ann. [160] For the Duchess of Somerset as
to part of her Dower. [161] For John Pulloo as to his Office and Fee. [162] For
Coney ap Rice the same. [163] For the Lady Roos Widow as to 60 l. per ann. for
life. [164] Provided also that noon exception made by us upon the Resumption in
this present Parliament of any Possessions extend to oney Londs, Tenements,
Fees, Offices Fermes or any other thing in Caleys or in the Marches thereof.
[165] A Saving for Robert Tanfeld as to 20 Mark per Annum for his life out of
the Hamper. [166] For John Somerset, Gentleman. [167] For Sir Edmond Hampden,
Queen's Carver, as to some Herbage in a Park, which did not exceed 50 Shillings
per Annum, and as to an Annuity of 20 l. per Annum. [168] For Tho. Parker, Esquire
as to his Grants not exceeding 24 l. per Ann. for Life. [169] For Tho. Pope.
[170] For Tho. Bird, Sergeant at Arms, as to his Wages and Clothing. [171] For
John Daindesey, King's Servant. [172] For John Skeleton as to Two Annuities, one
of 20 l. another of 10 Mark for his Life. [173] For John Faceby, Sergeant at
Arms, as to his Office and Sallary. [174] A Saving to the Town of Beaumaris, as
to 20 l. per Ann. granted for its Walling. [175] For Walter Bright, Sergeant at
Arms, as to his Office, Clothing and Wages. [176] For Johanna Astley, the
King's Nurse, as to Two Annuities for her Life, amounting in the Whole to 50 l.
per Ann. [177] A Saving to the City of Chester, as to a Release granted to 'em
for 50 Years of 50 l. per Ann. part of their Fee-farm Rent. [178] For Sir John
Fortescue, [179] To Thomas Brown, as to 12 l. per Ann. for his Life. [180] For
Henry Abyndon, Clerk of Eaton College, as to 8 l. per Ann. [181] For Henry
Vavousor, for some Grants which are expressed. [182] For Tho. Derwent, Sergeant
at Arms, as to his Office and Fee of 12 d. per Diem. [183] A particular, and
then a general Saving for King's- Hall in Cambridge. [184] A Saving for the
Abbot and Covent of St. Albans, as to Franchises and Liberties. [185] For Tho.
Thorp, as to his Grants, but 10 l. per Ann. Fee-farm Rent the King resumes.

The Reader may observe from this Record,

1 st. That the Crown was become indebted to the Subjects, in the Sum of 372000
l.

2 dly, That the Crown-Revenue, which in the Reign of Henry the Fifth, was
56966 l. became reduced to 5000 l. per Annum, so much had the Crown been robbed
and pillaged during the Minority of this Religious, but weak and unfortunate
Prince.

3 dly, That the House of Commons thought it reasonable to relieve the King's
Necessities out of his own, and by an Act of Resumption, rather than to charge
the People with new Duties and Impositions.

4 thly, That the House of Commons thought it reasonable to make the Act so
general, that they inserted only Sixteen Reservations or Saving for others, so
much did they consult the Public more than any private Interest.

5 thly, That the Commons desire the King to appropriate to the Expense of his
Household the Lands so resumed.

6 thly, That the King when he gave the Royal Assent to this Act, reserved to
himself the Power of putting in Writing, while the Parliament sat, certain
Moderations and Restrictions to the said Act, and the King in the said Assent,
excepts all Grants made as to Calais and Ireland.

The Writer of these Papers thought his Labor would not be unprofitably spent,
to give an Abstract of the Restrictions and Moderations, which the King's
Council believed at that time necessary in an Act, which was to be so very
general and extensive.

In these Savings, which are in Number 185, the Reader has before his Eyes a
perfect Image of the Gravity, Care, Exactness and Frugality of that Age.

Most of the said Savings relate to Patents for Employments, or for Lands
rather restored than granted, or for some Liberties and Franchises, or for
Lands given to Religious Uses, all which were affected by the Act. In some of
the Proviso's, the Value of the Grant is mentioned, and in others omitted; but
the general Exactness, which runs through the Whole, is a Mark, that where the
Value is not expressed, 'twas notoriously inconsiderable. In many of the
Savings there is something left and something taken away. The Reader may
likewise note, That most of the Grants of that Age were only for Life.

Note.] In this Writing of Restrictions the King receeds from the Exception he
made, as to Calais, when he gave the Royal Assent. [As in Saving 164.]

Note.] That the Great Earl of Shrewsbury, who had done so many Heroic
Actions, and had so valiantly fought for the Honor of his Country, had but 100
l. per Annum Pension for his Life, and some Lands in Ireland, then of no value,
the said Earl having had no other Recompense for his long Services, which
Moderation of his is a Reproach to the Avarice of the present Times, [vide
Saving 26.]

Anno 29. Hen. 6. There was another Resumption made. The Preamble agrees almost
Word for Word with the forementioned Act; but the Acts differ when we come to
the following Paragraph.

Rot. Parl. 29 H. 6. No 17.
And that all Lettres Patentes by you made, in, or of any of the Promises, to
any person or Persons, of the which any Recoverer has been had ayents the
said Patentees, or any other, by Covin or Collusion, that as well the Recoverer
thereof, as the Letters Patentes, be void and of noon effect; And over that
like it your Highness to take, resume, seize and reteign in your said Hands
and Possession all Manner of Libertees, Privileges, Franchises, Hundredes,
Wapentakes, Letes, Rapes, view of Frank plege, Sheref Towrnes, Sheref Gildes,
Amerciaments,* Issues and Profits of the same, by you granted sith the first
Day of your Reign, to oney Person or Persons, Abbot, Priour, Deane,
Chapetre, Maistre, Wardeyn of Collage, Fraternite, Craft, or Gilde, and all
Manner such Grantes, to be void and of noon Effect. Except such Libertees,
Privileges, Franchises, Hundredes, Wapentakes, Letes, Rapes, view of Frank
plege, Sheref Towrnes, Sheref Gildes, Fyues, Amerciaments, Issues and Profits
of the same, and all other Libertees, Privileges, Franchises and Immunities, as
ye have granted to the Provostes and Scolers of your Collages Roial, of our
Lady and Seint Nicholas of Cambrigge, nor to your Provoste and Collage Roial
of our Lady of Eaton, and to their Successors. And forasmoch as it is thought
to us your humble and liege People of this your noble Roialme, comen to this
your high Court of Parliament, by your Authority Roial, that certain and
diverse Libertees, Privileges, Freedoms, Fraunchises and Immunitees, by you to
the Provostes, Scolers, and to the Provoste and Collage and their Successors
of your Collages of Eaton and Cambrigge granted, been to your Highness
prejudicial and over chargefull and nyous unto your People of this your
Roialm.

Please it therefore your most High and Roial Mageste to ordeyne and appointe
by your high Wisdom and Discetion, that all Grauntes, and Acts of such
Libertees, Privileges, Freedoms, Franchises and Immunitees, as been to you
prejudicial and overchargefull and nyous unto your People of this your
Roialme be void and of noon Effect. Whereof we your true Comyns in the most
lowly wise that we can think, biseche your most habundant Grace, to have
Knowlech during this your said Court of Parliament for our special Releif and
Comfort: And over that, all the Grantes or Releases made by you sith the first
Day of your Reign to oney Abbot, Priour, Covent, or oney other Person or
Persons of discharge or quiet Claim of oney Corrodie or Corrodies, Pension or
Pensiones, Dismes Spirituels or Quinszismes or Dismes Temporels or of Discharge
or quiet Claim of oney Rentes of Fee or Services of Fee be void and of noon
Effect, this Act and Petition of Resumption to begin and take Effect the
first Day of your Parliament holden at Westminster the 28th Year of your
Reign, that all Manner of Grauntes by you made or to be made of oney of the
said Honors, Castelles, Lordshipps, Towns, Townshipps, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Wastes, Rentes, Reversions, Fees, Feefarmes, and Services with all
their Appurtenanees or oney Discharge or quiet Claim as is above reherced from
the 1st Day of the Parliament holden at Westminster the 28th Year of your
Reign unto the last Day of this your present Parliament be void and of noon
Effect. And if oney Person or Persons at oney Time after the first Day of
this your Parliament accept or purchase your Lettres Patentes of oney of the
said Honors, Castelles, Lordshippes, Towns, Townshippes, Manors, Lands,
Tenementes, Wastes, Rentes, Reversions, Fees, Feefermes and Services with all
their Appurtenances, or oney Discharge or quiet Claim as is above reherced of
oney of the Premises or oney other Possessions of Fee or of Free-holds that
should grow to you in Time coming by way of Forfeiture or otherwise. But if it
be so that thoose Letters Patentes pass by Advyse and Assent of your
Chancellor and your Tresorer of England Prive Seal and Six Lords of your
great Counseil for the Time being and that they and itch of them subscribe in
such Lettres Patentes their Names. And that the seide Letters Patentes so
subscribd be enrolld in your Chancellerie of Record. And if oney Person or
Persons accept or purchase your Letters Patentes of oney of the Premises
otherwise, forfette unto you our Sovereign Lord all his Londs and Tenementes,
that he or oney Person or Persons have to his Use at the Time of such
Letters Patents made, or oney Time after shall have in Fee simple holden of
you, immediately to you. And all other Lands and Tenements that they so shall
holden of other Persons, to them that they shall hold of immediately, and the
same Letters Patentes to be void and of noon Effect. And that no Person or
Persons that had oney thing of the Premises before the Time of the seid
Resumption be not chargeable by way of Account or otherwise for the same a
yents you your Heirs and Successors, except thoo that by your Grantes before
the said Resumption were accomptable. And that by Auctorite of this Parliament
every of your Liege Men, that has yeven or granted oney Lands, Tenementes,
Rentes, Advowsons, or other Possessions to you, or to oney other by your
Desire, for oney other Lands, Tenements, Rentes, Advowsons, or other
Possessions by you granted, or by oney other by your desire, sith the first
Day of your Reign, that they shall be now alyve, and their Heirs and the
Successors of them that been deed, may enter, have and enjoye all such
Lands, Tenementes, Rentes, Advowsons, and other Possessions so yeven and
granted in like wise and form, as their Ancestors, or Predecessoures had
them before such Grant or Estate made of them. And that Averment in this
Case may be had, admitted and received by this seid Auctorite, for every
Party that so shall enter into, have or enjoye oney of the Premises by their
surmyse, that the seid Lands, Tenementes, Rentes, Advowsons, or other
Possessions that they shall so enter in, have or enjoye, were yeven or granted
for other Lands, Tenementes, Rentes, Advowsons, or other Possessions that they
granted to you, or oney other at your Desire. Notwithstanding, that in no
Letters Patentes by you made, nor in such Gifts made to you, or by any other by
your desire mention be made thereof. So that such Lands, Tenementes, Rentes,
Advowsons, or other Possessions were not rightfully in your Possession in Fee
before such Yiftes or Grauntes, as it is above reherced, saving to every Person
their Right, Title and Interest in any of the Premises other than they their
Auncestoures or Predecessors had, by Force of your Letters Patentes, so
that thereof has been had no Recoverer by Covyne and Collusion.

The House of Commons judged it reasonable to make some Exceptions, or Proviso
of Savings to certain Interests; they are in Number Thirteen, and much of the
same kind as the Savings in the Act that passed the Year before. Then follows.

And for as much as it is pleynly and universally conceyved throughoute all
this your Roialme, that the good speed of this Act of Resumption is to you
full, honorable, necessary and behovefull, and to all your liege People
comfortable and great releife of their Povertee, the which they been in for
many unportable Charges leyed upon them before this time, for that the seid
Resumption before this time has not be effectually had. We your true, humble
Obeisant and faithful liege People, common for the comen of this your noble
Roialme, to this your high Court of Parliament, by your Autorite Royal, in
the most lowly wise to us possible, beseechen your most Noblaye, graciously
and tenderly to considre the great Benefits that should grow unto you, and to
this your Roialme, by the Mean of this Resumption. That it please therefore
your most habundat Grace, that the seid Resumption may take good and effectual
Conclusion, whereof we your seid humble liege People, undre the Favor of
your high and most noble Grace, may have knowlech during this seid Parliament,
for your singular Well and special Comfort and Consolation of us, and all thoo
that we come fore.

Resp. As for answer of the Petition and request of Resumption made to the
King by the Commons of this his present Parliament assembled, His Highness wol
that they know, That by thadvyse and assent of the Lords Spirituell and
Temporel, being in the same Parliament, and by the thauctorite of the same
Parliament His Excellence is agreed to resume and resumyth into his Hands and
Possession all Honors, Castles, Lordshipps, Towns, Townshipps, Manners,
Lands, Tenementes, Wastes, Rentes, Reversions, Fees, Fee-fermes and Services,
with all their Appurtenances in the which he had Estate in Fee, in England,
Wales, and in the Marches thereof, Irlond, Guysnes, Calais, and in the Marches
thereof, the which his Highness has granted by his Lettres, Patentes, or
otherwise sith the first Day of his Reign. And all the Honors, Castles,
Lordshipps, Towns, Towneshipps, Manners, Lands, Tenements, Wastes, Rents,
Reversions, Fees, Fee-ferms, and Services, with all their Appurtenances, the
which were of the Duchy of Lancastre, and passed from his Highness by his
Grant or Graunts. And he to have all the Premises in and of like Estate as
his Excellence had theyme at the time of such Grantes made by him of them. And
that all Lettres Patentes, or Grauntes by his Highness, or by any other
Person or Persons at his request or desire made to any person or persons of
the premises, or of any of them in that, that is of any of the premises be
void and of no force. And over that, that all manner of Grauntes of Rentes,
Charges or Annuities made by the Kyng's Highness of Estate of Enheritance, or
for Term of Life or Term of Yeris, or at the Will to any person or persons to
be taken of any of these Premises, or of any other of his Possessions, or of
his Custumes or Subsidies, or Awnage, or of his Hamper, or at, or in his
receite, or in otherwise, or in any other place, or in any of them, or of the
profits, coming of them, or any of them within this his Roialme, Irlond,
Wales, Guysnes, Caleys, and Marches of the same be void and of non effect. And
that all Manner of Grauntes made by His Highness to any Person or Persons of
Estate of Inheritance term of Life or term of Yeris or at his Will of any
Herbage or Pannage, Fishing, Pasture or Common of Pasture, Wareyn, Wode, Wine,
Clothyng, Furs to non Office longyng nor perteynyng the seid first Day of his
Reign nor before not yeldyng to his Highness the verray Value thereof nor doing
any Charge to His Highness thereof to the Value thereof be void and of non
Effect* And that all Lettres Patentes by His Highness made, in, or of any of
the Premises to any Person of the which any Recovere has been had against
the seid Patentes or any other by Covyne or Collusion that as well the
Recoverer thereof as the Letters Patentes be void and of non Effect. And over
that that all the Graunts or Relesses made by His Highness sith the first Day
of his Reign to any Abbot, Priour, Covent, or to any other Person or Persons
of Discharge or quiet Claim of any Corrodies or Corrodie, Pensions or Pension,
Dismes Spirituels or Quinzismes or Dismes Temporels or of Discharge or quiet
Claim of any Rents of Fee or Services of Fee be void and of non Effect. And
over that it likes his Highness to take, resume, and seize in his said Hands
and Possession all manner Libertees, Privileges, Fraunchises, Hundredes,
Wapentakes, Letes, Rapes, view of Fraunkplege, Shirrif Towrnes, Shirrif
Gildes, Fines, Amerciaments, Issues and Profits of the same by his Highness
granted since the first Day of his Reign to any Person or Persons or Abbot,
Priour, Dean, Chapitre, Maistre* or Wardeyn of College, Fraternitee, Craft or
Gilde, and all Manner such Grauntes to be void and of non Effect. Except such
Libertees, Privileges, Fraunchises, Hundreds, Wapentakes, Letes, Rapes, view of
Fraunkplege, Shirrif, Towrnes, Shirrif Gildes, Fines,, Amerciaments, Issues and
Profits of the same, and all other Libertees, Privileges, Fraunchises and
Immunitiees that his Highness has granted to the Provostes and Scolers of
his Collage Roial of our Lady and St. Nicholas of Cambrig; or to the Provoste
and Collage Roial our Lady of Eaton and to their Successoures. This Act and
Petition of Resumption to begin and take Effect at the feste of
Thannunciacion of our Lady in the Year of his Reign XXIX. And that all manner
of Grauntes by his Highness made of any of the seid Honors, Castles,
Lordshipps, Towns, Townshipps, Manoires, Lands, Tenementes, Wastes, Rentes,
Reversions, Fees, Feefermes and Services with all their Appurtenaunces or any
discharge or quiet Claim as it is above reherced during this present Parliament
be from the seid Fest of our Lady void and of non Effect. And as to the
Provisions and and Exceptions conteigned in the seid Petition of Resumption his
Highness them accepts and the same agrees forth, with other Provisions and
Exceptions by him by thadvise of the seid Lords, Spirituels and Temporels
being in this seide Parliament put in writing as the Tenours of them hereafter
folowen,

The Moderations or Savings put in Writing, as before, are in Number Forty Two,
and are much of the same Nature as those in the Act of the 28th of the same
King, only there is here a more express Saving for those who had bona fide
purchased of the Crown for a Valuable Consideration. And there is a general
Saving for Offices, and the accustomed Fees thereunto belonging.

And as to the Remanent contained in the feid Petition of Resumption, not
specified in this his Answer,

Le Roy Savisera.

Note.] That here the Lands of Ireland are resumed.

But as to the Fees belonging to Offices, the Point was farther cleared in an
Act of the 31st Hen. VI. Chap. 7. which is in the printed Statutes.

Anno 33. Hen. VI. there passed another Act of Resumption.

Rot. Parl. 33 H. 6. No 47.
Prayen the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, that where the
Victorious Prince of most noble Memory, your Fader, whom God rest, and other
your noble Progenitors, maintained as worshipful, noble and honorable estate
of their Household in this Land of the Revenues thereof as has oney King or
Prince in oney Land Christenned to the Ease and rest of the People of the same,
without agrugyng for lak of Payment therefore, such as caused all other Lands
to have this your seid Land in worshipfnl renown, and as great dread as oney
Land christenned.

And notwithstanding the great and large Grauntes of Gods, that by your true
People of this Land has been often times geven of true love and feith, tender
Zele and Affection unto your seide Highness, ye be indebted in such
outrageous Somes as be not easy to be paid, which by Gods Law, and eschewyng
his Displeasure, owe to be paid and contented; and that furthermore, the
Revenues of the seid Land to your Highness now^ belongyng mow not suffice
to kep^ and sustain your honorable House hold, which not only, but also your
other ordinary Charge mot be kep^ and boron worshipfully, as it accords to
the Honor of your Estate and your seide Land, if your Adversaries and
Enemies should fall in^ the dread, wherein heretofore the have been, and shall
with Godd^ Grace, be of your mighty Regal and of your seid Land, whereof yo^
People lament and sorrow petious^ and hevely the amennsyng of the worship and
prosperity, wheryn (...) has joyed, and ben reputed in the days heretofore,
now the refuse of a^ other Lands reputed, agrugyng al^ right hevely the Charge
that has bee^ born, and daily is born among they^ of Vitaille and other
Charges (...) your seid Household, and ordinar^ Charges whereof they been not
paie^ to their great loss and hurt, which they mow not of oney reason one
longer sustain.

It please you by thadvyse and Assent of the Lords Spirituel and Temporel, in
this present Parliament assembled, and by auctorite of the same, for the
Conservation and Supportation of your seid Estate, which first to Gods
pleasure, secundarie for your own Suerte, Honor and Well; and for the third,
for the universal Well, Ease, Rest and Suerte of this Land, the which ye owe
to prefer before the favor of oney Person, or oney Place, or other Thing
erthly, and to thentent that your seid Enemies from whose knowledge the penury
of your seid Household, and the Cause thereof, and also the agrugying therefore
of your seid People had is not hid, whereof without dout they take a great
Courage and boldness against your seid Land mow fall from the seid Courage
into rebuke, and have your seid Land and People in such dread as heretofore in
the days of you and of your Progenitors they have had, to take, seize,
have, reteyne, and resume into your hands and possession from the Fest of
Seint Michel, tharch angel next coming, all Honors, Castells, Lordships,
Towns, Townshipps, Manners, Londs, Tenementes, Wastes, Forestes, Chases,
Rentes, Reversions, Fee-fermes, Services, Issues, Profits of Countees,
Advowsons of Priores, Churches, Hospitals, and of free Chapel, and all other
Revenues, with their Appurtenances, passed from you sith the first day of your
Reign, and by you granted by your Letters Patentes, by Authorite of
Parliament, or in oney other wise by your Grantes, Confirmations, or Relesse in
Fee-simple, Fee-taille, term of Life or term (...) Yeris, to oney person or
persons (...) England, Wales, or in the Marche^ thereof, in your Land of
Ireland* Guysnes, Calais, or in the Marches thereof, or in Scotland, or in the
Este o^ Weste Marches of England, toward Scotland.

And also to take, resume and reteigne into your hands from the sei^ Fest, all
the Honors, Castells, Lordshipps, Manners, Lands, Tenementes, Wastes, Rentes,
Reversions, Fee-fermes and Services, with all their Appurtenances which were
of the Duchy o^ Lancastre, and passed from you by your Grauntes,
Confirmation or Relesse, or by Authority of Parliament, or whereof oney person
or persons were seized to your use, or to the use of your seid Fadir, o^ to
the performing of your or his Will, ye to have, hold and reteyne all the
Premises in and of like state, form and condition as ye, or oney other to
your Use, or to the Use of your seid Fadir, or to the perfourmyng of his or
your Will, had them at the seid first day, or oney time sith oney Act or
Ordenaunce by Parliament, or oney manner of Letters Patentes, Grauntes or
Estates by you, or oney other person or persons of oney of the Premises in
oney wise made to, or for oney Person or Persons at your request or desire,
or otherwise notwithstanding. All Offices of your seid Duchy, such as the
seid first day were Offices there, and the Fees, Wages and Rewards than as
before to them had accustomed or apperteignyng except.

And over that, that all Manner of Graunts of Rentes, Rent-charges, Annuities,
Some or Somes of Money, by you or oney other Person sith the seid first day
made of Estate of Enheritaunce, or term of Life, or term of Yeris to oney
Person, or otherwise to be taken or had in or of oney of the Premises, or of
oney of your Custumes, Subsidies, Awnage, or of the Profits and Revenues of
your Hanaper coming, or at or in the receite of your Exchequer, or in oney
other Place within this your seid Realm, or in the seid Land of Irelond, or
within Wales, Guysnes, Caleys, or the Marches thereof be from the seid Fest void
and of noon effect, to have, hold, or occupy from thenceforthe oney of the
Premises.

And that all Manner of Grauntes o^ Relesses by you sith the seid first day
made to oney person or persons of oney Estate of Enheritaunce, term o^ Life
or term of Years, or otherwys^ of oney of the Premises, or of the keepyng of
oney of them, or of oney of your Goales, or of oney Herbage or Pannage,
Fishing, Pasture or Comy^ of Pasture, Wareyn, Wode, Wax, Wine, Clothing,
Furs, Annuities, Fee, or oney Wages for doing or occupying oney Office or
Charge, and t^ noon such Office or Charge the seid first day due accustomed
belongyng o^ apperteyning be void and of noon effect.

And furthermore to ordeyne by thadvyse, assent and authority aforesaid, that
all Grauntes made by you, to oney person or persons of oney Office or Offices
which were noon Office or Offices the first day of your seid Reign or before,
be void and of no force.

And that all manner of Grauntes by you, or oney other Person or Persons sith
the seid first day, to oney Person or Persons made, whereby the same Person
or Persons to whom oney such Grant or Grauntes be made, should grant or
have power to grant oney Prebende or Prebendes, Church or Churches, Hospital
or Hospitals, fre Chapel or fre Chapels, or oney manner Collecion, Office or
Offices to to oney Officer, to make the Yeft or Presentation of which Prebend
or Prebendes, Church or Churches, Hospital or Hospitals, fre Chapel or fre
Chapels, Collecion, Office or Offices, or of the making of the seid Officers
the seid first day, or oney time sith belonged to you be void and of no force
nor effect, to thentent that of such Offices and other the Premises, it mow
please you to reward your Servauntes menial; furthermore, that all manner of
Grauntes by you made, to oney person or persons of oney Office or Offices
which wore Offices the seid first day or before, and to theyme belongs and
needs actuel Exercise, or of the fee or Wages thereto belongyng to have in fee
Simple or in fee Taille, in oney wise be of no force nor effect, but only
term of life of him or them that oney such Grauntes be made unto. And that
all the Grauntes of such Offices as that noble and worthy Prince Humphrey, late
Duke of Gloucestre, your late Uncle, whom God rest, had and occupied of your
Grant, the which Offices were by your Highness to oney person or persons
granted in his life to have after his decesse or Death be void and of noon
effect. And that all manner of Grauntes by you, or by oney other person or
persons by your great Seal, Prive Seal, or Seal of your Duchy of Lancastre
sith the seid first day made of oney Sherefwycke, or oney Office of
Sherefwycke, or of oney Eschete, or of oney Office of Eschetour, Clerk of the
Peace, or of oney Baillifwycke or Wapentake to you belongyng, for term of life
or term of yeris, to oney person or persons, be void of noon effect. And
also, that all Grauntes and Relesses made to you to oney Abbot, Priour, or oney
other Person of discharge, relesse, or quiet claim of oney Corrodies or
Corrodie, Pension or Pensions, Dismes Spirituel, or Quinszismes or Dismes
Temporell, or of the Colleccions of the same Rentes or Services, or of the
Payment of oney Knights Spence for coming to your Parliament be void and of
noon Effect.

Item, That all Grauntes made by you by your Letters Patentes, or otherwise to
oney person or persons to be Justices of your Benche or of the common Benche
within your Land of Irelond or of the Office of Keeper of the Rolls of
Chancery of the same Land for term of Life be void and of noon Force nor
Effect. And also that all Grant or Grauntes by you made to oney person or
persons of oney Office or Offices, whereupon no Charge hangs nor needs to be
of actuel Exercise or Occupation be void and of no Force nor Effect. And
also by the seid Advyse Assent and Auctority ye will grant, ordeyne and
establish that every person that has any Castells, Manours, Lands,
Tenementes, Rentes, Services, Commoditees, Advowsons, Possessions, or oney
Enheritaments to you or to oney other person or Body Corporate to your or
oney of their Use at your Desire or Contemplation for oney Rentes, Annuites,
Sums of Money or Thing that should or might have be taken or had of oney
Custume or Subsidies in oney your Ports within this your Realm, or in or at
the Receite of your Eschequer if no Yifte of Exchange nor Recompense for oney
Thing be had, be made, may have immediately and have, reteyne, keep, enter
and enjoye peasebly without oney Suite or yet Let or Disturbance of you your
Heirs or oney other from the seid Fest as well all the seid Manours, Lands,
Tenements, Rentes, Advowsons, Possessions and Enheritaments; with their
Appurtenaunces in oney wise so given to you or to oney person or Body
corporate at your Desire or Contemplation by him or his Auncestres, or by him,
or her or their Predecessors, or by thoo whose Estate oney such your Leiges
has or had in the Lands, Tenementes, Rentes, Possessions or Enheritaments
taken of you in Exchange as the seid Rentes, Annuites, and Sums of Money
that he should or might have had of oney Customs or Subsidies, or at your
Receite aforeseid if no manner of Exchange nor Recompense had be taken of you
therefore by him nor by noon his Anncestours or Predecessors in like Manner,
Form and State as though no such Grant or Estate of Exchange or
Recompense had be made.

So alwey that the Manours, Lands, Tenementes, Rentes, Annuitees, Advowsons,
Sommes of Meney and Enheritaments before reherced geven to you or to oney other
person or body corporate, or lest to be take for oney of the seid Exchange
or Recompense were not youres ne noon other person or persons to your Use
the first Day of your noble Reign nor after save only by reason of the Yefts,
Grauntes or Cause aforeseid. Except and forprised out of this Act of
Resumption all the Castells, Manours, Lands, Tenementes, Rentes, Services,
Possessions and Enheritaments with their Appurtenaunces, whereof every person
or persons have had restitution by Auctorite of Parliament, Restitution by the
Course of the Common Law.

Then the House of Commons made some few Savings, in Number Twelve, which are
much of the like Nature of those in the Two former Acts. Then follows.

And for as much as it is pleinly and universally conceived through all this
your Reame, that the good Speed of this Act of Resumption is to you full
honorable, necessary and behovefull and to all your Liege People comfortable
and great Relief of their Poverty which they been in for many unportable
Charges leid upon them before this Time for that the seid Resumption before
this Time has not be effectuelly had. We your humble, true, obeisaunt and
feithfull people comen for the common of this yonre Reame and to this your high
Court of Parliament by your Auctorite Roial in the most lowly wise beseech
your most noblaye, graciously and tenderly to consider the great Benefits
that should grow unto you and this your Reame by the mean of this your
Resumption, that it please your Highness that if so be that ye like by
thadvise of your Lords spirituell and temporell in this present Parliament
assembled to make oney provisions or Exceptions other then be conteynd in this
our Petition, that then the seid provisions and Exceptions be send down unto
us to that End that we may give our Assentes thereto, if it be thought to us
expedient and behovefull. And that by the same auctorite it be ordained that if
oney of your liege people after the seid Fest of St. Michel take and receive
your Grant or Grauntes of oney of the Premises except before except then
he or they as often as he or they that so take and receive run into the Penalte
of the Statutes of Provisours. And over that, that he or they that so take or
receive oney such Grant or Grauntes except before except contrary to this
our Desire forfaite a M. Marks as often as they so take or receyve, whereof the
oon half to be forfaited to you and that to be applied to the contentyng of the
Wages of the Souldeours of Caleys, and that other half to him that will sue.
And he that will sue yerfore may have an Action of Debt agenst oney such
person or persons, and such Process theryn as lies in an Action of Debt at
the Common Law, and that the Defendantes of such Suites shall not be essoyned
wage their Law, nor beg Protections in delay of the seid Suites. All Grauntes
to be made by your Letters Patentes by the Bille of the Tresorer of England
for the time being of oney of the Premises.

And also all Grauntes to be made of old Offices, which were Offices the first
day of your Reign, to the which belongs and needs actuel Exercise and
Fees, and Wages the same first day to the same Offices perteynyng or belongyng,
except out of the seid Peynes. And that no such person to whom oney Less or
Lesses Grant or Grauntes shall be made after the seid Fest for term of Yeris
or at Will of oney Thing parcelle of the Duchy of Lancastre, Erldome of
Chestre, Principalete of Wales, Caleys and Guysnes and the Marches thereof, or
of oney thing to them or oney of them belongyng or apperteynyng be not hurt
nor endamaggd by the penalty of this seid Act.

Then follow Two Savings, one for the Prince of Wales, and another for Richard
Duke of York, as to some Patents they had.

Resp. As touching this Petition of Resumption the King has well conceived and
understood the Matters, Articles and Desires contained in the same Petition;
wherefore the King by thadvyse and assent of the Lords Spirituel and Temporell,
being in this present Parliament, and by Auctorite of the same, takes and
resumeth into his Hands all manner things contained in the seid petition, and
the same agrees and accepts, the Penalte in seid petition except and leid
apart; alweye his Prerogative reserved; forseyn alweye that such provisions
and Exceptions as been by his Highness, by thadvyse of the seid Lords
Spirituel and Temporel made and agreed, or to be agreed; and in this same
Parliament put in Writing upon the premises, be good and effectuel the seid
Act notwithstanding for the Egalte and Reason that the King ought to do to his
people, the which shall be to the pleaser of Godde, the Honor and the Well of
his Land and People.

Then follow a great Number of Savings and Provisions, all of 'em much of the
same Nature with those in the former Acts; and none of 'em seem such as could
any wise defeat the Design of the Parliament, which was, that all immoderate
Grants should be actually resumed.

But some may object, that Henry the Sixth, under whose Reign these Three
Resumptions were made, was a weak Prince, unfortunate Abroad, engaged in
Factions at Home, and kept under by the Power of the House of York; whereunto
we answer, That it was the Interest of Great Men rather to oppose such an Act,
for they were most like to suffer by it; therefore its Passing was not the
Effect of Faction, but, indeed, it was carried on by the Weight of the People.
But these Objections will be more fully answered, when we show that the same
Thing was done by a Prince, who had mastered all Parties, and under an Active
and Martial Reign, which was that of Edw. IV. his Successor, where the
Presidents for a Resumption are four times confirmed.

As soon as Edward the Fourth came to the Crown, one of the first Things
desired by his Subjects was an Act of Resumption.

Rot. Parl. 1 Edw. 4. No 11.
-- And over that, that our seid Sovereign Liege Lord King Edward IV. the
Fourth Day of March was lawfully seized and possessed of the seid Corone of
England in his Right and Title, and from thenceforth have to him, and his
Heirs, Kings of England, all such Mannours, Castles, Lordshippes, Honors,
Londs, Tenements, Rentes, Services, Fees, Feefermes, Rentes, Knyghts Fees,
Advowsons, Gifts of Offices to geve at his pleasure, Fairs, Markets, Issues,
Fines, and Amerciaments, Libertees, Franchises, Prerogatives, Escheates,
Custumes, Reversions, Remainders, and all other Hereditaments, with their
Appurtenances whatsoever, be they in England, Wales, and Irelond, and in Cales,
and the Marches thereof, as King Richard the 2 d. had on the Fest of Seint
Matthew the Apostle, the 23th Year of his Reign, in the Right and Title of the
seid Corone of England, and Lordshippe of Irelond.

Resp. The King by thadvyse and Assent of the Lords Spirituel and Temporel in
this present Parliament assembled, at the Request of the Comyns being in the
same, agrees and assenteth to this Petition, and it accepts, with certain
Moderations, Provisions and Exceptions, by his Highness thereupon made, and in
certain Cedules written, and in the same Parliament delivered, the tenor of
which follows.

Then follow the Exceptions or Savings to particular Interests, which are in
Number 85.

But this Resumption looking so far backwards, as the Reigns of Henry the
Sixth, Henry the Fifth, and Henry the Fourth, was too large to have any good
Effect* And as to its having been impracticable, and not well concerted, we
have this Argument, that a new Act better digested, and which did not
retrospect so far, was thought necessary, Anno 3. and 4. of the same Reign.

Anno 3 and 4. Edw. 4 ti. There passed another Act of Resumption.

3 and 4 Ed. 4 Rot. Parl. No 39.
-- At which day and place, for diverse Causes and Considerations, conteynyng
the Honor and Prosperity of the King our Soverayne Lord, and also the
Commonwele, defense and welfare of this Reame, and of his Subgetes of the same,
hit is ordained and enacted, and stablished by thadvyse and assent of the Lords
Spirituels and Temporels, and of the Comyns in this present Parliament
assembled, and by Auctorite of the same, That the King from the Fest of the
Purification of our Lady the Year of our Lord, 1464, have* take, seize, hold
and joye all the Honors, Castells, Lordshipps, Towns, Townshipps, Manours,
Lands, Tenementes, Wastes, Forestes, Chases, Rentes, Annuities, Reversions,
Fermes, Services* Issues, Profits, and Commodites of Shires, which he had the
4th day March, or any time after before the seid Fest, by reason of his Duchy
of Lancaster, or by the Forfeitur of Henry the 6 th. late in deed, and not in
right King of England; in England, Irelond, Wales, and Marches thereof, Guysnes
and Caleys, and Marches thereof; and passed from him the seid 4th day of
March, or any time after and before the seid Fest, by his Letters Patentes to
any Person or persons, in Fees, Fee-simple, Fee-taille, term of Life, or
term of Years: And that the King have and Enjoy every of the Premises in like
Estate and Condition as he had them the seid 4th day of March or after: And
also, that all Yefts, Grauntes and Relesses made by the King the seid 4th day
of March, or any time after before the seid Fest, to any Person or Persons of
any of the Premises, in Fee-simple, Fee-taille, term of Life or term of
Years, under any of his Seals be from the seid Fest of Purification void and
of no force nor effect.

Ibid. N. 40
And also that all Yeftes, Grauntes, Ratifications, Relesses and Confirmations
made by the King the seid 4th day of March, or any time after and before the
seid Fest, to any Person or Persons of any Possessions, Right, Title, or
Interesse of his Duchy of York, or Erldome of March, or any part of them, or
of any Pension, Rent, Annuite to be had, taken, perceyved or levied of, or in
the same Duchy and Erldome, or any of them, or any parcel of them be from
the seid Fest void and of no force nor effect.

And that this Act extend not to any Honors, Castells, Lordshipps, Manours,
Lands, Tenementes, Rentes, Services, Possessions or Enheritaments which came
to the Hands or Possession of our seid Sovereign Lord King Edward the 4 th, or
apperteyned or belonged to him, or that he should have had the seid 4th day of
March, or any time after by the forfeiture of any Person in the Parliament,
hold at We^^minster the 4th day of November, the seid first Year attainted, or
by force of an Act of Forfeiture therein made, other than by the Forfeiture of
Margarete, late called Queen of England: And also that this Act extend not to
any Grant or Grauntes before this time made to any Lord not attainted of any
Annuite for the Sustentation of his Name and Estate, nor to noon Office or
Offices which were Office or Offices the seid 4th day of March, or before, and
needs actuel Exercise granted the seid 4th day of March, or after to any
Person or Persons for term of his Life, or their Lyfes, with Fees, Wages
and Profits to the same Office or Offices before the seid 4th day of March due
and accustumed.

And also that all Yefts made by the King the seid 4th day of March, or any
time after under any of his Seals, to any Person or Persons of any Office,
wheruppon no charge hangs nor needs to be of actuel Exercise or Occupation,
be from the seid Fest void and of no force nor effect.

Also that all Grauntes made by the King the seid 4th day of March, or any
time after to any Person or Persons of any Office or Offices, with Fees and
Wages then not due and accustumed, nor apperteynyng to the same Office or
Offices the seid 4th day of March be from the seid Fest, as to the seid Fees
and Wages not due and accustomed void and of no force and effect.

This Act to be had, and take with such Exceptions and Provisions, as shall
please the King to make.

Then follow Three Savings made by the House of Commons. 1 st, For Sums issued
to the Payment of the King's own Debts. 2. For Corporations, Cities and
Boroughs, etc. as to any Gift, Grant, Demise, Lease, Release, Jurisdiction,
Authority, Confirmation, Ratification, License, Pardon, etc. granted by the
Kings Henry the 4 th, 5 th and 6 th. 3. For Grants or Licenses given by the
said Kings to any Person, to found or make Fraternities, Gyldes, Hospitals,
etc. or to purchase Lands for those Uses.

Then follow a prodigious Number (...) Savings and Exceptions, and so many as,
indeed, seem entirely to defeat the Design and Intention of the Act; which in
the 7th of the same Reign, produced another Resumption.

This Heroic Prince, who himself had fought so many Battles, and wh^ by his
Courage from a private Person got to be King of England, invites hi^ People
from the Throne, to resume wha^ had been plundered from the Crown, i^ the Words
following.

7 Edw. 4. Rot. Parl. N. 7.
John Say, and ye Sirs common to this my Court of Parliament, for the Common of
this my Land: The Cause why Y have called and summoned this my present
Parliament, is, Y purpose to to lyve upon my nowne, and not to charge my
Subgetts, but in great and urgent Causes, concerning more tho well of
theymself, and also the defense of them, and of this my Reame, rather then my
nowne pleaser, as heretofore by Commons of this Land has been done, and born
unto my Progenitors in time of need; wherein Y trust, that ye Sirs, and all
the Commons of this my Land, wol be as tender and kind unto me in such Cases as
heretofore eney Commons have been to eney of my seid Progenitors. And for the
good Wills, kindness and true herts that ye have born, continued and showed
unto me at all times heretofore, Y thank ye as hertily as Y can; as so Y trust
ye wol contenue in time coming; for the which, by the Grace of God, Y shall be
to you as good and gracious King, and reign as reight, wisely upon you as ever
did eney of my Progenitors upon Commons of this my Reame in days paste; and
shall also in time of need aply my Person for the Well and defense of you and
of this Reame, not sparyng my Body nor Life for any jeopardie that might
happen to the same.

Ibid. N. 8.
Memorandum. Quod quedam Cedula formam cujusdem Actus Resumptionis in s^
continentis exhibita fuit in presenti Parli^mento in haec Verba. For diverse
Causes and Considerations concerning the Honor, State and Prosperity of the
King, and also of the Commonwele, defense, surete and welfare of this Reame,
and his Subgettes of the same, it is ordained, enacted and established by
thadvyse and Assent of the Lords Spirituells and Temporells, and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by Auctorite of the same, That the King from
the Fest of Ester last past, have, take, seize, hold and joy all Honors,
Castells, Lordshipps, Towns, Towneshipps, Manors, Lands, Tenementes, Wastes,
Forestes, Chaces, Rentes, Annuities, Fermes, Fee-fermes, Reversions, Services,
Issues, Profits, Commoditees, which he was seized and possessed of the 4th day
of March, the first Year of his Reign, or any time after, by resone of the
Coroune of England, the Duchy of Cornwaille, Principalite of Wales, and Erldom
of Chestre, or any of them in England, Irlond, Wales, and Marches thereof, or
that apperteyned or belonged to him the same fowerth day, or any time sin, as
paroell of his Duchy of Lancastre, or by the forfaiture of Henry the Sixth,
late in deed, and not in Right King of England, or any Person atteynted sin the
seid 4th day of March, by auctorite of any Parliament holden sin the seid 4th
day, or otherwise attaynted by the course of the Common Law of this Land, and
passed from the King under any of his Seals, to any Person or Persons in
Fee-simple or Fee-taille, term of Life or term of Years, and that the King
fro the seid Fest of Ester, have, hold and joye every of the Premises in like
estate as he had them the seid fowrthe day of March, or any time after.

Also that all Yeftes, Grauntes, Ratifications, Releses, Leses, Demyses and
Confirmations made by the King the said 4th day of March, or any time sin to
any Person or Persons of any of the Premises in Fee-simple or Fee-taille,
term of Life or term of Years, under any of his Seals, be from the seid Fest
of Ester void and of no force nor effect.

And furthermore it is ordained by the seid Advyse, Assent and Auctorite, That
the King from the seid Fest of Ester, have, take, seize, hold and joy all
Honors, Castells, Lordshipps, Towns, Towneshipps, Manours, Lands,
Ten^mentes, Rentes, Services, Possessions, Enheritaments, Issues, profits and
Comoditees which the full noble and famous Prince Richard very true and
rightwyse Enheritour to the Reames of England and France, and Lordshipp of
Irelond, Fader to the King, was seized of to his own Use and Behoof the 30th
Day of December, the 39th Year of the pretended Reign of the seid Henry the
Sixth. And that the King from the seid Fest of Ester, have, hold and joy all the
seid Honors, Castells, Lordshipps, Towns, Towneshipps, Manours, Londs,
Tenementes, Rentes, Services, Possessions, Enheritaments, Issues, Profits and
Commoditees in like Estate as his seid Fader had them the seid 30th of
December. And that all Yefts, Grauntes, Ratifications, Releses, Leses, Demyses
and Confirmations made by the King sin the same 30th Day to any person or
persons under any of his Seals of any of the same Possessions, Issues,
Profits or Comoditees, or of any Lordshippes, Manors, Lands, Tenementes,
Possessions or Enheritaments whereof any person or persons were seized the
same 30th Day to the Use and Behoof of his seid Fader or of any Right, Title or
Intres of, or in any part of the same or of, or in any of the Premises which
his seid Fader was seized of the seid 30th Day, or of any Pension, Rent,
Anuuitee to be had taken perceyved or levied of, or in any part thereof, or of
or in any part whereof any person or persons were seized to the Use and
Behoof of his seid Fader the seid 30th Day be from the seid Fest of Ester void
and of no Force nor Effect.

And also by the seid Advyse, Assent and Auctorite, it is ordained and
stablished, That such lawful Right, Title, Claim and Interest be saved and
had to every person and persons of every their Heirs other than the seid
persons atteynted and their Heirs claymyng in by them or any of them, as he
or they not atteynted might or should have had in any of the Premises if this
Act had not been made otherwise then by the Kings Grant, or any of his
Le^tres, Patentes or Assignment.

And furthermore it is odeyned by the seid Advyse, Assent and Auctorite, That
all Yefts made by the King the seid 4th Day of March, or any Time sin to any
person or persons of any Office in England, Irlond, Wales* or Marches thereof,
whereupon no Charge hangs nor needs to be of actuel Exercise or Occupation be
from the seid Fest of Ester void and of no Force nor Effect.

Also, That all Grauntes made by the King the seid 4th Day of March or any
time sin to any person or persons of any Office or Offices in England,
Irlond, Wales or Marches thereof, Guysnes, Caleys, or Marches thereof with Fees,
Wages, Profits or Commodities not used and accustomed to the same Office or
Offices before the same 4th Day of March, be from the seid Fest of Ester as to
the seid Fees, Wages, Profits and Commoditees and every of them so not used
and accustomed void and of no Force nor Effect.

Also, That every Grant made by the King the seid 4th Day of March, or any
time since to any person for term of his Life of the Office of Sarjeant of
Arms be from the seid Fest of Ester of noon other Force and Effect than only
at the Kings Will and Pleaser.

Then follow several Savings much of the like Nature as those in the former
Acts, as also some Regulations relating to the King's Tenants, not material to
our present Subject.

Quae quidem cedula transportata fuit Communibus Regni Angliae in dicto
Parliamento existent. Cui iidem Communes Assensum suum prebuerunt sub hiis
Verbis. A toutez lez Actez and Provisions desuis Escriptez les Comunes sont
assentuz. Quibus quidem cedula and assensu in Parliamento predicto lectis
auditis and before intellectis de avisamento and assensu and autoritate
predict* respondebat eidem in forma sequen.

Resp. Le Roy le voet ovesq. lez Provisions and Exceptions sur ceo pur luy
faitz les tenours de queux cy apres ensuent.

That is, the King consents to the Bill with the ensuing Provisions and
Exceptions: Then follow a great Number of Savings and Provisions, most of 'em
for private Persons, and much of the same Natures as those of the former Acts.

7 Edw. 4. Rot. Parl. N. 15.
And at the closing of the Sessions, the King thanks the H. of Commons by the
Mouth of the Bishop of Bath and Wells, his then Chancellor for this Resumption.

* Pro suis Laboribus circa dictam Resumptionem ostensis. -- Idem Dominus Rex
omnia and singula per ipsos Communes declarata and desiderata profunde
conceperat.

Anno 13. Edw. 4. There passed another Act of Resumption for that, either the
former had been so ill executed, or that the Exceptions had been so many as to
frustrate the good Intentions of the House of Commons.

13 Edw. 4. Rot. Parl. N. 6.
For diverse Causes and Considerations concerning the Honor, Estate and
Prosperity of the King, and also the common Well, Defense, Surete and Welfare
of this Reame and Subgettes of the same; It is ordained, enacted and stablished
by Thadvyse and Assent of the Lords Spirituells and Temporells, and by the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Auctorite of the same,
That the King from the Fest of the Saint Thomas thappostill, that shall be in
the Year of our Lord God One Thousand Four Hundred Seventy and Three, shall
have, take, seize, hold, possess and enjoye all Honors, Castelles,
Lordshipps, Manors, Lands, Tenementes, Rentes and Annuitees, which he was
seized and possessed of in the 4th Day of March, the first Year of his Reign,
or any time after by reason of the Corone of England; in England, Irlond,
Wales, or Marches thereof, Guysnes, Caleys or Marches thereof; and also that
apperteyned or belonged to him the same 4th Day of March, or any time since, as
parcelle of his Duchy of Lancastre, or by forfaiture of Henry the Sixth late in
Deed, and not in Right King of England: And of any person atteynted since the
seid 4th Day of March by Auctorite of any Parliament holden since the same 4th
Day of March, or otherwise atteynted by the Course of the Common Law of this
Land, and passed fro the King undre any of his Seals to any person or
persons in Fee-simple or Fee-taille, for term of Life, or term of Years, or
otherwise, by the Kings Grant under his Seals; and that the King from the
seid Fest of St. Thomas, have, hold, possede and enjoye any of the Premises in
and of like Estate and Condition, as he had them in the seid 4th Day of
March, or any time after.

And furthermore, It is ordained by the seid Advyse, Assent and Auctorite, That
the King from the seid Fest of Saint Thomas, have, take, seize, hold and enjoye
all Honors, Castells, Lordshipps, Manoirs, Lands, Tenements, Rentes and
Annuitees, which the full noble and famous Prince Richard very true and
rightwyse Enheritour to the Reames of England and France and Lordshippe of
Irlond, Fader to the King was seized of to his own Use and Behove the 29th Day
of December the 29th Year of the pretended Reign of the seid Henry the Sixth:
And that the King from the said Fest of Saint Thomas, have, hold and enjoye all
the same Honors, Castles, Manoirs, Lands, Tenementes, Rentes, Annuitees, in
and of like Estate and Condition as his seid Fader had them the seid 29th day,
and passed from the King to any Person or Persons under any of his Seals, in
Fee-simple, Fee-taille, term of Life or term of Years. Also, that all Yeftes,
Grauntes, Releses and Demyses made by the King the seid fourth day of March or
any time since, to any Person or Persons, of, or in any of the Premises, in
Fee-simple, Fee-taille, term of Life or term of Years, or otherwise, under
any of his Seals, be from the seid Fest of Saint Thomas void and of no force
nor effect. And also by the seid Advyse, Assent and Auctorite, it is ordained
and stablished, That such lawful Right, Title, Claim and Interest be saved,
and had to every Person or Persons, and every their Heirs other than such
Persons now being atteynted of Treason, and their Heirs clayming in by them,
or any of them so atteynte, might or should have had in any of the Premises if
this Act had not be made otherwise then by the Kings Grant, or any his
Lettres Patentes, or Auctorite of Parliament.

What follows being joined with this Act, and showing the Wisdom and Frugality
of those Times, and the Methods they took to put the King out of Debt, we
thought it would not be foreign to our present Matter to insert it.

Ibid. N. 7.
Also in this Parliament begun and holden, etc. -- Great multitude of
Assignments, as well by Letters Patentes of the King, Tailles, Debentours, and
other Bills levied and rered at the Receipte of his Exchequer or otherwise, as
by Bills undre the Seal or Seals being in the same Receite ordained for
Assignations to be made upon the Possessions of the Duchy of Lancastre, Wales,
Duchy of York, and Erldome of March, as well for the Kings Household and
Wardrobe, and for his Works as for many and diverse Somes of Money in times of
diverse Persons, late Tresorers of England, since the first day of the Kings
Reign, dyversly have be made great part of the which Assignations by Bill and
otherwise inordenately, and without ground of Duete, have be had and made as
it is understond: It is therefore ordained by thadvyse and Assent of the Lords
Spirituels and Temporels, and the Commons in the same Parlelement, the seid
sixth day of October, in the seid Thirteenth Year assembled, and by Auctorite of
the same, That before the Fifteeneth of Ester next now to come, open
Proclamation be made within every Shire of the Reame, in every Markette-Towne
within the same Shire, by the Shiref, or Shirefs of the same Shyre or Shyres
for the time being: And that every Shiref duly make the Proclamation in that
party, and the Writ thereof serve and return at the day of the Return of the
same, upon the Pain to forfaite at every defaute to the King one hundred
pounds: That every Person or Persons having any Patente, Taille or Bille made,
rered or assigned before the first day of Decembre, in the Tenth Year of his
seid Reign, for any Some or Somes of Money contained or specefied in any of
the same appear before the Barons of the Kings Exchequer at Westminster, in his
proper Person, or by his Atourny or Servaunt, having suffisant Auctorite of
him before the fifteeneth of Ester, which shall be in the Year of our Lord,
1475, there to show and prove that the Somes of Money contained and specifyed
in his or their Patent, Taille or Bille, was by, or upon any true ground or
cause due by the King at the time of the making, rearyng, or assignment of the
seid Patent, Taille or Bille, made, reared or assigned to to the same Person
or Persons named in the same Patent, Taille or Bille for the Kings House, for
the Kings Chamber, his Wardrobe, his Werks or Money to him lent for the
Victualler of of Calleys, or any of them, or for any other Cause, that the
same Barons upon due prove by their Discretions had and made of any Some and
Somes in such Taille or Bille to be due by the King; and at the time of the
seid prove made not paid, have auctorite and power by this Act, to certifye
into the Receipte of the Kings Exchequer of the Some and Somes so proved due,
and of the Name or Names of the Person or Persons to whom the seid Some or
Somes so shall be proved to be due: And thereupon by this Act the Tresorer and
Chamberleyns of the Kings Receipt for the time being, dyvydyng severally the
seid Debte into twenty parts by even Portions, without delay or denyer at the
Kings proper Cost and Charge rere, there make and delivre twenty Tailles or
Bills according, payable Yearly iche after other within twenty Years then next
ensueyng, to have and reteyne in such Place or Places, and under such Form as
the Treasorer of England for the time being* with the reasonable agreement of
the seid Person or Persons to whom such duetee shall be proved due, shall be
thought reasonable. And as for such Duetees as shall be found due to any of the
seid Persons before the seid Barons, by reason of any such Letters Patentes that
the seid Barons shall certify such duetees as they shall find due by any such
Letters Patentes made under the Kings great Seal, to the Chaunceller of
England for the time being: And such Duetees as shall be found due to any
Person before the seid Barons, by reason of any of the Kings Letters Patentes
made undre the Seal of his Duehie of Lancastre, to the Chaunceller of the same
Duchy for the time being: And then that every of the seid Chauncellers for
such Somes so to them certified, do make at the Kings Cost and Charge to such
Persons as such Duetees shall be fonnd due* to, Letters Patentes, to receyve,
have, or reteyne such Somes of Money as shall be to them certyfyed, and to be
had, received or retained Yearly within twenty Years next ensueyng the date of
the seid Letters Patentes rately as is aforeseid in such place or places,
ground or grounds as the same Persons before this Act were assigned or
lymytted: And that the seid Tailles, Bills, and Letters Patentes serverally to
be rered and made be and stond good and effectuel in Law, and preferred in
payment before any other payment by Patent, Taille or Bille, or any other
Assignment or Cause rered, made or had after the rering of the seid Tailles:
And that all the seid Lettres Patentes, Tailles, Bills, and every of them not
showed before the seid Fifteeneth before the seid Barons be void, and the King
thereof acquit and discharged. And also that all Lettres Patentes, Tailles,
Bills, and every of them showed before the seid Barons, and before them proved
not to be made, reared or assigned upon true Ground or Cause of Duetee in
likewise to be void, and the King thereof quyte and discharged for evermore.

Then follow Sixteen Exceptions or Savings as to private Interests, which the
House of Commons make, and they are much of the same Nature as those in the
other Acts.

Resp. As touching this Bill of Resumption, and the other Act above specified
concerning Assignations made by the King, and the Form of Paymentes of his
Dettes, and all things comprised in either of the seid Bills and Act, and
the other Matiers and Articules above specified, the Kings Highness has well
conceyved and understond the same, and by thadvyse and assent of the Lords
Spirituells and Lords Temporells, and the Commons being in this present
Parliament, and by the Auctorite of the same them has accepted and agreed. So
also that such Provisions and Exceptions as by his Highness be or shall be made
and agreed, and during the time of this present Parliament in Writing, to or
upon the Premises be good and effectuel the seide Bille or Act, or any other
the Premises, notwithstondyng for the Equity and Right wis reward that the
King intends to do to every of his Subgietts for his Merits, which shall be
to the Pleaser of God, and Honor of his Highness, and the Weel of all the
Land and People.

Then follow a great Number of Exceptions brought in by the King, but they do
not seem of that Nature, as if it were designed they should defeat the
Intentions of the House of Commons, as the Savin^s in the first Act of
Resumption passed in this Reign plainly did: So that at last both King and
People appear to be in Earnest in this Matter.

But all the Acts of Resumption hitherto passed were not thought sufficient; so
that though we cannot find Richard the Third, who succeeded Edward, was any great
Giver, yet the Parliament in the Reign of Hen. 7. who was Successor to Richard,
believed another Resumption necessary.

Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. 7. p. 2.
Anno 1. Hen. 7. Prayen the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That
where the most noble and blessed Prince of most holy Memory, King Henry the 6th
your Uncle, whom God rest, and other your noble Progenitors, have kept as
worshipful, noble and honorable Estate of their Household in this Land of the
Revenues thereof, as have done any King or Prince in England christenned to the
Ease and Rest of the People of the same, without agrudging or lack of Payment
therefore, such as caused all other Londs to have this your said Land in as
worshipful Renown and as great Dread as any other Land christenned, and for
that the Revenu^ of your said Land to your Highness now belonging mow not
^uffice to keep and sustain your honorable Household nor your other ordinary
Charges which must be kept and born worshipfully and honorably as it accords
to the Honor of your Estate and your said Realm, by which your Adversaries and
Enemies shall fall into the dread wherein heretofore they have been. That it
would please your Highness by thadvyse and assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same
for the Conservation and Suportation of your said Estate, which first to Gods
Pleasure, secondarie for your own Suertie, Honor and Weal, and for the third
to the universal Weal, Ease, Rest and Suertie of this Land the which you owe to
prefer before the Favor of any Person or any Place or other Thing earthly;
to take, seize, have, reteyne and resume into your Hands and Possession from
the 21st Day of August last passed, all such Castles, Lordshipps, Honors,
Manours, Londs, Tenements, Rents, Services, Feefermes, Knights Fees, Advowsons,
Annuitees, Yefts of Offices to yeve at your Pleasure Grantes of keeping Idiots,
Faires, Markets, Hundred, Turns, Views of Frankplegge, Leets, Yssues, Fines,
Amerciaments, Libertees, Fraunchises, Prorogatives, Escheates, Custumes,
Reversions, Remainders and all other Hereditaments with their Appurtenances
whatsoever they be in England, Wales, Ireland, of Caleys or the Merches
thereof, as the said most christen and blessed Prince King Henry the 6th, your
Uncle had of Estate of Enheritance, or any other to his Use had the 2d Day of
October the 34th Year of his Reign, or any time since as parcel or in the
Right and Title of the Crown of England of the Duchy of Lancastre, the Duchy
of Cornwall, the Principality of Wales, and the Earldome of Chester. Saving to
every of your liege People such Right, Title and Interesse as they or any of
them should have or might have had in, or of the Premises or any Parcel
thereof, other than by means of Lettres, Patentes of any King of this your
Realm, or by Act of Parliament made after the said 2d Day. And over this be it
enacted, ordained and stablished by the same Anctoritie that all Yefts,
Graunts, Leases, Releases, Confirmations and Discharges of any Castles,
Honors, Lordshipps, Manours, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Services, Reversions,
Annuites, Feefermes, Offices, Liberties, Fraunchises or other Hereditaments and
all Appropriations, Corporations, Collations, Assignments and Graunts of any
Debt or Sums of money by Letters Patentes or Tailles as to any Payment only
whereof the Days of Payment, have, or shall grow after the 21st Day of August
last passed made by Richard the 3d, late in deed and not of right, King of
England any time during his usurped Reign under his great Seal of the County
Palatine of Chester, or by Tailles to any person or Persons or Body corporate;
and also all Yefts and Grauntes by Authority of Parliament or otherwise, made
by Edward the 4th late King of England, or by Edward his Son late called King
Edward the 5th to any person or persons be fro the said 21st Day of August
adnulled, void and of no force ne effect. And all Graunts made by the said
Edward the 4th late King of, or touching the Earldome of Devonshire, or any
Parcel thereof, be from the same 21st Day also void and of no Force ne
Effect. Then comes,

A Saving for some special Grants made by Edward the 4th, and King Richard, as
to Lands of the County Palatine of Lancaster, Chester, or of the Earldome of
March. A Saving to Abbots, Abbesses, Priories in England or Wales, as to the
Restitution of any of their Temporalities. A Saving for License to incorporate
or found any Chantery, etc. Then follows,

And over this be it inacted, ordained and stablished by the said Auctority
that all Graunts and Letters, Patentes of any Office made by our said Sovereign
Lord, before the 20th Day of January the 1st Year of our Reign to any person or
persons be from* hence forth void ne of no effect.

A Saving for the great Officers and Others, as to their Employments and Wages.

A Saving for the Patents of the Peers, and their Creation-Money. And to
Corporations, etc.

Then follow Ten Exceptions or Savings made by the House of Commons to the said
Bill, and such of them* as are either general or particular, are much of the
like Nature with the Savings in other Acts.

Resp. As touching this Bill of Resumption, the King's Highness has well
conceived and understood the same has therefore by thadvise and assent of the
Lords Spirituels and Temporels and Commons in this present Parliament, and by
thauctoritie of the same it accepted and agreed. So always, that such Provisions
and Exceptions as by his Highness, be, and shall be made and agreed, and during
the Time of this present Parliament put in Writing, to, or upon the Premises
be good and effectual. The said Bill or Act, or any other the Premises
notwithstanding. For the Equity and rightwise Reward that the King entendeth
to do to every of his Subgietts, for his Merits which shall be to the Pleasure
of God, and Honor of his Highness, and the Weal of all his Land and People.

Then follow many particular Exceptions more in Number than in any other of the
Acts, but under this frugal King we may suppose they are not such as would make
the Act ineffectual.

Besides, in this Reign there passed several particular Acts of Resumption, for
which we shall refer the Reader to the Records.

Rot. Parl. 3 Hen. 7. N. 35.
Anno 33. Hen. 7. An Act of Resumption of the Offices or Places of Receivers,
Auditors, Customers, Collectors of Customs, Subsidies, Comptrollers, Searchers.
Surveyors and Places of other Officers, Accomptants to the King.

Rot. Parl. 11 Hen. 7. N. 2.
Anno 11. Hen. 7. An Act of Resumption of diverse Castles, Manors, Lands and
Tenements, which were formerly given by K. Edward the Third, and K. Richard the
Second, to Edmond de Langley, Duke of York.

Rot. ibid. N. 4.
In the same Year an Act for making void all Grants made of the Manor of
Woodstock.

Ibid. N. 6.
In the same Year an Act for making void diverse Leases and Offices within the
Principality of Wales, Duchy of Cornwall, and Earldom of Chester.

Anno 6. Hen. 8. There passed another Act of Resumption, which related only to
resuming needless Offices and Pensions.

Rot. Parl. 6 Hen. 8. N. 8.
Prayen, and in most humble wise, beseeshing Your Heyghness, Your humble
Subjects the Commons in this present Parliament by your high Commandment
assembled, That where the most Christen Princes, King Henry the Sixth, King
Edward the Fourth, and the most famous and renowned Prince of most worthy
Memory, King Henry the Seventh your Fader, whom God pardon, and other your
noble Progenitors, have kept as honorable Astates as well in their own
Persons as in their Households, and other their Charges as well in defense of
this Your Realm, as in defense of the Towns of Caleys, Guisnes, Hammes,
Berwick, and the Marches of the same, and other Charges of this Your Realm of
the only Revenues thereof, as has any King or Christen Prince in any oder
Christen Region, not only to the great Honor of the same, but also to the
great ease, rest and quietness of the People of the same, which caused all
other Lands and Realms to have this your Realm in great Renown, Dread and
Fear, and your said Progenitors to be dradde of all outward Nations.

And so it is, most drade Sovereign Lord, that the Revenues of your Lands, and
other Things late being in your Hands and Possessions be so great mynyshed, by
reason of the Many fold Yifts, Graunts and Releases passed from your Highness
since the begynyng of of your most noble Reign hitherto, that the residue
thereof now remaining in your Hands and Possession in no wise suffiseth, nor can
suffice to bear and susteyn your great Charges daily increasen, as well by
reason of your Wars now being in hand against your ancient Enemies the Scots,
as of your great Charges in keeping and defense of your City of Tournay, late
by your Grace victoriously Conquered, and which of very necessity must be
maintained and born as accords to your Princely Astate and Honor of your
Highuesse, and suerte of your humble Subjects, and of your Realm.

In Consideration whereof yt may please your Highness, by thadvise of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in this present Parliament assembled, and by Aucthority
of the same, for the conservation and maintaining of your most Royal Astate,
and oder Charges above rehearsed, to the Pleasure of God, and for your own
Honor and Suerte; and also for the universal Wead, Ease, Rest and Suerte of
this your Realm and Land, and for the mynyshyng and lessening of the Charges
and Burden of your said poor Commons and Subjects of the same, which your
Grace owes to prefer and specially regard before the Favor of any
particular Persons or earthly Things, to take, seize, resume and have into your
Hands, from the Feast of Easter next coming, all and singular those and such
Annuitees Granted to any Person or Persons by your Highness, by your Letters
Patents, not for exerciseing of any Office which be not ne at any time of the
said Letters Patents made, were Rent-Service or Rentcharge of any Estate of
Enheritaunce in your Highness, and that all the said Letters Patents of all
the same Annuitees, and every of them from the said Feast of Ester only,
touching the said Grant of the same Annuitees be utterly void and of no
effect.

And also, that all Letters Patents, Grants and Bills signed by your Highness,
made to any Person or Persons, of any Office or Offices, or Rowme to be had
after the Death of any Patenteth the same Patentee being yet alive, and in
Possession by Virtue of his Patent, or of the next Avoydance of any Avowsons of
Churches, Benefices, Chauntreys, Hospitals, Prebends, or of any Spiritual
Benefices not executed, be from henceforth utterly void and of none effect.

Then follow some other Regulations relating to Offices, Places and Pensions.
After which there is a Saving for the Peers, as to their Creation-Money: And
then for George, Earl of Shrewsbury, of, and for the Stewardship of Tutbury,
Parcel of the Duchy of Lancaster, etc. signed with the King's own Hand. Then
follow Savings for several great Officers, and for the Queen.

And then comes a Provision for Offices in the King's Lands, Castles and
Manors, etc. then follow some particular Savings, and those not many.

Resp. Le Roy le Veult.

So that this Prince, as Arbitrary as he was, gave way to this Resumption made
in Parliament.

The Writer of these Papers (though it has proved a Matter of great Labor) has
thought it best to set down the very Words of all these Acts of Resumption,
omitting the Savings, which in each Bill are very numerous; but to give the
Reader Light into the Nature of these Exceptions, he did extract all the
Savings that were brought into the first complete Act, that passed upon this
Subject, which was 28 Hen. 6. And by those the Reader may judge of the Rest;
for they which followed were much of the like Nature.

It Is true, his Work will thereby seem tedious, but curious Persons may,
perhaps, receive Satisfaction, to see the Sense of their Forefathers upon this
Point. And we take it, that the Wisdom and Gravity with which these Acts are
penned, and the Exactness and Care which the House of Commons from time to time
showed in this whole Transaction, will prove no unpleasant piece of History.

He has done impartially, and taken notice of what may make against, as well as
for his present Argument, that the Reader may have the whole before him. And in
this Transcript he has followed the best Copies of Records he could procure,
such as have been signed and examined at the Tower, in which he believes there
is no material Error, and that they are according to the Original Records,
except in Orthography, or spelling Words, wherein all Transcribers of Records
mistake and differ with one another: But as to the French Records, both in this
and the following Section, the Author has examined them all at the Tower by the
Rolls.

As to what was done upon Resumptions before the Reign of Edward the Second, he
has therein followed the best Ancient Writers of our English History, whose
Authority may be relied upon, because most of such as he has cited, wrote of
Things done near, or in their own Times.

But for their Ease, who do not care to read much, and to help the Memory of
others, he will recapitulate in a few Words the several Resumptions; afterward
he will make some few Observations upon the Whole, and examine what Effect
these Acts of Resumption produced, as to enlarging the Crown-Revenue, and then
conclude this long Section.

1 st, A Resumption was made by William Rufus.

2 dly, A Resumption by Henry the First.

3 dly, A Resumption agreed to by King Stephen.

4 thly, A Resumption actually made by Henry the Second.

5 thly, A Resumption by Richard the First.

6 thly, A Resumption by Edward the Second.

7 thly, Resumptions made by Richard the Second.

8 thly, Resumptions made by Henry the Fourth, particularly of the Lands
belonging to Windsor-Castle.

9 thly, Three Resumptions made in the Reign of Henry the Sixth.

10 thly, Four Resumptions made in the Reign of Edward the Fourth.

11 thly, One general Act, and other particular Acts of Resumption in the Reign
of Henry the Seventh.

12 thly, An Act of Resumption of ^ivers Offices, Annuities, and other Things,
in the Reign of Henry the Eighth.

Upon the whole Matter these Observations may be made.

1 st, From the forecited Records, it appears, that the People of England have
in no Age thought it reasonable, that the Crown-Revenue should be alienated.

2 dly, That not only under the Reigns of weak and unfortunate Princes, but
when there has been upon the Throne martial and active Kings, this Nation has
all along insisted upon Resumptions.

3 dly, It appears from the said Records, that very few of the said Resumptions
did look farther backward than the Reign of the present Prince.

4 thly, That the People have been most provoked, when the Crown Lands have
been given away to Foreigners.

5 thly, That the House of Commons in their Bills of Resumption made very few
Savings, as to the Interests of Private Men.

6 thly, That it appears from the said Records, that very small Things were
looked into, and that in the Three R^sumptions made by Henry the Sixth, it does
not appear there were Savings for any large Grant.

7 thly, That in some of their Bills the House of Commons insisted upon
Penalties, to be inflicted upon such as should procure Grants of the
Crown-Revenue.

8 thly, That by the Profusion of some Princes, the Crown-Revenue was reduced
from Fifty Six Thousand Nine Hundred Sixty Six Pounds, to Five Thousand Pounds
per Annum.

9 thly, That Edward the Fourth invited his Parliament, in his Speech from the
Throne Anno 7. to make an Act of Resumption.

10 thly, That in the many Acts made to this Purpose, every following Act was
penned with stricter Clauses, and to reach more than the former did.

11 thly, That the Act made the 28 H. 6. provides, that the Lands so resumed
should be for the Expenses of the King's Household.

12 thly, That some of these Resumptions, as that of 3 and 4 of Edw. 4.
extended not only to the Crown-Revenue, but also to what was the King's own
Patrimonially, namely, to his Duchy of York, and Earldom of March. And that
Anno 7* all was resumed, which belonged to Richard, Duke of York, the King's
Father, the 30 th of December, Anno 39. Hen. 6. The ^ame 13 Edw. 4.

13 thly, That in these Acts of Resumption, the Sallaries and Wages are taken
away of all superfluous Offices, which required no Attendance and Execution,
and which were newly erected.

14 thly, That some of these Acts establish, that the Lands so resumed should
continue in the Crown.

15 thly, That it will appear to any who will look into the volumenous Savings
and Exceptions which were brought in by the King to the said Acts; that many of
the Grants in those Ages made for Lands or Pensions, were only for Term of Life
or Term of Years, and to return to the Crown.

16 thly, That in many of the Savings; as to the Interest of private Men, where
there is something left, there is something resumed.

17 thly, That most of these Acts not only resume the Crown Lands, but revoke
all unnecessary Pensions.

18 thly, That the 33 Henry 6. resumes the Land passed away from the Crown,
even by Authority of Parliament.

19 thly, That in all these Acts, except 28 Henry 6. the Lands in Ireland are
comprehended.

20 thly, As every subsequent Act was more strictly penned than that which went
before, so the Exceptions and Savings brought in by Edward the Fourth (Henry
the Sixth were at last few and frugal) became every Time more moderate than the
other; so that in the End, both Prince and Parliament agreed, that a Resumption
was necessary, and would be greatly beneficial to the Kingdom.

But now as to the Effects which these Acts of Resumption produced; it appears
manifestly, that they were put in Execution, and that the Savings and
Exceptions were not such, as to defeat the Designs of the Parliament, which
some People pretend to suggest; and it is likewise evident, that the
Crown-Revenue was thereby very much increased.

For the Records plainly show, that the whole Income of the Crown, Annis 28
and 29. Hen. 6. was reduced to Five Thousand Pounds per Annum. Edward the
Fourth who succeeded, was an expensive Prince, Richard the Third his Brother a
frugal Man indeed, but his Reign was too short to make any great Improvements
in his Revenue; and yet we find Henry the Seventh his Successor, Master of more
ready Money than ever any King of England was either before, or since his Time.

This Prince had not many Aids from his People, Answer to the Reasons for
Foreign Wars* ^. 51
Sir Robert Cotton enumerates them: But one Aid upon Land, viz. Anno 19. Out of
their Goods and Lands a Tenth; out of their Goods only thrice a Tenth; Five
Fifteens, besides a Tenth and Fifteenth, which amounted to 120000 l. Three
Subsides, of which the last came to but 36000 l. One Benevolence. And of the
Clergy twice the Tenth, and 25000 l. by way* of Subsidy; and yet Cotton says
(for which he cites a good Lib. Acquit. int. Regem and Dudley,. R. C.
Authority) That he left behind him in Bullion, Four Millions and a Half,
besides his Plate and rich Attire of House. My Lord Life of Hen. 7. p. 230.
Bacon, indeed, brings the Sum lower, and says it was near Eighteen Hundred
Thousand Pounds Sterling. But to reckon according to either of these Authors,
the Sum was prodigious for those Times.

It Is true, he had very extraordinary Ways of scraping up Money, such as Sale
of Offices, Redemption of Penalties, dispensing with the Laws, and the like;
but all these together produced only Answer to the Reasons, etc. p. 52.
120000 l. per Annum. Besides, Empson and Dudley, the Two Ministers of his
Extortions, did not commit their Rapines till toward the latter End of his
Reign.

From whence we may reasonably conclude, that the Principal Foundation of all
this Wealth (joined with his own Parsimony) must have been the Crown-Revenue,
and that the former Acts of Resumption with that which was made in his own
Reign (which no doubt this frugal Prince took Care to see put in Execution) had
reduced it to it is former State and Condition.

For had no more been left than 5000 l. per Annum, there would have been no
matter for his Economy to work upon; so that we may very well infer, that the
forementioned Resumptions had relieved the King's Affairs, and brought the
Crown-Revenue once more into a flourishing Condition.

But Henry the Eighth not only spent the immense Sum left him by his Father,
but likewise a great Part of that Revenue which came to the Crown by seizing
the Abby-Lands, which amounted to Hist. of the Reform. Part 2. p. 268.
131607 l. 6 s. 4 d. per Ann. However, he who considers the History of those
Times, and how much this Prince made himself the Arbiter of Europe, will find
his Money was not so unprofitably spent as is vulgarly imagined. Besides, Ibid.
p. 269.
great Sums were laid out on building and fortifying many Ports in the Channel,
and other Parts of England, which were raised by the Sale of Abby-Lands.

But notwithstanding the expensive Temper of this Prince, he left his
Successors very sufficient and substantial Landlords in England: For we found
in Sir Robert Cotton's Library, in a Cleopatra, F. 6. Fol. 51.
Book, part of which is of that learned Antiquary's own Hand writing, and to
which King James the First has set his Name, James R. which Book contains very
many curious Things: That the Revenue of the 12th of Elizabeth, besides the
Wards and Duchy of La^c^ster amounted to 188197 l. 4 s. per Annum.

The Writer of these Papers does not remember to have met with any Thing
relating to Resumptions in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; but the Reason why
nothing of that Nature should be done in her Time, is very obvious; her Father
had alienated from the Crown a great Part of the Abby-Lands, or exchanged 'em
for other Lands (as a Multitude of Acts passed to that Purpose in his Reign
Witness:) And it was a strong Security to the Protestant Religion and Interest,
that those Estates should remain in the Hands and Possessions of private
Persons.

A Resumption was thought on in the Reign of King James the First, of which the
forementioned Tracts of Sir Robert Cotton are a sufficient Evidence: Besides,
in the Annals of King Jam. p. 10.
Annals of those Times, it is said to have been debated in Council.

But in the Reign of King Charles the Second, a Resumption was again agitated,
for we find in the Journals of the House of Commons, Martis 22 Die, Maii, 1660.
A Bill for making void of Grants made since May 1642, of Titles of Honor,
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, passed under several great Seals
by the late King Charles, or the King's Majesty that now is, or any other great
Seal, was this Day read the second Time, and upon the Question, committed, etc.

And as a Mark that these Alienations of the Crown-Revenue were always
distasteful to the People of England; and to show that the House of Commons
desired, that a new Prince should betimes know the Nation's Sense in this
Matter, we shall produce the following Resolves of that Parliament which
restored King Charles.

Martis 4 Die Sept. 1660. Resolved, That this House does agree with the
Committee, That a Bill be brought in for Settling the Lands of the Crown, so as
that no Grant of the Inheritance shall be good in Law, nor any Lease for more
than Three Lives, or One and Thirty Years, where a Third Part of the true
yearly Value is reserved for a Rent, as it shall appear upon a Return of a
Survey, which that Act is to take Order for, to be speedily had and taken, and
that Mr. Solicitor General, and Mr. Sergeant Glyn, do prepare and bring in a
Bill accordingly.

Resolved, That this House does agree with the Committee, That the King's
Majesty be humbly desired from this House to forbear to make any Leases of the
Lands, or other Grants of the Revenue of the Crown, till the said last
mentioned Act be passed.

And the Reason why these good Resolutions took no Effect, is not at all
difficult to discover. It Is to be feared that too many (we mean without Doors)
in those corrupt Times, not only were concerned in the Grant already made, but
likewise did design, as it proved afterward, to get for themselves what
remained of the King's Lands.

And now for a full Answer to those who pretend Resumptions had never any
Effect, we shall produce a State of the Crown-Revenue, as it lay before the
House of Commons the same Year.

Martis die 4. Sept. 1660. 'Sir Heneage Finch reports from the Committee, That
according to the best Information the Committee could receive, and by Estimate,
the Revenue amountted to 819398 l. per Annum, viz.

l. By Customs. -- 400000. By Composition for the Court of Wards. -- 100000.
The Revenue of Farms and Rents. -- 263598. The Office of Postage. -- 21500. The
Proceed of Dean Forest. -- 4000. The Imposition on the Sea-Coal exported. --
8000. Wine-Licen^e, and other Additions. -- 22300. Total 819398.

From which Account it appears, that notwithstanding the Profusion of Henry the
Eighth, and the irregular Bounty of K. James the 1st. to his Scots; the
Land-Revenue of the Crown, which Anno 28. Hen. 6. when the Parliament made the
first formal and regular Resumption, was reduced to 5000 l. per Annum, came
afterward (with the Forest of Dean) to amount to 267598 l. per Annum.

Our Princes have seldom been known to purchase Lands. The Abby-Lands could not
make this great Increase; besides, it is notorious, K. Henry the Eighth either
sold or gave away a great Part of the Church Lands: From all which it must
follow by undeniable Consequence, that the forementioned Acts of Resumption
did restore the Crown-Revenue, consisting in Rents and Farms, to the State and
Condition, wherein it was in the beginning of King Charles the Second's Reign.

And Lastly, For their Satisfaction, who pretend Resumptions are against the
Fundamentals of our English Law, we shall produce the Opinion of a Venerable
and Learned Lawyer in this Point; it is taken out of a Book, written by Sir John
Fortescue, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in the Reign of Henry the Sixth.
The Manuscript is in the Bodleian Library at Oxford; it is entitled, Sir John
Fortescue's Treatise De Dominio Regali, and De Dominio Regali and Politico. But
let the Author himself speak with his Old English Heart, as well as in his Old
English Words.

CHAP. XI. Hereafter is schewyd what of the Kyng's Lyvelood geven away, may
best be takyn again.
Bib. Bodl. Digh. 145
-- The King, our Souveraign Lord, had by times sethen he Reyned upon us
Lyvelood, in Lordshipps, Londs, Tenements and Rents nere hand to the Value of
the 5th Part of his Realm, above the Possessions of the Church; by which
Lyvelood if it had abydyn still in his Hands, he had been more mighty of good
Revenues, than any of the said Two Kings [sc. the King of France or the Sowdan
of Babylon] or any King that now reyneth upon Christian Men. But this was not
possible to have done, for to sum part thereof the Heirs of them that sum
time owyd it be restored, sum by reason of Taylys, sum by reason of other
Tytles, which the King has considered, and thought them good and reasonable.
And sum of the same Lyvelood his good Grace has gyven to such as has servyd
him so notably, that as their Renown will be eternal, so it befetteth the Kings
Magnificence to make their Rewards everlasting in their Heirs to his Honor,
and their perpetual Memory. And also the King has gyven part of Lyvelood to
his most honorable Brethren, which not onley have servid him in the manner
aforesaid, but been also so nygh in Blood to his Highness, that it befet not
his Magnificence to have done otherwise. Nevertheless some Men have done him
Service for which it is reasonable that his Grace had rewardyd them, and for
lack of Money the King than rewarded them with Land: And to sum Men he has
done in likewise above their Demerits through Importunite of their Sewtes. And
yt is supposyd that to some of them is gyven a C l. worth Land yearly, that
would have hold him content with CC l. in Money if they might have had it in
hand; wherefore yt is thought if such Gifts and namely those which have been
made inconsyderately, or above the Merits of then that have them, ware
reformyd, and they rewardyd with Money or Offices or somewhat Lyvelood for
term of Life which after their Deths would then return to the Crown, the King
schuld have such Lyvelood as we now seek for sufficient for the Maintenance of
his Estate. And if yt would not then be so great, I hold yt for undoubtyd that
the People of this Land wol be wyllyng to grant him a Snbsidye upon such
Commodities of his Realm as be before specifyd as schal accomplish that which
schal lack him of such Lyvelood. So that his Highness wol well establish the
same Lyvelood then remaynyng to abide perpetually to his Crown without
translatyng thereof to any other Use. For when that schal happyn hereafter to be
given hytte schal need that his Commons be chargyd with a new Subsidye and be
always kept in Poverty.

Hereafter is schewyd why yt needs that there be a Resumption.

We found by great Causys yt was needful, that all such Gifts as have been
made of the Kings Lyvelood inconsyderately as not deservyd, or above the
Merits of them that has getyn them were reformyd, so that they which have
done Service be not over rewardyd, which thing as me thinks may not perfitly
be done without a general Resumption made by Act of Parliament. And that there be
gevyn the King by the Auctorite of the same Parliament, a great Subsidye with
which his Highness with the Advice of his Counceil, may reward those that have
deservyd rewards, and ought not therefore to have part of his Revenues, by
which his Estate must needs be mainteyned, or ought not to have so much of the
Revenues as they have now, or not so great Estate in the same. Consyderyng that
all such geving away of the Kings Lyvelood is harmfull to all his Liege Men,
which schal therbye, as is before schewyd be artyd to a new Charge for the
Sustentation of his Estate. But yet or any such Resumption be made yt schal be
good, that an honorable and notable Counceil be establyshyd, by the advyse of
which, all new Gifts and Rewards may be moderyd and made, as if no such Gifts
or Rewards had been made before this time. Provided always, that no Man be harmyd
by reason of such Resumption in the Arrearages o^ such Lyvelood as he schal
then have, which schold ron after the Resumption, and before the said new
Gifts and Rewards. And when such a Counceil is fully create and establyshyd,
hit schal be good that all Supplications which schal be made to the King for
any Gift or Reward be sent to the same Counceil and there debatyd and
delibered. First, whither the Suppliant have deservyd such Reward as he askyth,
and if he have deservyd yt, yet yt needs, that yt be delibered whether the
King may gyve such Rewards as he asks of his Revenues, savyng to himself
sufficient for the Sustenaunce of his Estate, or else such gevyng war no
Virtue, but rather a Spice of Prodigality, and as for so much it war
delapidation of his Crown. Wherefore no private Person wol by reason of
liberalite, or of reward, so abate his own Lyvelood, as he may not keep such
Estate as he did before. And truly it war better that a private Person lackyd
his Reward, which he has well deservyd, than that by his Reward the good
Public and also the Land were hurt; Wherefore to eschew these two Harms, hit
may than be advysyd by the Counceil how such a person may be rewardyd with
Office, Money, Marriage, Fraunchise, Privilege, or such other thing, of which
the Crown has great Richesse; and verily if this Order be kept, the King
schal not be be grevyd by importunyte of Sewters, nor they schal by importunyte
or brocage optain any unreasonable desires. O what mighty quiet schal grow to
the King by this Order, and in what rest schal al his People lyve, havyng no
Color of grutchyng with such as schal be about his Person: As they were wont
to have for the gyvyng away of his Londs, and for miscounceiling him in many
other Causis, nor of murmour ageyn the Kings Person for the misgoverning of his
Realm.

The first Regular Resumption having been made in the Reign of Henry the Sixth,
it seems by this Paper, which contains the Scheme of a Resumption, that the Act
for resuming Grants, etc. passed 28 Hen. 6. was modeled by this able Lawyer,
who was made Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas 20 Hen. 6. and who we find
to have been Chief Justice of the King's- Bench the Rot. Parl. 28 Hen. 6.
28th Year of the same Reign.

At the End of the Manuscript, out of which this was transcribed, is this Note:

Explicit Liber compilatus and factus per Johannem Fortescue Militem quondam
capitalem Justitiarium Angliae, and hic Scriptus Manu propria mei Adriani
Fortescue Militis, 1532.

Our Ancestors did not only take Care to help the Princes Affairs by Acts of
Resumption, but they likewise relieved him when he had been over-reached or
deceived in Releases, or what we now call Privy*Seals; having an Eye that such
as were Debtors or Accomptants to the King should not be discharged without
making a fair and just Account; whereof we shall produce a President, with
which we shall close this Section.

Rot. Claus. 8 Edw. 2. M. 11.
Rex Thesaurario and Baronibus suis de scac^ario Salutem. Cum Praelati Comitos
and Barons ad ordinandum de Statu Hospitii and Regni nostri nuper virtute
Commissionis nostrae inde factae Elerti inter caeter as ordinationes per ipsos
factas and per nos approbatas Ordinaverint quod (...) Donationes per nos factae
ad Damnum nostrum and detrimentum Coronae, nostrae de terris Tenementis
redditibus Custodiis and Maritagiis, ac etiam pardonationes and remissiones
debitorum post 16. Diem Martii An. Regni nostri Tertio quibuscunque personis
revocentur, and quod terrae tenementa redditus Custodiae and maritagia
praedicta in Manum nostrum resumantur, and quod debita illa non obstantibus
pardonitionibus and remissionibus praedictis leventur ad opus nostrum: Vobis
mandamus quod scrutatis Rotulis and Memorandis dicti Scaccarii de hujusmodi
Donationibus Concessionibus and pardonationibus post praedictum 16. Diem Martii
In dicto Scaccario factis and inspecta quadam Schedula quam vobis super hoc
mittimus sub pede sigilli nostri omnia debita in praedictis rotulis memorandis
and Schedula contenta and per vos post praedictum 16. Diem Martii pardonata and
remissa levari faciatis ad opus nostrum non obstantibus pardonationibus and
remissionibus praedictis aut allocationibus ad dictum Scaccarium inde factis
and d^ Exitibus de terris and Tenementis Custodii^ and Maritagiis praedictis
provenientibus nobis ad dictum Scaccarium faciatis responderi Testa Rege apud
Westminster. 15 Die Martii.

SECT. IV. That several Ministers of State have been Impeached in Parliament
for presuming to procure to Themselves Grants of the Crown-Revenue.
IN the foregoing Section we have taken Notice how careful the Commons of
England have all along been, to assist by Acts of Resumption, such of their
Kings as had been injured by immoderate Bounty. We shall now go on to show how
Parliaments have proceeded with the Instruments of their Profusion, and in what
manner they have handled such Ministers of State as have either winked at, or
promoted the Depredations that were made upon their Master's Revenue; and
especially with those who ^n Breach of their Trust have ventured ^o enrich
themselves with Spoils so little warranted by the Constitution of this Kingdom.

The Records we have already cited sufficiently demonstrate that it was ever
the Opinion and Sense of the People that the King should live upon his own, and
that the Nation should not be burdened with unnecessary Taxes and Impositions.

It appears likewise from the foresaid Records, that when the Crown has been
impoverished by Gifts and Grants, new and extraordinary Courses of Raising Money
have become unavoidable.

It cannot be denied but that our King^ have very anciently prescribed a Power
of Alienating the Public Revenues, bu^ it may admit of a Question, whether the
was not more de Facto than de Jure, an^ it is not quite so clear that from the
beginning it was so; on the contrary it ^ther seems one of those Incroachme^
which Flattery and Compliance ha^ supported.

For it would not be difficult to man appear that in all these Gothic
Gover^ments founded upon the Principles (...) Liberty, the Public Revenues we^
esteemed to belong as well to the Kin^dom as to the King. De Repub. l. 6.
Bodinus says was held as a Maxim in France, The the Propriety of the
Crown Lands was not in the Prince; That 'twas esteemed as a Fundamental in
France, Spain, Poland and Hungary, that the Crown Lands were not alienable:
Which Opinion has been confirmed by Decrees of the Parliament of Paris. King
Charles the V. and VII. would not have the Crown Lands engaged but by Consent
of Parliament. Vie de Charlemagne*
Mezeray says, Le Domaine des Roys, and ^eluy de l'Eglise, etoient
inalienables. And that though their Kings were now and then constrained to make
Grants, C'estoit a vie seulement, and a titre de Gratification; C'est pourquoy
ils les nommoient des Benefices, mot qui n'est demeure que dans l'Eg^ise. Lib.
6*
Bodinus says, all Monarchies and States have held it for a general and
undoubted Law, That the Crown Lands should be holy, sacred and ina^ienable; and
that the Maxim is ground^d upon this wholesome Policy, That ^e Wants of the
Prince might not ^ompel him either to overcharge his ^hole People with
Impositions, or to ^ek for Wealth by confiscating the Ibids
Lewis XII. ^who was termed the Father of his Country) would not mix his
Revenues and Patrimony with what belonged to ^he Public, erecting separate
Offices to that purpose. Sir Cot. Post. p. 179.
Robert Cotton, an Author of great Weight in all these Matters, says (as we
have noted before) that in England our Ancestors held it impious to alienate
the ancient Demeas^e* Lands of the Crown.

We have taken Notice, in the second Section, of the difference the Roman
Emperors made between the Fiscus, and the Aerarium, the first of which was the
private Patrimony, and in the other the People had a Right.

Of this very Thing there are Footste^^ in England. That is, there was
anciently a Difference made between the Scaccarium and the Hannaperium, and
Spel. Glos. p. 278.
Spelman seems to liken the Scaccarium or Treasury to the Aerarium, and the
Hannaperium or Hamper to the Fiscus Principis. p. 331.
Hannaperium] Fiscus (...) sporta grandior in Cancellaria Regis, (...)
inferuntur Pecuniae e Sigillatione diplo^matum, Brevium, Chartarum Regiar^ etc.
provenientes. For this Branch of the Revenue as we are informed, the Cha^cellor
in old times did not account i^ the Exchequer; it being looked upon (...) the
Princes private Patrimony, or (...) his Privy Purse, and so to be disposed
(...) without any Account. It was forme^ a Clause in most Grants, -- Sine ali^^
Fine vel Feodo magno vel parvo nobis solvendo in Hannaperio. Which Fine went to
the King's private Purse. Heretofore when much Land was in the Crown the Hamper
yielded so considerable a Sum, as that it was thought fit to be included in all
the Acts of Resumption; for large Pensions being begged out of it, the
Parliament judged it their Duty to take care as well of what was reckoned the
Princes Peculium, or private Patrimony, as of what belonged jointly to him and
the Public, which was done in other Instances, as where they resumed Annis 3
and 4, 7 and 13, Edw. 4. his Family Inheritance of the Duchy of York and
Earldom of March.

But this difference, with many other good Forms of our old Government, is said
aside. Spel. Glos. p. 278.
Nulla pene jam nobiscum habita Pecuniae Publicae and privatae distinctione,
cum sit utraque; in solius Princi^is Arbitrio. And from the time of William
Rufus, our Kings have thought they might alienate and dispose of the
Crown Lands at Will and Pleasure; and ^n all Ages not only Charters of
Liberties and Franchises have been given, but likewise Letters Patents for
Lands and Manors have actually passed in every Reign.

Nor would it have been convenient that the Princes Hands should have been
absolutely bound up by any Law, or that what had once got into the Crown,
should have been for ever separated from private Possession: For then, by
Forfeitures and Attaintures, he must have become Lord of the whole Soil in a
long Course of Time; The Constitution therefore seems to have left him free in
this Matter, but upon this tacit Trust, (as he has all his other Power) that he
shall do nothing which may tend to the Destruction of his Subjects.

However, though he be thus trusted, it is only as Head of the Commonwealth; and
the People of England have in no Age been wanting to put in their Claim to that
in which they conceived themselves to have a remaining Interest, which Claims
are the Acts of Resumption that from time to time have been made in Parliament,
when such Gifts and Grants were made, as became burdensome and hurtful to the
Public.

Nor can any Government or State divest it self of the Means of its
Preservation: And if our Kings should have had an unlimitted Power of giving
away their whole Revenue, and if no Authority could have revoked such Gifts,
every profuse Prince, of which we have had many in this Kingdom, would have
ruined his Successor, and the People must have been destroyed with new and
repeated Taxes, for by our Duty we are likewise to support the next Prince: So
that if no Authority could look into this, a Nation must be utterly undone
without any way of redressing it self; which is against the Nature and Essence
of any free Establishment.

Our Constitution therefore seems to have been, that the King always might make
Grants, and that those Grants, if passed according to the Forms prescribed by
the Law, were valid and pleadable against not only him, but his Successors.
However at the same time it is likewise manifest that the Legislative Power has
had an uncontested Right to look into those Grants, and to make them void
whenever they were thought exorbitant. And therein wise Kings have given way,
and not thought it dishonorable to join with their People in that which was
judged to be for the Ease and Benefit of the major part.

But because in Acts of Resumption the Legislature exerts it self in an
extraordinary manner, and because it is a Cordial of a very strong Operation,
and for that such Acts must of Necessity break into private Contracts,
Marriage-Settlements, Sales upon a valuable Consideration, and in many other
Instances, the Law has fenced the King's Revenue with Restrictions and wholesome
Constitutions, it has prescribed Forms by which Grants and Gifts should pass,
it has erected several Checks, and trusted those Checks in the Hands of high
Officers of the Crown; And lastly, the Laws have called to Account, and
seveerly punished many Men of great Birth and Figure for breaking down these
Fences; by all which our Ancestors seem to have desired and designed preventing
Mischiefs in their Growth, and that Recourse should be had to extraordinary
Remedies as seldom as possible.

And First, That not only his common Expenses, but that also his Liberalities
might be supplied without diminution of the Capital, innumerable Laws did
provide that he might be neither deceived in his Receipts nor in his Payments,
besides which the Introitus and Exitus of the Exchequer was originally
contrived with Check upon Check, and with all the Care and Art imaginable.

But all these good Methods were very early overthrown by the Negligence of
some Princes, but more through the Corruption of their Ministers.

Henry the IV. who had deposed his Predecessor, and who came in upon the Foot
of Reformation, began to make Regulations, and restore some Order in the
Revenues of the Crown.

In the first Year of his Reign the Commons complained of outrageous Grants,
and of great Sums of Money released to undeserving Persons, the King not
perceiving the hurt done him at the time of the Grant. They pray that such
Grants upon good Deliberation may be recalled, and that from thenceforth he
would make no Grant but with the Advice of his Council. The King Answers, He
will be advised by the wise Men of his Council. And thereupon several good
Regulations relating to the Passing of Grants are established, but take the
Record.

1 Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. Number. 98.
Et aufyn qil ne soit deceux en les Grantes ou douns annuelx ou en fee, ou en
ascunes Offices per luy a faires ou a Granters, en temps avenir, il voet, de
lassent des Seignours Esprituelx and Temporelx, and des Communes, qe touts ceux
qi demanderont du Roy Terres Tenementes Rentes Offices Annuitees ou autres
profits qeconqes, facent express mention en lour Petitions de la value de la
chose ensi a demander, and auxi de ceo qe ils ont eve du done le Roy, ou des
autres ses Progenitors ou Predecessors per devant; and en cas qe ils ne
facent tiel mention en lour dites Petitions, and ceo duement proeve, soient les
lettres patentes du Roy ent faites nient vaillables ne de nulle force neffect,
mes de tout revoqes, repelles and adnuelles pur toutz jourz au punissement de
ceux qe ensi ount fait tiel deceit, ou Roy come ceux quy ne sont pas dignes
denjoier leffect and Benefice des Lettres Patentes a eux Grantez en celle
party.

This Acts directs, that in the Petition to the King for any Gift or Grant,
express mention shall be made of the true Value of the thing petitioned for,
and that mention be made of what other Gift or Grant the Petitioner has had
from the King or any of his Predecessors; and if all this be omitted, the Grant
to be void.

4 Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. Number. 31.
In the fourth Year of his Reign, He declares he will grant no Lands but to
such who shall deserve them, as shall best seem to Him and Council; and if any
make demand without desert, he shall be punished by the King and his Council,
and not obtain his Suit.

11 Hen. 4. Rot. Parl. Number. 23.
In the eleventh of his Reign, it was enacted, That all manner of Hereditaments
which from thenceforward should fall into the Crown, should not be alienated
but remain to the King.

Thus did this wise King, by keeping the Lifeblood of the Body-Politick within
its proper Veins, add to it so vigorous a Health, that his Son was in a
Condition to attempt and succeed in the Conquest of France.

And by his Resumptions, and by the good Order he had settled in his Revenues,
he enabled Henry the V. to go on in those great Undertakings, without laying
any extraordinary Burdens upon the People. Answers to the Reasons for Foreign
Wars, p. 47.
Sir Robert Cotton says, That during Henry V. Reign of nine Years, there was no
Charge laid upon Land. Out of the Goods of the Commons, he received six times
the tenth, and fifteenth entirely, and once two thirds only of staple Wares; A
Subsidy once for four Years, and after for his Life: Three Shillings Tunnage,
and 12 Pence Poundage for the like terms as the former Subsidies. And thrice he
had the Tenth of his Clergy. All which was but very little, considering the
great Actions he performed; but he himself was a wise Man, and his Father had
left him an honest and able Set of Ministers.

But long before either of these Reigns, the King's Revenue was a particular
Object of the Parliaments Care; And they endeavored to keep his Affairs within
such a Compass, that the People might not be burdened with new Taxes; which
they tried to bring about by the following Methods.

1. By Regulating the Expenses of the King's Court. Edw. 2. Ex. Ang. M. S. Fol.
29.
Anno 3. Edw. 2. An Ordinance was made, Pro Hospitio Regis, in ease of the
People. A l'honneur de Roy and a son profit, and au profit de son peuple, selon
droit and resonel serment que le did nostre Signeur le Roy fist a son
Coronement. Rot. Parl. 36. Edw. 3.
Anno 36. Edw. 3. The Household was regulated at the Petition of the People.
Rot. Parl. 1* Rich. 2. Number. 19.
Anno 1. Rich. 2. The Household was brought to such a Moderation of Expense as
might be answerable to the Revenues of the Crown* Ex ordinat* in Rot. Act.
Council. An. 11 Hen. 4. marked R. R.
Anno 11. Hen. 4. The Expenses of the King's Household were moderated; the
Reason the Commons gave for it, was, Qe vous poiez vivre le vos biens propres
en eese de vostre Peuple.

2. By desiring the King to employ wise and able Men in his Affairs, as was
done, Rot. Parl. 6 Rich. 2. Part 2. Number. 16.
Anno 6. Rich. 2. And by desiring the King to make use of such Persons as were
renowned for Virtue, as was done, Rot. Parl* 5 Hen. 4* Number. 19.
Anno 5. Hen. 4. And by appointing certain Persons by Name to be of the Privy
Council at the King's own desire, as was done, Rot. Parl. 7 and 8. Hen. 4. Number.
31.
7 and 8. Hen. 4. for which the principal Reason given in the Record, is, the
Improvement of the King's Revenue. Premierement pur la Conservation des Droits
de nostre Seignour le Roy, and de sa Carone, and qe le Revenu dycell soient
mieulx Coillez a son Profit and encrescez a tant come home poet justement le
fair, a fyn qil poet le mieulx son honorable* Estat sustinir. And Note, that
just before the Passing this Act, there passed an Rot. ib. Number. 29.
Act to Banish Foreigners.

3. By procuring the Banishment of Great Men, and particularly Foreigners, by
whom the Money of the Nation was consumed. Thus the Weight of the People
prevailed upon Hen. 2. ex Gervas Dorobern.
Henry II. to banish William de Ipre Earl of Kent a Netherlander, and all his
Countrymen, when they were become a Burden to the State. They prevailed
likewise upon Rich. 2. ex Rich. Canonico* in Vit. Rich. 1.
Richard I. to send away Otho Earl of York, though he was his own Nephew, with
all his Bavarians. And he took from Otho the Earldom of York, because it
offended the People that a Foreigner should enjoy so high a Title; and in
exchange he gave him the Title of Poictife. Hen. 3. Ex lib. St. Alba and Will.
Rishang. and lit. Baron Papae
Henry III. (as we have noted before) was compelled to Banish his half
Brothers, the Earl of Pembroke and the Bishop of Winchester, who had more than
any others helped to impoverish that profuse Prince. At the same time all the
Poictovins were banished. Edward II. was necessitated to send away Pierce
Gaveston, and others, as appears by his Ordinance. Ex Ordinat. 3 Edw. 2. in
lib. Legum Manuscr. ^ol. 285.
Qe tout le Lignage sire Pieres Gaveston soit entirement ouste de estre entoins
le Roy and de son Service, Item Burgois de Til soit ouste and son Fias qe est
Mereschal d l'escheqer; Item qe Bertram Assabi and son Friar and ceux de
Gascoigne, and Aimerick de Friscomband soint oustre and ses terres prises en le
main le Roy. In the 11th of Rot. Parl. 11 Ri. 2. Part 1. Number. 28.
Richard II. an Act of Parliament passed to banish the Bohemians who were
Hangers on upon the Court, and helped to undo that unfortunate King. In the 5th
of Rot. Parl. 5 Hen. 4. from Number. 26. to Number. 31. exclus.
Hen. IV. All Foreigners, except some few about the Persons of the Queen and
Princes, are banished the Court, and the Reason given for it is that they were
a Burden and Charge upon the King. Et qe le Houstiell de nostre dit Seignour
le Roy ne feusse chargez ovesqe tielx estrangers. Mais qe ycell Houstiell
purroit estre mis en bone and moderate Governance don't les Coustages purroint
estre supportez des Revenues del Roialme ovesqes autres charges necessaires.

4. By appointing Commissioners to inspect the Public Accounts, as was done in
the Case of Furnival and Master John Pelham. These two Gentlemen, at the
Parliament held at Coventry, had been made by the House of Commons particular
Treasurers for certain Aids then granted toward carrying on the War. In the
7th and 8th of Henry IV. They pray to have leave to quit their Employments (a
Modesty and Self-denial not very common in this Age) and that their Accounts
might be passed, upon which the House of Commons directed Persons to audit and
state the said Accounts. The Record is very curious, we shall therefore give it
in Words at length, Rot. Parl. 7 and 8 Hen. 4. Nu. 44.
Item mesme le Jour, le dit Mr. John [Tibetot then Speaker] monstra de par les
ditz Communes coment, au Parliament nadgaires tenuz a Coventre, Thomas sire de
Furnival and Mr. John Pelham furent assignez Tresorers pur les Guerres Come
pierd de Record en Roll de Parliament, puis qel Temps les ditz Tresorers ont
desirez, and molt diligeamment purs^is as diverses foits a nostre Seigneur le
Roy, and as toutes les Estates de ceste present Parliament, de estre deschargez
de lour dit Office, and auxint ont suppliez as dits Communes, qe leur pleust de
fair instance and request pur mesme les Tresorers, a mesme nostre Seigneur le
Roy, and as touts les Estates suisdits, pur eux finalement and outrement
deschargier de lour dit Office. Sur quoy pria le dit Mr. John Tibetot en nom
des dits Comunez a mesme nostre Seigneur le Roy, qe les dits Tresorers soient
outrement and finalement deschargiez de lour dit Office. Et qe leurs Heirs
Executours ne Terre Tenants ne soient aucunement en temps avenir grievez
molestez enquietez ou pur le exercice de ycelle, and qe cestes prier and reqest
soient endrez de Record en Roll de Parliament.

Qeux prier and reqest nostre dit Seigneur le Roy graceousement ottroia; and
purtant qil ad pleu a nostre dit Seigneur le Roy qe les dits Tresorers soint
deschargiez de lour dit Office, and de assigner certains Auditors, cest
assavoir le Seignour de Roos and le chief Baron de le Escheqer, and qil est la
volonte du Roy a ceo qe les dits Comunez ont entenduz, qe mesmes les comunez
deussent nomer autres Auditors, doier and terminer les Accounts des dits
Tresorrers, du temps pass, Mesme yceux Comunes ont nomez certains Persons
comprises en une cedule delivre per les dits Comunes en Parliament, tielx come
leur semble necessaires en ceo cas, pur le pour estat de les Comunes dessuis
dits, Cestassavoir.

Mr. Hugh Lutherel, Mr. Richard Redeman, Lawrance Drew, Thomas Shelrey, David
Holbeche, William Staundon,
Cinq Qatre Trois ou Deux de Eux.

Furnivale and Sir John Pelham (for so he is called afterward) were, as the
Rot. ibid* Number. 63.
Record says, Ordeignez Tresoreres de les Guerres, or what we call Paymasters of
the Army, and pressed the Parliament to take their Accounts: An Example which
we hope all their Successors in that Employment will desire to follow. The
Powers likewise which the Parliament gave to these Commissioners are fit to be
observed. Qe pleise a vostre tres gracieuse Seignourie, de ordeigner qe les
dits Auditors ensi nomez, soint Auditors de Record, eiants plein poair and
authority du Parliament de Oier and Terminer le dit Account* and de fair
Allowance as avaunt dits Tresorers; si bien de les Paiments and delivrances par
eux faits, per virtue and authorite des vos Lettres and Mandements dessous
vostre Seal a eux directs, pur les causes suisdits, and sur les Dependantz
dycelle, Come de les Paiments and Delivrances per mesmes le^ Tresorers, per
Authorite de lour dit Office faits pur semblable Causes and les Dependants
dycelle.

That is, Power was given not only to inspect but finally to conclude the said
Account. To which the King assented And it seems our Ancestors thought such a
Commission necessary to hinder the Public Money from being embe^zel'd.

5. Parliaments have preserved the King's Revenue by inquiring into the Cause
why some Branches yielded nothing, as in Edw. 3d's. Reign it was asked, Why
Ireland was rather a Burden than a Profit to the Crown? The Commons desiring
if the Fault lay in the Ministers, that they may be removed. Rot. Parl. 21 Edw.
3. Number. 41.
Item pleise a nostre Seignour le Roy fair^ enqerer per bons Gents la Cause
purqoi il (...) prent profit de ce qil ad in Irland come to^^ ses Ancestres
avoint Aid de luy and de l^ Comune pur meyntenir sa guerre depuis qi^ ad plus
en Irland qe uulle de ses Ancestres navoint, and si defaute soit trove en ses
Ministres laundreit qe autrez y soient ordeignez en lour lieu, tieux qi
voudreut respondr^ a^ Roy du Profit qil averoit dilloqes de reason. Resp. Il
plest a nostre Seignour le Roy qe ensi soit.

These were some of the Methods by which the House of Commons endeavored to
preserve the Crown-Revenue from the greedy Hands of those who were always
desiring therewith to enrich themselves. But the Kings greatest Safety lay in
the very Constitution of the Exchequer, which if bad Ministers had not broken
into, our former Princes could not have been robbed so much to the
Impoverishment of the People.

The Constitution of the Exchequer; we may rather call it the Constitution of
the Kingdom, has contrived to put a great many Letts and Obstructions in the
way of designing Favorites and rapacious Followers of the Court, and that no
Grant should pass from the King but upon strict Inquiry and after mature
Deliberation.

In order to which the State thought it necessary to be at the Expense of
several Great Officers, who should be as so many Sentinels continually watching
that the King may not be surprised nor defrauded.

Regularly and according to the Laws of the Land, Grants from the Crown ought
to make the following Steps.

The Petition is first made to the King, in which (as we have noted before) the
Petitioner ought to incert the true and express Value of the Thing demanded.

The King refers this Petition to the Treasurer of the Exchequer, now called
Lord High Treasurer of England, whose first Step is to have a Particular of the
Thing petitioned for from the Auditor, if it lies before him, or from the
King's Remembrancer, if it lies before him: This Care is taken that the State
may not be deceived in the value of the Thing.

The Petition is first referred to this High Officer because the Law presumes
that the whole State and Condition of the Revenue lies before him, that he
knows what Debts and Engagements the King has upon him, and whither the
Expenses of his Wars, and the other necessary Charges of his Government, are
not such, as for the Peoples Ease, and by the Rules of Justice ought for the
present to restrain his Bounty. If the Thing to be granted be of great Value,
if it cannot be given away without great Damage to the Crown, if by reason of
such Gift he is hindered from paying his just Debts, or from having wherewithal
to defray the Charges of the Government, or to provide for the Kingdoms
Defense; or if by this and other Gifts he must be driven through the failing of
his own Revenue, to lay heavy Burdens upon the People; it is the Duty of the
Lord Treasurer to represent the whole Matter honestly and impartially to the
King, and to hinder the Grant from proceeding any further. And as a Tie upon
him he takes the following Oath. Ye shall swear, That well, and truly, ye shall
serve the King our Sovereign Lord, and his People in the Office of Treasurer;
and ye shall do right to all manner of People, Poor and Rich, of such Things as
touches your Office; And that King's Treasure truly ye shall keep and dispend;
And truly ye shall counsel the King, and his Counsel ye shall layn, and keep;
And that ye shall neither know nor suffer the King's Hurt, nor his
dis-heriting, nor that the Rights of his Crown be distressed by any means, as
far forth as ye may let; And if ye may not let it, ye shall make knowledge
thereof clearly and expressly, to the King, with your true Advice, and Counsel:
And ye shall do, and purchase the King's Profit in all that ye may reasonably
do, as God you help, and the Holy Evangelists. It was hardly possible to devise
a more binding Oath. And the Words Ye shall well, and truly, serve the King our
Sovereign Lord, and his People in the Office of Treasurer, are an Evidence that
our Forefathers took themselves to have some kind of Interest in what was
called the Crown-Revenue.

If the Grant meets with no Objection at the Treasury, the King signs a Warrant
directed to the Attorney or Sollicitor-General, who is another Great Officer,
impowering him to prepare a Bill containing such a Grant. And if the Grant be
of Money appropriated by Act of Parliament, or of Lands annexed to the Crown by
Act of Parliament, or if the Grant be any ways illegal or prejudicial to the
Crown, it is the Attorney or Sollicitor-General's Duty to advertise thereof.

After Mr. Attorney has passed it, it goes to the Signet, the Custody whereof is
in the Secretary of State, who being a Minister in high Office is presumed by
the Laws to be watchful for the King's Good, and to inquire into all Matters
relating to the Weal Public. He is presumed to be apris'd of the Persons
Merits to whom the Grant is to be made, and likewise to understand either the
Affluence or Want in the King's Coffers, and the general Condition of his
Revenue. And having an Allowance for Intelligence, he is presumed to know the
Discourses and Opinions of the People, and how such Grants are relished: If
therefore the Person suing out the Grant has no Merit at all, or at least no
sort of pretention to so great a Reward, or if he knows the Public to be
pressed with Wants and Debts; or if he hears that the People murmur at the
Taxes which Profusion introduces, and Clamor to see the Nations Money wasted,
by his Duty, as Privy Councellor, and by his Oath he is bound faithfully and
plainly thereof to inform the King.

From the Signet it should go to the Privy Seal, who is likewise another Great
Officer; who being near the Person of the King, is presumed to know the
Condition of the Kingdom; and therefore the Law has made him another Check. He
takes this Oath: Ye shall as far forth as your Cunning and ^^^cretion
suffices, truly, justly and evenly execute and exercise the Office of Keeper
of the King's Privy Seal, to you by his Highness committed, not leaving or
eschewing, so to do for Affection, Love, Meed, Doubt, or Dread of any Person or
Persons, etc. So that if the Lord Privy Seal, finds that through Corruption in
other Offices, or that by Power, Importunity, or partial* Favor, a Grant,
tending greatly to the Public Damage, and to the Diminution of his Prince's
Revenue, has passed so far as to his Office, he ought to stop it there, and is
bound in Duty, and by his Oath, to lay the whole Matter before the King.

From the Privy Seal it goes to the Great Seal, in the Custody of the Lord
Keeper, or Lord Chancellor of England, who is accounted the Kingdom's, as well
as the King's Officer, and there the Grant is completed; upon which score, in
the Eye of the Law, this Great Minister is most looked upon; his Oath is the
same with that of the Lord Treasurer. He swears, "Well and truly to serve the
King and his People in the Office of Chancellor, truly to Counsel the King, not
to suffer his Hurt or Dis-heriting, nor that the Rights of the Crown be
distressed, by any Means, as far forth as he may let; And if he may not let it,
he is to make it clearly and expressly known to the King, with true Advice and
Counsel; And, in all that he may, he is to do, and purchase the King's Profit."
So that more than any other, as the highest Officer, and as the last Check, the
Laws presume him to consult for the King's good. Therefore if the Grant be
exorbitant, if it be made to an undeserving Person, if it notoriously surpasses
the Merits of the Suitor, if it was obtained upon wrong Suggestions, if it
occasions Obloquy to the Government, or Discontent among the People, if the
King's Debts are many and clamorous, if the Nation labors, at the same time as
the Gift is made, under heavy Taxes; and if the Grant tends greatly to the Hurt
and Impoverishment of the Crown (with all which Matters the Law presumes so
great a Minister in the State to be acquainted) he is bound in Duty and by his
Oath not to fix the Great Seal to the said Grant, but thereupon faithfully and
impartially to advise the King: And Chancellors who have acted otherwise, and
who, contrary to the Trust of their Office, have ventured to pass outrageous
Gifts, Douns Outrageuses, as the Records call 'em, whereby the Crown has been
impoverished, have been heretofore, as we shall show by and by, questioned,
impeached and attainted in Parliament.

These were the ancient Steps in Passing Grants from the Crown, which were
afterward enforced by a positive Anno 27 Hen. 8. Cap. 11.
Law in the Reign of Henry the Eighth, a Prince jealous enough of the Regal
Authority. It Is true, by the Suggestion in the Preamble, it looks as if the Act
were made to preserve the Fees belonging to the Clerks of the Signet, but
bringing in Fees to Officers, being never the Object of a Parliaments Care; we
ought to conclude that the House of Commons gave that fair Color (in the Reign
of a Suspicious and Arbitrary Prince) to the Regulations they intended to make
as to Passing Grants from the Crown. First, the Law directs, That the King's
Grants shall be brought to the Principal Secretary, or to one of the King's
Clerks of his Grace's Signet for the time being, to be at the said Office of
the Signet passed accordingly. And be it also ordained and enacted, That one of
the Clerks of the said Signet, to whom any of the said Writings signed with the
King's most gracious Hand, or the Hand of any other aforesaid, or any of them,
fortune to be delivered, may and shall by Warrant of the same Bills, and every
of them within the space of eight days next after he shall have received the
same, unless he have Knowledge by the said Secretary, or otherwise, of the
King's Pleasure to the contrary, make, or cause to be made in the King's Name,
Letters of Warrant, subscribed with the Hand of the same Clerk, and sealed with
the King's Signet, to the Lord Keeper of the King's Privy Seal, for further
Process to be had in that behalf: And that one of the King's Clerks of the said
Privy Seal, upon due Examination had by the said Lord Keeper of the said Privy
Seal, of the said Warrant to him addressed from the Office of the said Signet
as before, may and shall within the space of eight days next, after he shall
have received the same, unless the Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal do give them
Commandment to the contrary, make or cause to be made, by Warrant of the
foresaid Warrant to the said Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, Address from the
Office of the Signet aforesaid, other Letters of like Warranty, subscribed with
the Name of the same Clerk of the Privy Seal, to the Lord Chancellor of
England, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster,
Chancellor of the King's Land of Ireland, Treasurer and Chamberlains of the
Exchequer, and Chamberlains of any of his Counties Palatines, or Principality
of Wales, or other Officer, and to every of them, for the writing and ensealing
with such Seals as remain in their Custody of Letters Patent or Closed, or
other Process making, due and requisite to be had or made upon any the said
Grants, according to the Tenor of the Warrant to them or any of them directed
from the Officer of the Privy Seal, as is before specified.

These Cautions show how carefully our Constitution has provided that nothing
shall be done which may turn in Despendium Regis aut Regni.

But here some flattering Lawyers will affirm, That these Methods are Directive
not Coerceive: Or, as Hobart says, Hobart's Reports, Colt and Glover, P. 146.
"That these kind of Statutes were made to put Things in ordinary Form, and to
ease the Sovereign of of Labor, but not to deprive him of Power;" according to
this Maxim of the same Judge, That Lord Sheffeild, ver. Ratcliffe, p. 335.
Dare Prerogativam est nobile Officium Judicis and Debitum. And truly,
heretofore Westminster Hall did so order it, that these Fences, intended to
keep the Public Revenues from the Hands of Spoilers, were all broken down, and
that all these Statutes were evaded.

For the Force of all these wholesome Laws was enervated by Clauses afterward
incerted into the Letters Patents, viz. Ex certa Scienta, mero motu, and Gratia
speciali. Ex certa Scientia was very anciently made use of, but the words
became more necessary afterward to defeat the 1st of Henry IV. where it is
enacted, Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. 4. Number. 98.
"That the true and express Value of the thing to be granted, shall be incerted
in the Letters Patents, otherwise the Grant to be void." So that these words
suppose the King to have certain knowledge in every Circumstance of the thing
he is to give away, which happens very rarely to be the Case. But
notwithstanding these words, if certain Proof can be made that the King was
misinformed by false Suggestion, no Lawyer will say the Grant is good. Ex mero
motu, imports the Honor and Bounty of the King, who Rewards the Patentee for
Merit without his Suit. These words suppose the King to be truly appris'd of
the Person's Merit, and were brought in to obviate the 4th of Henry IV. whereby
it was enacted, Rot. Parl. 4 Hen. 4.
"That no Lands should be given, but to such as deserved them; and if any made
Demands without Desert, that he should be punished." And to the same purpose
were added the words Ex Gratia speciali; yet more to denote that the Gift
proceeded merely from the King's Favor, and not at the Party's Solicitation.

But besides all this, because anciently it seemed a Fundamental, that the
Crown Lands were not alienable, and because all along Parliaments had
complained of these Alienations, as looking upon 'em to be illegal, the Lawyers
of old Times endeavored to secure and cover all by a Clause of Non Obstante to
be incerted in the Patents.

These Clauses of Non Obstante were not known in our original Constitution.
Matthew Paris says they grew rife in the Reign of Henry III. Anno Dom. 1250.
Mat. Paris, p. 810.
Sprsimque jam tales Literae, in quibus inserta est haec detestabilis adjectio:
Non Obstante Priore Mandato, vel haec, Non Obstante Antiqua Liberate
Suscitabantur: Then he goes on, Quod cum comperisset, quidam vir discretus tunc
Justitiarius, scilicet Rogerus de Thurkeby, ab alto ducens suspiria, de
praedictae adjectionis appositione, dixit Heu, heu, hos ut quid dies
expectavimus? Ecce jam civilis Curia exemplo ecclesiasticae Coinquinatur, and a
Sulphureo font intoxicatur.

But this Clause grew more necessary after the 11th of Henry IV. when it was
plainly and directly enacted, " Rot Parl. 11 Hen. 4. Number. 23.
That all manner of Heriditaments which from thenceforward should fall into the
Crown, should not be alienated, but remain to the King." And this last Law
being positive, unrepeal'd (as we know of) and still in force as much as Magna
Charta, and the Doctrine of Non Obstantes seeming to be condemned by The Ast
declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, in these Words, "That the
pretended Power of Suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws by Regal
Authority, without Consent of Parliament is Illegal. That the pretended Power
of dispensing with Laws, or the Execution of Laws by Regal Authority, as it
has been assumed and exercised of late is Illegal." There will arise a
Question how far the Grants made, since the passing this Act 1 Gul. and Mar.
are valid by the Laws; as they stand at present.

For we may argue thus, It was enacted 11 Hen. IV. That the Crown Lands should
not be granted away* However the Practice was otherwise, and the Grants were
supported by Clauses of Non Obstante: But these Non Obstantes* or the
dispensing with Laws in force, being declared Illegal, it should follow, that
the Grants of Crown-Land made for these last ten Years are void in Law, and
revokable at the King's Will and Pleasure. But it is left to the Gentlemen of
the Long Robe to determine in this Point.

However though this Doctrine of Non Obstantes (invented perhaps first to enlarge
the Prerogative for the People's benefit, and made use of afterward to extend
it to the King and People's Damage) may have heretofore received Countenance in
Westrninster-hall, there is another Place where in no Age it has met with
Favor.

And the Reasons why so many Resumptions have been made, might be, First, That
it gave Offense to the Legislative Authority to see the Ministers make use of
this dispensing Power. Secondly, That it appeared the Suggestions were wrong
upon which the Grants were grounded: That is, that the Sovereign did not
proceed Ex certa Scientia, namely, that he was surprised and misinformed in the
value of the Thing given. That he did not proceed Ex mero motu, but that the
Gift was wrested from him by his importunate and undeserving Courtiers. That he
did not proceed Ex Speciali Gratia; but was rather induced to bestow the
Favor, through the necessity of his Affairs, to quiet some great Man, or to
please some powerful Party. And in all probability upon such, or the like
Accounts, Parliaments have looked into Grants, and the best Princes have not
thought it dishonorable to join in Revoking what had been thus Extorted from
them.

And as to the distinction which the Lawyers make between Directive and
Coercive: Admit the Forms by which the Law has directed all Grants shall pass,
should be only Directive to the Sovereign, and devised for his greater Ease and
Safety, yet without doubt they are Coercive to his Ministers. No Lawgivers ever
intended that a solemn Law, made upon mature Deliberation, and prescribing a
Rule in high Affairs of State, should have no effect at all. But the 27 Hen.
VIII. which Chalks out to the Secretary, Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Chancellor,
the regular Steps they are to make in passing Grants, would be of no sort of
signification, if they may pass per Saltum, and by immediate Warrant, without
being entered in the several Offices.

When Parliaments advise the Prince, it is humbly submitted to his Wisdom,
whether or no he thinks fit to approve of their Councils: But when by a written
Law they give Advice, and lay down Rules and Directions in Matters of State for
the Ministers to walk by and observe, without doubt they intend, Advice so
solemnly given, should be followed.

Hitherto we have mentioned the Cautions, Provisions, Restrictions and Forms,
which our Ancestors established, and made use of, to preserve the King's
Revenue, by which the Public was to be supported. But notwithstanding all
this, the Wickedness of Men was either too Cunning, or too Powerful for the
Wisdom of the Laws in being.

And from time to time Great Men, Ministers, Minions, and Favorites, have
broken down the Fences contrived and settled in our Constitution; they have
made a Prey of the Commonwealth, plumed the Prince, and converted to their own
Use, what was intended for the Service and Preservation of the State.

We shall therefore proceed to show, That to obviate this Mischief, the
Legislative Authority has all along interposed with Inquiries, Accusations and
Impeachments, till at last such dangerous Heads were reached.

For as Courts have been watchful to Rob the Prince, so anciently the Barons,
and afterward Parliaments, from time to time have been as vigilant to prevent
his Ruin, showing, in the progress of their Councils, great Wisdom mixed with
Duty, and Temper joined with Courage.

The first Great Person whom we find questioned since the Norman Government,
was Ranulphus Bishop of Durham, who bore the Office, of what we now call *
Dugdale Series Chronica, p. 1.
Lord Treasurer of England, in the time of William Rufus. This Man had been the
Principal Instrument of the Profusion, and of what is its Consequence, those
Extortions that disgraced the Reign of Rufus: Of whose times William of
Malmsbury speaking says, None were then Rich but such as dealt with the
Exchequer, Will. Malms. p. 123.
Nullus Dives, uisi Nummularius. This wicked Minister was brought to Punishment
by Henry I. who cast him into Prison, and loaded him with Chains. Matthew Paris
says, Mat. Paris, p. 56.
De Communi Consilio Gentis Anglorum posuit eum Rex in vinculis. Malmsbury
gives him this Character, Will. Malms. p. 123.
Radulphus Clericus ex infimo genere hominum, Lingua and Assiduitate provectus
ad summum; Expilator Divitum, Exterminator Pauperum, Confiscator alienarum
Hereditatum. Invictus Caussidicus, and cum verbis, tum rebus immodicus, nec
aliorum curaret odium dummodo complaceret Dominum. It seems he was a little
insolent Fellow, who by his fluent Tongue and cringing at Court, had got Power
enough to do much hurt in England: A mischievous Tool against the Public, as
well as an Oppressor of private Men; Subtle to invent Wickedness, and Bold to
put it in Execution, and one who would stick at nothing to raise himself.
Matthew Paris speaking of him says he was, Mat. Paris, p. 56.
Homo perversus, and ad omne Scelus paratus, quem Rex constituerat Procuratorem
suum in Regno ut evelleret, destraeret, raperet and disperderet, and omnia
omnium bona ad Fifci Commodum comportaret. We have thus painted out this
Statesman in the Colors as he is represented by those two Venerable Writers.
And he so much resembles several bad Ministers, who, in the Ages since, have
succeeded both to his Post and Power, that one would think they had chosen to
take him for their Pattern.

In the 5 of Edward II. Pieres de Gaveston was accused in Parliament for having
given the King ill Council, and for having cheated the King of his Treasure,
and sent it beyond Sea, and for having Estranged the King's Heart from his
People, so as he slighted their Councils, and for having removed all faithful
Ministers, and placed only his own Creatures, or Foreigners about the King, and
for having caused the King to grant Lands, Tenements and Offices to himself and
his Heirs, and to diverse other People, (insomuch that by his Wealth he was
become dangerous) to the great damage and injury of the King and his Crown. For
which he was Banished the Realm, so as if he returned he should be treated as
an Enemy to the King, Kingdom and People. But take the Words of the Record
because it is very curious.

Rot. Ord. 5. Edw. 2. Number. 20.
Purceo qe conue chose est, and per le examinement de Prelatz Countes and
Barouns, Chivalers and autres bones Gentz du Roialme trovez, qe Pieres de
Gaveston, ad Malmeuez and mal Conseillez nostre Seignour le Roy, and lad
enticee a malfaire en diverse Manieres and deceivances en accoillant a lui toute
le Tresor le Roi, and lad esloigne horse du Roialme, en attreant a lui royal
Poer, and royal Dignite, come en aliaunce fair de Gentz, par sermentz, de
vivre and morir ovesqe lui encountre touts Gentz, and ceo par le Tresor qe il
purchase de jour en jour, enseignurant surlestate le Roy and de la Corone, en
destruction du Roi, and du Peuple, and especialment enloignant le cuer le
Seignour de ces liges Gentz en despisant lours Counseils, nient soeffrant bons
Ministers fair ley de Terre, en ostant les bons Ministers, mettant ceux de sa
Covine ausi biens Aliens, come autres qi a sa volunt and a son commandment,
offendent droit et ley de Terre, en parnant Terres, Tenements et Baillies du
Roi, a lui et a ses Heirs. Et ad fait, qe le Roi ad done Terres and Tenements
de sa Corone as diverse Gentz, a grand damage et decrese de l Estate le Roi et
de sa Corone. Et ceo ausi bien puis l ordeinement, qe le Roi granta as
Ordeinours de fair au profit de li et de son People, come devant, encountre l
ordeinement des Ordeinours. Et maintient Robbeours Homicides et les fait avoir
le chartre le Roi de Peez, en donant hardement a mesfeseurs de pis fair, et
menant le Roi en Terre de Guerre, sauz commun assent de son Barnage, en peril
de son Corpse, et en destruction du Roialme. Et en fesant sealer blanches
Chartres desoutz le Grand Seal le Roi, en deceit et desheritance du Roy et de
sa Corone, et encontre son Homage, et felonesement fauxment et treterousment ad
fait les chooses susdites a grand dishonor et damage du Roi, et desheritison de
la Corone, et a destruction du People in moults manners. Et ovesqe ceo nous
eantz regard a lez faits le tresnable Roi Pere le Roi qore est, par qi Agard,
lavant dit Pieres forsjura le Roialme d Engleterre, et voleit qe nostre
Seignour le Roi son Fitz forjurast a touz jours la Campaigne de lui, et qi
puis, par comun assent de tout le Roialme, et du Roi, et de lui mesmes, les
Prelatz Counts et Barouns autrefoitz estoit agardez de meisme le Roialme voider
et voida, et qe son retorner nestoit unqes par comun assent, mes solement par
assent des ascuns persons qi, souz Condition, si bien se portast apres son
retourner, a ce se assentirent. Et ore certainement est troves son mal port,
pur qeu^port, et pur Les grandes mauvaisetees Susdites, et pur plusors autres
qe purront aveiner a nostre Seignour le Roi, et a son People, et pur bon accord
nurrer enter le Roi, et ses Gentz, et moltes maniers, de discordes et perils
eschuire. Nous ordeinous, par virtue de la Commission nostre Seignour le Roi a
nous grantee, qe Pieres de Gaveston, come apiert Enemy le Roy, et de son
People, soit de tout exiles, auxi bien horse de Roialme d Engleterre, d Escoce,
d Irland, et de Galls, come de ^o^e la Seignourie nostre Seignour le Roy, auxi
bien dela la mere, come de cea a touz jourz, sans james returner, et qil void
le Roailme d Engleterre, et totes les Terres susdites, et tout outriment la
Seignourie nostre Seignour le Roi, enter ci et la Fest de toutz Seintz prochein
avenir. Et luy donons Port a Dover, en la form susdite et nuelle part
aillours a passer et a voider: Et si le dit Pieres demoerge en le Roialme d
Engleterre ou uuelle part aillours en la Seignourie nostre Seignour le Roi
outre la dit jour qe done luy est de voider et de passer come est susdite,
Adunqe soit fait de luy come del Enemy du Roi et du Roialme et de son People;
Et qe touz ceux qi desormes voant encontre cest ordeinement en droit du dit
Exile ove le peine qe sensuit, soit fait de eux solone ceo qe y appent si de
ceo soint atteintz.

Pieres Gaveston at first was a Man only in the King's Pleasures; but as weak
Princes often remove Men from their Pleasures into their Business, so Gaveston
became presently a Minister of State: For the Records show that he was Guardian
and Lieutenant of the Kingdom in the King's Absence with very immoderate
Powers, and afterward he was constituted Pat. 1. Ed. 2. m. 3.
Lieutenant of Ireland; but the extravagant Honors and Favors conferred upon
him, and the Lands he got from the King, drew, as all our Historians witness,
the Indignation of the Parliament upon him. Walsing. p. 99.
Tho. Walsingham says that the Barons, Librato utrobique Periculo, inveniunt,
quod vivente Petro esse non poterit Pax in Regno, nec Rex abundare Thesauro.
And so they never rested till he was banished the Kingdom.

5 Edw. 2. Rot. Parl. Nu. 22.
In the same Parliament Henry de Beaumont was likewise accused, for that to the
damage and dishonor of the King, he had received the Kingdom of Man, which the
Lords whom the King had consented should be of his standing Council, thought
fit should remain to the Crown; And for that he had procured from the King to
himself other Rents, Lands, Franchises and Offices; And for that he had
procured for others the Grants of Lands, Rents, Tenements, Franchises and
Offices; And for that he had given evil Council to the King contrary to his
Oath. For all which the Judgment upon him was, That he should be outed the
King's Council for ever, and not come near the King's Person, unless he were
summoned to Parliament, or called upon to attend the King in his Wars; Or
unless it were by common Assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons, in
full Parliament; and that all his other Lands should be seized into the King's
Hands until the King should be satisfied, the full value of what he had
received from those Lands so granted to him by the King.

It seems likewise that in this Reign the Ladies were Begging and Intreaguing
at Court. For the Lady Vescey was Rot. ibid. Nu. 23.
accused for having prevailed upon the King to give Sir Henry Beaumont her
Brother, and to others, Lands, Franchises and Offices, to the Damage and
Dishonor of the King, for which she was ordered to repair to her own House,
without ever returning to Court to make stay there.

It Is true (as we have noted before) the King got this whole Act repealed at
the Parliament held at York, 15 Edw. 2. but it was just after he had made a War
upon his People, and put to Death the Tho. Walsing. p. 116.
Earl of Lancaster, of the Blood Royal, and Eleven or Twelve of the other Peers
of England. And what succeeded to this unfortunate Prince upon such an
extraordinary Act of Violence is but too manifest.

The Ministers and Promoters of all the Irregularities committed by that King
were the two Spencers Earls of Winchester and Gloucester, who were put to death
in a tumultuous manner. Col. 2547.
Knyghton indeed says, the Earl of Gloucester was arraigned before Sir William
Trussel Justiciarie. Dominus Hugo Spencer ductus coram domino Willielmo
Trussell Justiciario areniatus est coram eo ad Barrum.

One of the principal Heads of the Accusation against Hugh Spencer was, for
that he had advised the King to give and grant unto the false Traitor the Earl
of Winchester, Andrew Harkely, and to himself, Lands appertaining to the Crown
in disherison thereof.

K^ygh^on Col. 2548.
Hugh apres celle maveiste, vous Consellastes nostre Seignour le Roy, en
desheritaunce de sa Coronne, a doner vostre Piere que fuist faux Traitor, le
Conte de Wyncestre, and Andrewe de Harkely Traitor notorye and attaynte, le
Conte de Cardoyle. Et a vous Hugh la Terre de Cantermaure and altres Terres que
furont proprement Appurtenancez a la Coronne.

For which, and for other Crimes, he was condemned and Executed.

Among the Articles exhibited in Parliament, Anno 4. Edw. 3. against Roger
Mortimer Earl of March, two of 'em are for procuring to himself Grants of the
Crown-Revenue. That he caused the King to make him Earl of March, and to give
Him and his Heirs many Lands, in Disherison of the Crown. And that the said
Roger caused the King to give to Him and his Children and Confederates,
Castles, Towns, Manors and Franchises in England, Ireland and Wales, in
decrease of the Revenues of the Crown.

Judicium Rogeri de Mortimer.
Rot. Parl. 4 Edw. 3.
Et a mesme le Parliament, per son dit Royal Poer a luy accroche, fist tante, qe
nostre Seignour le Roy luy fist Conte de la Marchie, and luy dona plusours
Terres, a luy, and a ses Heirs, en desheritance nostre dit Seignour le Roy and
de sa Corone.

Item le dit Roger per son Royal Poer a luy accroche, fist le Roy doner a luy,
and a ses Enfantz, and a ses Alliez Chastelx Villes Manoirs and Franchises en
Engleterre, Irland and Gales en decrese de sa Corone.

Rot. ibid
For this and for other Crimes, of which some were judged to amount to Treason,
he was condemned to be hanged at Tyburn, and the Sheriffs of London were
ordered to attend the Execution.

In the 10th of Richard II. Michael de la Pool Earl of Suffolk was Impeached in
Parliament upon several Articles, the Principal of which was, For that being
Lord Chancellor, and sworn to promote the King's Profit, he had purchased of
the King Lands, Tenements, and Rents of a great Value, against his Oath, and
such Grants being more than he deserved, considering the great Poverty of the
King and Kingdom. To which he answered that he had no Lands of the King, but
since his being created Earl, and that by way of Exchange. To which the Commons
replied, by showing the Oath he took when he was made Lord Chancellor, the
Effect whereof was for doing Justice, observing the Laws, Councelling the King,
and not to suffer any Damage or Disherison of the Crown, and that by all means
he should promote the King's Profit. And hereupon because he confessed the Gift
of the Lands to him whilst he was Chancellor, and that during the same time,
the Exchange was made of good Lands, for a Casual Custom at the Port of Hull,
they inferred that the same was not for the King's Profit, according to the
Tenor of the Chancellor's Oath; And therefore they pray Judgment. The Judgment
against the said Earl was, That for Breach of his Oath, all the said Manors
and Hereditaments which he had of the King's Gift, should be seized into the
King's Hands, together with all the mean Profits, saving to the Earl his 20 l.
per Annum Creation-Mony in the County of Suffolk. But take the Words of the
Record as far forth as they relate to the present Matter.

Rot. Parl. 10 Ri. 2. P. 1. Number. 1.
Premierement qe le dit Conte estant Chanceller, and jure de fair le Profit du
Roy, purchassa de nostre Seignour le Roy, Terres Tenements et Rents a grand
value, come piert per Records Rolls de la Chancellerie, encontre son serment,
La ou il n'avoit tant desservi, considerez la grante necessite du Roy, et du
Royalme, et outre ce, a cause qe le dit Conte fust Chanceller au temps du dit
Purchasse faite les dites Terres et Tenements, furent extendus a meindre value
qils ne veillent, per an. per grant some, en deceit du Roy.

Rot. ibid. Nu. 6.
Qand al premier Article de son Empechement, cest assavoir depuis qil estoit
Chanceller, qil deust purchasser certeins Terres du Roy, etc. Le dit Conte
respond qe depuis qil fust Chanceller il ne purchassa unqes nulles Terres ne
Tenements du Roy, ne le Roy luy donna, ne al nully des soins, nulles Terres ne
Tenements, tant qe aux temps qe le Roy fist prendre l'estat du Conte, mes per
voie de verrai Exchange, Cest assavoir qe come le dit Conte avoit CCCC Marcs
annuelx sur la Custume de Kyngston sur Hull, per descente de Heritage, pur qeux
il pleust au Roy d assigner au dit Conte Terres et Tenements a la value, et
assignee et ordonna party devant qil fust Chanceller, et party depuis, et ce
au profit du Roy, si bien annuellement come par Cause de une Some de mill
Marcs paiees ou Roy per le dit Conte pour celle cause, etc.

Then he proceeds to give several Particulars of the Agreement, and to set
forth his Merits, and that the King made him take the Honor of Earl upon him
without his seeking, and how he was persuaded to be Chancellor. But it seems
the Parliament did not take his Answer to be sufficient; for the Commons
replied in the Words following.

Rot. ibid. Number. 8.
Et les Communes replians al responce du dit Conte del premier Article,
Monstrent as Seignours la Copy de son serment, fait qant il fust Creez
Chanceller, en maniere quensuit. Vous Jurrez qe bien et Loyallement servirez a
nostre Seignour le Roy, et a son People, en l office de Chanceller, et droit
feres as toutes Gens pouvres et riches, seloncles lois et usages du Royalme, et
loyalement conseillerez le Roy, et son Conseil sellerez, et qe vous ne saverez
ne sufferez le damage ne desberitison le Roy, ne qe les droitures de la Corone
soient destruits per nulle voie, sy avaut come vous le poez destourber, et sy
vous ne poez destourber, vous le ferez savoir clerement et expressement au Roy
ensemblablement ove vostre loyal avis et Conseil, et qe vous ferez et
purchasarez le profit le Roy par tout ou vous le purrez fair resonablement. Si
dieu vous eide et les Seints Evangieles. Prient qe ce lu et bien entendu, et
considerez les Circonstances de son dit responce, sy bien, Cest assavoir de ce
qe and pas dedit, qe il ne receut du don le Roy, puis qil estoit fait Conte,
estant en l office de Chanceller, diverses Terres et Tenements come contenu est
en le Empechement, come qil ad conus ouvertement qil recent du Roy autres
Terres et Tenements qe sont certeins et seures, a la value de qatre Cents Marcs
per an. en Exchange de qatre Cents Marcs annuels, qeux il avoit sur la Custume
de King ston sur Hull qe sont casuels, et nemy sy seures, nient enformant le
Roy clerement de son damage celle party, et coment qil ad dit, qil receut
parties desdites Terres et Tenements issint pris en change devant qil estoit
Chanceller, les Communes dient qil estoit lors du Prive Conseil du Roy, et a ce
jurez, et puis en la Creation del Office de Chanceller astrict de Nouel per
serement, et il en cel Office Agreant as Exchanges par luy devant suppliez,
prist et receust du Roy le remenant desdites Terres et Tenements en plein
perfourmessement des Exchanges susdits et demandent Judgment du Parliament
surtout son responce des susdits.

So that for* the Insufficiency of his Answer the following Judgment was given.

Rot. ibid. Number. 13.
Et purce qe le dit Conte ne allegea point ^n son Responce qil observe le
effect de son ferement, and en ce qil jurrast qe il ne saveroit ni ne
suffreroit le damage, ne la desheritison du Roy, ne qe les droitures de la
Corone fussent destruits, par uulle voie, sy evant come il les poiast
destourber et si il ne les poet destourber il le feroit savoir derement and
expressement au Roy ensemblablement, ove son loyal avise and Counseil and qil
feroit and purchasseroit le Profit le Roy per tout ou il le pourroit fair
resonablement; Et il tant come il estoit ainsy principal Officer du Roy,
Sachant le Estat and necessite du Roy and du Royalme, prist du Roy tiels Terres
and Tenements come est suppose par le Empechment, a luy en le dit premier
Article surmis, and coment qil alleged en son responce qe les dons a luy issint
faits furent confirmez par plein Parliament, il ny a null tiel record en Roulle
de Parliament. Purquoy Agardez est, qe tous les Manoirs Terres and Tenements,
Rents, Services, Feos, Avoesons, Reversions and Profits; ove lour
Appurtenances per luy issint receus du Roy, soient Reseisez and reprises en les
Mains du Roy a avoir and tenir a nostre dit seigneur le Roy, et ses Hoirs sy
pleinement and enheritablement come il les avoit and tenoit devant le don eint
fait al dit Conte, et qe toutz les Issues et Profits ent receus ou leves al
Oeps du dit Conte en le mesme temps soient levez al Oeps nostre Seignour le Roy
des Terres et Chastelx du dit Conte illoques et aillours. Mes ne est pas le
Intention du Roy, ne des Seignours, qe celle Jugement sestende de luy fair
perdre le nom et le Title de Conte ne les vingt livres Annuelx quex le Roy luy
grana prendre des issues du Conte de Suffolk, pur le Nom et Title avantdits, Et
outre purceqe le dit Conte nadpas dedit qil nestoit du prive Conseil du Roy, et
a luy jure quand il demanda primes du Roy la dit Exchange estre faite, et ad
conu qe devant les dites Exchanges perfourmes il fut fait Chanceller en qel
Office il fust astrict per son serement faite en la form avaunt dite.

So that it appears plainly from this Record, That King, Lords and Commons,
took it to be a Crime in the Lord Chancellor, and against his Oath, to take
Lands in Gift or in Exchange from the King; for upon the Chancellors Oath the
Judgment was grounded, it being in those Days thought and understood, that he
who was sworn to purchase the King's Profit, should not enrich himself with the
Revenues of the Crown, and as the Record says, that he chiefly ought not to do
so, who was le Principal Officer, and who knew the State and Necessities both
of King and Kingdom. And it was a very odd Circumstance of those times, that
the Legislature should be necessitated to relieve the King against Frauds
committed by the Principal Judge in Equity, and by the Keeper of his Conscience.

Anno 11. Rich. II. The Legislative Authority was not satisfied with what had
been done the Year before against this Chancellor, but it was thought fit to
proceed farther against Him and other bad Ministers who had attempted to
overthrow the Constitution of this Kingdom.

The Duke of Gloucester Uncle to the King, and Constable of England, the Earl of
Darby, the Earl of Arundel, the Earl of Warwick, and Thomas Earl Marshal,
accused Michael de la Pool and others of High Treason; the Term then used was
they Appealed 'em of Treason. Rot. Parl. 11 Rich. 2. p. 2. m. 7.
Thomas Duc de Gloucester Conestable d Engleterre, Henry Conte de Derby, Richard
Conte de Arundel and de Surry, Thomas Conte de Warwick, and Thomas Conte
Marshall, Appellons Alesandre Ercevesque Deverwik, Robert de Verr Duc d
Irland, Michael de la Pool Conte de Suffolk, Robert Treselian faux Justice, and
Nicholas Brembre faux Chivalier de Londres, de Hautes Trahisons par eux faits
enc^ntre nostre Seignour le Roy and son Royalme, Come Traitors and Ennemies du
Royalme. Qeux Appel and Trahison sont declarez Appointex and Specesiez
pleinement, sy come est contenu en diverses Articles desous Escripts. Et Priont
qe les dits Appelles soient demandez, et qe droit et Justice ent soit fait en
cest present Parliament.

Then these Lords exhibited against Michael de la Pool, and the rest, 39
Articles of High Treason. In the 5th, 6th, and 7th Articles, they are accused
for having procured to themselves and others, and to their Kindred, Grants of
the Crown Lands in England and Ireland, besides Gifts of Money to the Value of
above One Hundred Thousand Marks, by which the Kingdom came to be loaded with
Taxes and Impositions.

5 Art.
Item per le dit Acrochement les avantdits Robert de Verr Duc d Irland and
Michael de la Pool Conte de Suffolk, per assent and Conseil du dit Alesandre
Ercevesqe Deverwik ont fait qe nostre Seignour le Roy sans Assent du Royalme,
ou desert de eux, lour a done per lours abettements diverses Seignouries,
Chastelx, Villes, and Manoirs si been anexes a sa Corone, come autres, sy come
la Terre de Irland, and de Okeham ove les Forests dicelle, and autres Terres,
qe furent al Seignour d Audeley, and autres Grants Terres, au dit Robert Verr
Duc d Irland, and as autres diversement, peront, ils sont grandement Enriches,
and le Roy est devenu pouvre, and ne ad don't i^ se pourra soutenir and porter
les Charges du Royali^^^ sinon per Impositions Taxes ou Tributs ^ettre and
prendre sur son People en d^shiritison de sa Corone and en defeasance de son
Royalme.

6 Art.
Item par le dit Acrochement, les avandits Alexandre Ercevesqe Dewerwik, Robert
de Verr Duc d Irland, Michael de la Pool Cont de Suffolk, et per assent et
counseil desdits Robert Tresilian faux Justice, Nicholas Brembe Chevalier de
Londres, ont fait qe nostre Seignour le Roy a done diverse Manoirs, Terres, et
Tenements, Rents, Offices, Ballies, as diverses autres Persons de lour
Affinite, et as autres diverses Persons des qeux ils ont pris grands dons pur
Brocage pur y^elle cause et auxi pur Cause a tenir avec eux en lour faux
qerelles, et purposes en defeasance du Roy et de son Royalme, sy come est de
Sir Robert Manseil Clerk, Johan Blake, Thomas Usqe et autres diversement.

7 Art.
Item Robert de Verr Duc d Irland, Michael de la Pool Cont de Suffolk, et
Alesandre Ercevesqe Deverwick per assent et counseil de dit Nicholas Brembre,
faux Chevalier de Londres, acrochants a eux royal Poer, ont fait qe nostre dit
Seignour le Roy lour a ^^nne tres grands somes dor et d argent, sy bien de ses
biens et Joiaux propres, come (...) biens et Tresor du Royalme, sy come des
Dismes and Quinsismes et autres Taxes grantez as diverses Parlements pur estre
exploites en deffence et sauvegarde du Royalme, et autrement, qelle some amonte
cent mill Marcs et plus, sy come au dit Robert de Verr Duc d Irland, et autres
diversement, et outre ceo plusioures bones Ordinances et Purposes faits et
ordeinez en Parliament sy bien pur les Gurres come en defense du Royalme ont ilz
destourbes, en grande Arrerisement du Roy et du Royalme.

The Persons accused were sommon'd to answer to the 39 Articles; and not
appearing, the Duke of Gloucester and the other Lords Appellants, pray the
Nonappearance may be recorded.

Rot. Parl. 11 Ri^^. 2. P. 3. m. 14.
Ilz feurent demandez solemnement en le grande sale de Westminster et auxint a
la grande port du Palois de Westminster de venir and respondre, etc.

Le Duc et Cont Appellants, prient au dit Roy nostre Seignour, et aux dits
Seignours, du Parliament qils violent Recorder le defaulte, etc.

After which the King and the Lords took time to deliberate upon the Matter.
Then the Judges, Sergeants and Civilians were called, for to deliver their
Opinions in Law; who said the Appeal was not in the Forms required, either by
the Common or Civil Law. To which the Lord's answered, That the High Court of
Parliament was not bound up to the Forms and Rules of the Courts below. But
take the Words of the Record it self.

-- Rot. ibid.
A qel temps les Justices et Sergeants, et autres Sages de Ley du Royalme, et
auxint les sages de la Ley Civille, furent Chargez de par le Roy nostre dit
Seignour, de doner loyal Conseil as Seignours du Parliament de deuement proceder
en la cause de le susdit Appel, les quex Justices, Sergeants, et Sages de la
Ley du Royalme, et auxint les dits Sages de la Ley Civille, pristont ent
deliberation, et respondront as dits Seignours du Parliament, qils avoient veue
et bien entendu la Tenor du dit Appel, et disoient qe mesme le Appel ne feust
pas fait ne affirm selonc l order qe lune Ley ou lautre requiert; Surqoy les
dits Seignours du Parliament pristront ent deliberation, et avisement, et per
assent du Roy nostre dit Seignour, et de lour Commun accord, estoit declare qe
en si haute crime come est pretendu en cest Appel, qe touch la Person du Roy
nostre dit Seignour, et l estat de tout son Royalme, perpetre per persons qe
sont Peers du Royalme ovesqe autres, le cause ne sera aillours deduit qe en
Parliament ne per autre Ley qe Ley et course du Parliament et qil appertient as
Seigneurs du Parliament et a lour Franchise et Libertee d' auncien Custume du
Parliament destres Jugges en tieux case, et de tieux case ajugger per assent du
Roy, et qe ensy sera fait en cest Cas per Agarde du Parliament: Purceqe le
Royalme d Engleterre ne estoit devant ces heures, ne a lentent du Roy nostre
dit Seignour, et Seignours du Parliament onqe ne sera rule ne, govern per la
Ley Civille, et auxint lour intent uest pas de ruler ou Gouverner si haute
cause come cest Appel est, qe ne sera aillours try ne termine qen Parliament,
come dit est per course Process et order usee en ascun Court plus bas deinse
mesme le Royalme, qeux Courts et Places, ne sont qe Executors d ancienes Leys
et Custumes du Royalme, et Ordinances et establissements du Parliament. Et fust
avis au mesmes les Seignours du Palement per assent du Roy nostre dit Seignour,
qe cest Appel fuist fait et asirme bien, et asses duement, et le Process
dicelle bone et effectuell, selonc les Leys et Course du Parliament, et per tiel
lagarderont et adjugeront. Et a mesme jour le Roy nostre dit Seignour et
Seignours du Parliament, seants en la dite blanch sale en plein Parliament les
ditz Appellants prieront qe le Defaute des ditz Ercevesqe Duc Cont et Robert
Tresilian, Appellees comme devant, feuse Record.

After which the Persons accused were again summoned, and appeared not, but
alleged, (as we may suppose by their Council, for here the Record is silent)
That they had not sufficient Notice of the Matter contained in the Appeal. Upon
which the Parliament proceeded to Judgment.

In which the Judgment was, That several of the Articles against the said
Persons contained High Treason, of which the Parliament pronounced them Guilty;
And that they were guilty of the Crimes laid down in these other Articles,
which were not judged to amount to Treason, among which were the 5th, 6th, and
7th Articles. But take the Words of the Record.

Rot. ibid.
Surqoy les dits Seignours Temporels, per Commandment du Roy nostre dit
seignour examineront les Articles contenus en ledit Appel, and le Couple des
dits Ercevesqe Deverwick, Duc, Cont and Robert Tresilian, Appellez come devant,
en celle party par grand Labor and Diligence, and per continuance de diverses
jours tanqe le Judy le 13 Jour dudit mois de fevrier, and par lour avisement et
bone deliberation firent declaration and Adgugeront qe le 1 and 2. le 11. le 15
and le 17 Articles contenus en le dit Appel sont Trefon. Et qe ce qest contenu
en le 22 Article de mesme le Appel, touchant la levee des Gents, pur guerroer
and destruire les Seignours, and Lieges du Roy, est aussy. Treson and qe les
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 37, 38, 39. de mesme le Appel, sont aussi Treson, come est
remember en le avaunt dit roulle, du dit Appel. Et troveront per deue
Examination, and per proves et emformations per tous les voies qils pourroit,
lour Consciences deucment emformer, qe le dit Ercevesqe, Duc, Cont, and Robert
Tresilian, Appelles come devant, feurent Coulpables notairement en icelles cest
assavoir Chacun de eux en chacun Article qe luy touch. Et auxint qils sont
coulpables en touts les autres Articles contenus en le dit Appel, nient
declares au present pur Treson, cest assavoir chacun deux en chacun Article qe
luy touch, en presence du dit Roy nostre Seignour, et Seignours du Parliament
Temporels, seant en la dite blanch sale en plein Parliament mesme le jeudy le
13 jour du dit mois de Fevrier, les dits Duc and Contes Appellants prieront as
dits Roy nostre Seignour and Seignours du Parliament illoques estants qe les
dits Ercevesqe, Duc Conte et Robert Tresilian Appelles come devant fussent
adjuges convicts de les hautes Trahisons contenus en ^e dit Appel.

Jugement Rot. ibid.
Parqoy les dits Seignours du Parliament illoqes estants come Juges du Parliament
en cest Case, per Assent du Roy nostre Seignour, Prononceront lour declaration
avaunt dite and adjugeront lesdits Ercevesqe, Duc, Cont, et Robert Tresilian,
appelles come devant, coulpables et convicts des Tresons contenus en les dits
Articles, declares pur Treson, come devant, Et Agarderont qe mesmes les dits
Duc, Cont, Robert Tresilian, appelles come devant, fussent Treinez et penduz
come Traitors et Ennemies au Roy nostre dit Seignour, et a son Royalme, Et qe
les dits Ercevesqe, Duc, Cont, Robert Tresilian, Appelles come devant, et lours
Heirs fussent desheritez a tous jours, et qe lours Terres et Tenements, Biens
et Chateux, feussent forfaits au Roy nostre dit Seignour. Et les Temporalites
du dit Ercevesqe Deverwik, del Ercevesche Deverwik saisis es mains le Roy
nostre dit Seignour.

In the same Parliament Simon de Beurle Lord Chamberlain, among other Crimes,
was Impeached by the Commons for having persuaded the King to make large Gifts
out of the Crown-Revenue to Foreigners, Bohemians, to the Impoverishment and
Oppression of the People.

* Rot. ibid. Art. 7.
Item qe la ou le dit Simon de Beurle fust Chamberlein nostre Seignour le Roy,
en sa tender Age, and tenus de luy Conseiller pur le mieux, en profit de luy et
de son Royalme, le dit Simon per son malveis Inginie, et procurement, conceilla
nostre Seignour le Roy davoir deinz son Houstiel grande Plenitee des Aliens,
Beamers, et autres, et de les donner grands douns des Revenus et Commoditees du
Royalme, peront nostre Seignour le Roy est grantement empovres et le People du
Royalme outrement opreses.

The Parliament thought the Duke of Ireland so dangerous a Man that to be rid
of him they had given the King a Grant of 30000 Marcs; but when Suffolk
returned after his first Disgrace, the Duke of Ireland returned with him. About
this time that the Ministry might be complete, and of a piece, there was a Lord
Treasurer of the same Stamp with the Chancellor, Chamberlain, and the Duke of
Ireland, to wit, John Foord Bishop of Durham, of whom Sir John Heyward gives
this Character* Life of Hen. 4. p. 20.
He was a Man of little depth, either in Learning or Wisdom, but one that had
the Art of seeming, in making the best Show of whatsoever he spoke or did: And
rising from a mean Estate to so high a pitch of Honor, he exercised the more
excessively his Riot, Avarice, and Ambition, not able to moderate the Lusts and
Desires which former Want had kindled. He at the same time was removed from the
Council, and turned out of his Office of Treasurer.

We have dwelt the longer upon Michael de la Pool, because it is the first
formal and regular Impeachment that we meet with in the Records. And perhaps it
will not be unnecessary to say something of a Man that so much drew upon him
the Hatred of the People. Life of Hen. 4. p. 16.
Hayward says, He was a Merchant's Son in London* and growing Mighty on the
sudden, he could not govern himself in the Change: But Prosperity laid open the
secret Faults of his Mind, which were suppressed and choked before. Thomas of
Walsingham calls him Michael At Pole, and says he was convicted in Parliament
of notorious Frauds, Walsing* p. 324. Number. 10*
Convicerant eum nempe de multis Fraudibus, et quibusdam proditionibus in
Regem, quos nequaquam inficiari nequibat, unde et cum responsis astaret, et
objecta negare nequibat, Rex pro ipso verecundatus et rubore suffusus, caput
agitans, heu! heu! inquit Michael, vide quid fecisti. But as soon as the
Parliament was up, the King took him into greater Favor than before. But the
Weight of a Parliament will at last bear down a bad Minister, so that de la
Pool durst not stand the next Sessions, but fled to France where he died in
Exile. But take from Walsingham the Character of this Chancellor, with the
Account of his Death. Ibid. p. 339.
Hac Aestata perfidiae promptuarium; Sentina Avaritiae, Auriga Proditionis,
Archa Malitiae, Odii Seminator, Mendacii Fabricator, susurro nequissimus, dolo
praestantissimus, artificiosus detractor, Patriae delator, Michael At Pole,
quondam Comes Southfolchiae Regnique Cancellarius sed nunquam Consiliarius,
concessit in fata Parisiis, merito perfidum evomens Spiritum in terra peregrina.

Simon de Beurle whom the Commons had Impeached that Parliament, was beheaded
at Tower Hill. His being Knight of the Garter exempted him from a more
ignominious Sentence that was pronounced against him. This Man's sudden Rise
from 20 Marcs to 3000 Marcs per Annum, drew the Hatred of the People upon him.
Knyghton Col. 2727.
Dominus de Burlee qui de Patrimonio haereditario expendre non valuit ultra XX
Marcas, sed in paucis annis in obsequio praedicti Regis crevit ad ultra valorem
trium mill Marcarum annui proventus.

Some perhaps will object, That in the 21 Rich. 2. most of what had been Rot.
Parl. 21 Ri. 2. Number. 47, 48.
done 10 and 11 of the same Reign was repealed. It Is true the Fact is so, For
Richard, after he had treacherously got into his Hands the Duke of Gloucester
his Uncle, and after he had imprisoned the Earls of Arundel and Warwick, the
only three Lords in whom the People placed any Confidence, the Nation was quite
disperited, insomuch that the King was able to pack a Parliament; which yet
could not be brought to do his Business, 'till it was adjourned from
Westminster to Shrewsbury. There he did what he would by the Help of Sir John
Bushie (then Speaker of the House of Commons) Sir William Bagot, and Sir John
Green, of whom Sir Life of Hen. 4. P. 84.
John Hayward says, "These were then in all the Credits and Authority with the
King, and his chiefest Schoolmasters, both of Cruelty and Deceit: They were
proud, arrogant and ambitious, and upon confidence of the King's Favor,
professed Enemies to Men of ancient Nobility; to the end, that being lately
start up, they might become more famous by maintaining Contention with great
Persons. And first by their importunate Travail all the Charters of Pardon,
granted by the King were in this Parliament annulled and revoked." These
Pardons were revoked while the Parliament sat at Westminster, where Thomas
Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury was banished, and his Temporalities seized:
All the other* irregular Matters were transacted at Shrewsbury* But what was
the End of all this Violence, and breaking in upon the Rights of Parliament?
It Is seen in the Story, the People thereupon grew so discontented that Henry
Duke of Lancaster was encouraged to come and invade the Kingdom with some few
Friends, and of Soldiers, only fifteen Lances in his Company, who was
cheerfully embraced by the whole Nation. One of the first Things done in the
Reign of Henry the 4th was to Repeal all that had passed at the Parliament held
at Shrewsbury, and to affirm all that was done 11 Rich. 2. Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. 4.
Number. 66 and 67.
Qel Parliament feust tenuz pur Grand honur et Comune Profit de tout le Royalme.
And here it is to be noted, That in the First Article against King Richard II.
when he abdicated the Throne, 'twas objected to him, That he did wastfully
spend the Treasure of the Realm, and had given the Possessions of the Crown to
Men unworthy, by reason whereof new Charges were laid on the Necks of the poor
Commonalty. But take the whole Article.

Rot. ibid. Number. 18.
Imprimis abjicitur Regi Richardo, quod propter malum regimen suum videlicet
bona et Possessiones ad Coronam suam spectantia, etiam personis indignis
donando, et alias indiscrete dissipando, et ob hoc collectas et alia Onera
gravia et importabilia Populo sine causa imponendo, nec non alia mala iunumer
abilia perpetrando, alias de assens^^, et mandato suis per totu^ Parliamentum
ad gubernationem Regni certi Praelati et alii Domini temporales erant electi,
et assignati, qui totis viribus suis circa justam Gubernationem regni, propriis
sumptibus suis, fideliter laborarent, tamen Rex facto per eum Conventiculo, cum
suis complicibas, dictos dominos tam Spirituales quam Temporales circa Regni
utilitatem occupatos de alta Proditione impetere proponebat Justiciarios Regni
ad suum nefandum propositum roborandum metu mortis et cruciatus Corporis
violenter attraxit, dictosdominos destruere satagendo.

The Fate of Michael de la Pool could not work upon his Grandson William de la
Pool, so as to make him a better Man toward the Public. For we find this
William Duke of Suffolk, treading in his Grandfather's Steps, and so acting in
his Ministry, as to provoke an Accusation from the House of Commons.

The Grants out of the Crown Revenue which he had procured for himself, and
those of his Alliance and Party, occasioned so much popular Anger, that in the
28 Year of Henry VI. he drew upon himself an Impeachment, the first part of
which contains Matter of High Treason; in the second part he is accused of
diverse great Offenses, Misprisions, untrue Labors, and false Deceits; but we
shall only take notice of those Articles which relate to our present Subject.

Rot. Parl. 28 Hen. 6. Number. 28.
To the King our Soverayne Lord shows, and with dolorous Lamentations
Compleyneth your true feithfull Subgettes and Commons being in this your
present Parliament, by your Commandment Roial, That William de la Pole, Duke
of Suffolk, has done, and caused to be done, ayents your Regalie, Honor,
Estate and Prosperity of your most noble Person, and the Well of your true
Subgettes of your Reames of England, and France, your Duchies, Guyen, and
Normandy, and other Places under your Obeisance, diverse great Offenses,
Misprisions, untrue Labors and falls Deceytes in Manner and Form ensueying.

Number. 29.
First, The seid Duke the 16th Year of your Reign, then being next and
Pryvyest of your Counseil, and Steward of your Household, then and many Years
seth, for covetise of great lucre of good singulerly to himself, sturred and
moeved your Highness, the seid 16th Year, Ye then being in Prosperity, and
havyng great Possessions, to yeve and grant much party of your seid
Possessions to diverse Persons in your seid Reame of England, by the which ye
be gretely impoverished, the Expenses of your honorable Household, and the
Wages and Fees of your menyal Servants not paid, your Warderobe, the
Reparations of your Castells and Manners, and your other ordinary Charges
were not had satisfied nor do, and so by his subtle Counseil, importune and
unprofitable Labor, to your most High and Royal Estate, the Revenues of the
Demesnes and Possessions of your Corone, your Duchy Lancastre, and other
your Enheritaunces have be so amennsed and amentysed, that your Commons of
this your Reame have be so ymportably charged that it is nygh to their fynal
Destruction.

Number. 30.
Item, The seid Duke havying alwey inordinate Covetise, has by sotill means
and sinistre Suggestions, for his especyal availle, caused you to grant many
Privileges Fraunchises, etc.

Number. 31.
Item, The seid Duke, for the singular enritchyng of his Nece, and her Husbond,
Son to the Capidawe, caused you to make the seid Son Earl of Kendale, to geve
him great Possessions and Enheritaunces in England, and over that to grant
him dyvers Castells, Lordshipps and great Possessions in your Duchy of Guyen,
to the yearly value of one thousand pound and more, etc.

Number. 32.
Item, The seid Duke, within this your Reame, has untruly Counseilled you to
grant fro you, without due Consideration the Castle of Mawlyon de Sool in
Guyen, etc.

The Five next following Articles relate to his Transactions in Foreign Parts,
which we omit.

Number. 38.
Item, Whereas well full many Quinsismes Dismes Subsidies of Merchandises and
other Charges have been granted to you by the Commons of this your Reame
assembled in your Parlements, as Dismes and other Charges spirituel, have been
granted to you by the Clergy of this your Reame, for the defense and tuytion
of the same, and the sauf kepying of the Sea, the seid Duke of Suffolk has
caused great party of the Revenues hereof to ben applied to other Use and
Dispense, to you not Profitable; and so the defense of this your Reame, and the
sauf keeping of the Sea not had nor kept, to our great empoverishyng and hurt
of this your Reame.

Number. 39.
Item, The seid Duke of Suffolk has caused the French Queen to have of the
Revenues of this your Reame, etc.

Number. 40.
Item, That where the Lord Sudeley, late your Treasourer of this your Reame,
the time of his departier out of his seid Office, of his great Troth and
Prudence for the defense of your seid Reame, and support of the Charges
necessary of the same, left in your Treasourie in ready Money and sure payment
the some of 60000 l. of Quinsismes and Dismes, and other Revenues of this your
Reame, which Money, if it had be well dispended, and to such intent as it was
left fore, in your Tresourie, would gretely have helped to the Defense of the
same, the great part of which 60000 l. by the Labor and Means of the seid
Duke of Suffolk, has been myscheavously yeven and distribute to himself, his
Friends, and Wele-willers: For lakke of which Treasoure no Armee nor competent
Ordeinance might be sufficiently in due time purveyed for thees Premises.

Number. 41.
Item, the seid Duke of Suffolk, by his full comberous Suyte, and falls colored
Suggestions, without eney Merit or deservyng, has optayned of your Geft to
him in Estate of Enheretaunce the Erldome of Pembroke, the Reversion of the
Lordshippe of Haverford West, after the Death of Sir Rowland Lenthale with other
great Castells and Lordshipps, as well in England as in Wales, and dyvers great
Wards and Marriages of Heirs, and their Enheritaunces, in special of Margerette
Doughterr and Heir of John late Duke of Somerset, by which ye have had over
great damage, for it would heve sufficed to a great part of the Expense of
your Household.

The next Article relates to his having embezzel'd several Bonds remaining in
the Treasury. The next to his having embezzel'd several Writs. The next for his
having procured an irregular Pardon for William Tailleboys a Debtor to the
King. Which Articles being long we omit.

Number. 45.
Item, The seid Duke conceyvyng himself to be with you privyest, and best
trusted, by full many Years has presumed upon himself to name to yovre
Highness, and caused to be made dyvers Persons Shirreves of many your
Countees, in this your Reame, some for lucre of good, and some to be applyable
to his intent and Commandment, to fulfylle his Desires and Wrytyngs, for such
as him lyked; to thentent to enhaunce himself and have over great and
unfyttyng Rule in this your Reame: Whereof ensued, that they that would not be
of his Affinite in their Countries, were every Matter, true or falls, that he
favored, was furthered and speed, and true Matters of such Persons as had
not his Favor, were hyndered and put abakke, Perjuries thereby increased, many
of your true Lieges by his Might and help of his Adherents disherited,
impoverished and distrowed, etc.

The next Article relates to one of his Foreign Transactions.

Number. 47.
Of all which Offenses, Misprisions and untrue Labors, and false Deceytes, in
the seid Atticles specifyed, We your seid Commons Accuse and Empeche the seid
Duke of Suffolk. And in the most humble wise beseech and pray your Highness,
that this been enacted in this your high Court of Parliament. And that it may
be proceeded upon the Premises against the seid Duke, during the same Parliament,
as the Matters and Causes forefeid requiren, in Conservation of Justice, to the
singular Comfort of all your Liege People, your Rightwisenesse considering
that the said Misprisions, Fawtes and other full untrue colored Counseils and
myscheivous Deeds of the same Duke, which to reherce were overlong, and to
diffuse have been the Ground and Cause of the Subversion of your Laws and
Justice and Execution thereof, and to the nygh likely Destruction of this your
Reame and other Places under your Obeysaunce.

Number. 48.
The 9th of March the Duke was brought from the Tower, where the Accusations
and Impeachments of the Commons were declared to him, of which he desires a
Copy.

Number. 49.
The 13th of March the Duke was again brought before the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, where, kneeling, he answered all the Articles of Treason by himself,
and utterly denied them.

Number. 50.
The 14th day of March the Chief Justice rehearsed to all the Lords by the
King's Commandment, saying, that it is well in your Remembrance, in what wise
the Duke of Suffolk demeaned him here yesterday, And upon that axed a Question,
What Advyse the Lords would yeve to the King? what is now to do furthermore in
the matter, which Advyse was deserred unto Monday then next coming, on the
which Monday was noothyng done in that matier.

Number. 51.
Memorandum, That on Tuesday the 17th day of March the King sent for all his
Lords both Spirituell and Temporell then being in Town [then the Lords present
are recited] into his innest Chamber, with a Gabill Window, over a Cloister,
within his Paleys of Westminster, and whenn they were all assembled, the King
sent for the Duke of Suffolk, the which Duke, whenn he came into the Kings
Presence, he kneeled down, and so he kneeled continuelly stille, unto the time
the Chancellor of England had seid to him the Kings Commandment, in Form
that follows.

Sire ye be well remembered, when ye were last in the Kings Presence and his
Lords of your Answers and Declarations upon certain Articles touching
Accusations and Impechements of great and horrible things put upon you by the
Commons of the Land assembled in this present Parliament, in there first Bill
presented by them to the Kings Highness, and how at that time ye put you
not upon your Parage. What would ye sey now further more in that matier.

And the seid Duke answered and seid, they were too horrible to speak more of
them, and seid openly to the King, and all the Lords, that all the Articles
comprehended in the seid Bille touching the Kings high Person and thastate of
his Royalme, he trusts to God he has answered hem sufficiently for he has
denied the Days, the Years, the Places, and the Commumications hadd, which
were never thought nor wrought; seying utterly they ben^fals, and untrue and in
manner impossible, for he seid so great things coud not be done nor brought
about by himself alone, unless that other Persons had done her party, and
be privy thereto, as well as he, and he took his Soul to perpetuel Damnation if
ever he knew more of thoo Matters than the Child in the Moders Womb. And so
he not departing from his seid Answers and Declaration, submytted him holy to
the Kings Rule and Governance, to do with him as him list, wheruppon the seid
Chaunceller by the Kings Commandment seid unto him again in this Form.

Sire y conceyve you that ye not departing from your Answers and Declarations
in the Matters aforeseyd, not puttyng you upon your Parage, submit you
holy to the Kings Rule and Governaunce.

Wherefore the King commands me to sey you, that as touching the great and
horrible things in the seid first Bille comprised, the King holds you nether
declared nor charged.

And as touching the second Bille, put against you touching Misprysions which
be not Crymynal, the King by force of your Submission by his own Advyse, and
not reporting him to thadvyse of his Lords, nor by wey of Judgment, for he is
not in place of Judgment, puts you to his Rule and Governaunce, That is to
say that ye, before the first day of May next coming, shall absent your self
out of his Reame of England. And also from the seid first Day of May unto the
end of five Years next following, and fully complete, ye shall absteyne to
abide in the Reame of France, or in any other Lordshippes or Places being
under his Obeysaunce whersoever they be. And that ye shull not show nor wait
nor no Man for you, as far forth as ye may let it, no malice evil will, harm
ne hurt to any Person of what degree he be of, or to any of the Commons of
this Parliament, in noe manner of wise, for any thing done to you in this seid
Parliament or else where.

And forthwith the Viscount Beamount, on the behalf of the seid Lords both
Spirituels and Temporelx, and by their Advyse Assent and Desire recited seid
and declared to the Kings Highness, that this that was so decreed and done by
his Excellence, concerning the person of the seid Duke, proceeded not by their
Advyse and Counseil, but was done by the Kings own demeanaunce and rule,
wherefore they besought the King that this their seiyng might be enacted in the
Parliament Roll, for their more declaration hereafter, with this Protestation,
that it should not be nor tourn in prejudice nor derogation of them, their
Heirs ne of their Successors in time coming, but they may have and enjoy
their Lybertee and Freedom in case of their Parage hereafter, as freely and
as largely as ever they or any of their Auncesters or Pedecessours had and
enjoyed before this time.

Thus William de la Pool, Duke of Suffolk, the Kings Favorite and the Queens
Minion, was impeached by the Commons, and banished by the Regal Authority.
Graft. Chron. p. 609.
Grafton speaking of him, says, He was notorious for enrychyng Himself with the
Kings Goods and Lands, gathering together and making a Monopoly of Offices,
Fees, Wards and Ferms, by reason whereof the Kings Estate was greatly mynished
and decayed, and he and his Kin highly exalted and enriched.

Ibid. p. 610.
Besides the same Author says, He had dipped his hands in Blood, having been a
chief Instrument in contriving the Murder of Humphry Duke of Gloucester. But
Sanguinary Men seldom escape unpunished, for this Duke of Suffolk had his own
Head struck off upon the side of a Cock-boat by a Servant belonging to the Duke
of Exeter.

Cot. Post. p. 280. In his Speech to the House of Commons.
Sir Robert Cotton cites an Old Author, who gives an admirable Description of
those times. He says, I will tell you what I found since this Assembly at
Oxford, written by a Reverend Man twice Vice Chancellor of this Place: his Name
was Gascoin; a Man that saw the Tragedy of De la Pool: He tells you, that the
Revenues of the Crown were so rent away by ill Council, that the King was
enforced to live deTallagiis Populi: That the King was grown in debt quinque
centena millia librarum: That his great Favorite, in treating of a foreign
Marriage, had lost his Master a foreign Duchy. That to work his Ends, he had
caused the King to adjourn his Parliament In villis and remotis partibus Regni,
where few People, propter defectum hospitii and victualium, could attend, and
by shifting that Assembly from place to place, to enforce (I will use the
Authors Words) illos paucos qui remanebant de Communitate Regni, concedere Regi
quamvis pessima. When the Parliament endeavored by an Act of Resumption, the
just and frequent way to repair the languishing State of the Crown (for all
from Hen. 3. but one, till the 6 of Hen. 8. have used it) this great Man told
the King it was Ad dedecus Regis, and forced him from it: To which the Commons
answered, although Vexati laboribus and Expensis, quod nunquam concederent
Taxam Regi, until by Authority of Parliament, Resumeret actualiter omnia
pertinentia Coronae Angliae. And that it was Magis ad dedecus Regis, to leave
so many poor men in intolerable want, to whom the King stood then indebted. Yet
could not all good Council work, until by Parliament that bad Great Man was
banished, which was no sooner done, but an Act of Resumption followed the
Inrollment of the Act of his Exilement.

Sir Robert Cotton, that learned Antiqary, is so entirely in the Right in this
Assertion, that whoever looks over the Records will find, that there is not so
much as a line interposed between the Proceedings against the Duke of Suffolk,
and the Act of Resumption, so quickly they followed one another: Which ought to
be a perpetual Notice and Lesson to Posterity, that when the People of England
desire an Act of Resumption, the Work must begin with Impeaching Corrupt
Ministers.

We have hitherto produced Impeachments of elder Times, which perhaps the
Persons concerned in point of Interest, will call old musty Records; We shall
therefore now proceed to show some Presidents of a later date.

As our Ancestors held it a Crime for Men to procure to themselves Offices
above their Capacity, and Gifts and Grants from the Crown beyond their Deserts,
so in this latter Age the House of Commons have thought the like Proceedings
not for the King's Honor, and dangerous to the Public.

2 Co^* 1.
It was an Article against the Duke of Buckingham, that he had such a
Multiplicity of High Offices in the State, as no one Person could well and
truly discharge.

That for his own particular Gain he had sold Patents to be Peers of England,
to the prejudice of the Gentry, and dishonor of the Nobility of this Kingdom.

That besides his great Employments, and the Profits thereunto belonging, which
might have satisfied any moderate Ambition, He had procured to himself several
Grants of the Crown Revenue, amounting to a high Value.

But that the Reader may have this matter of Impeachments more fully before
him, we shall here incert the three Articles which have Reference to our
present subject, tho they are already published in Rushworth.

Rush. Coll. 1 vol. p. 306.
Art. I. That whereas the Great Offices, expressed in the said Duke's Style and
Title, heretofore have been the singular Preferments of several Persons,
eminent in Wisdom and Trust, and fully able for the weighty Service, and
greatest Employments of the State, whereby the said Offices were both carefully
and sufficiently executed by several Persons, of such Wisdom, Trust, and
Ability: And others also that were employed by the Royal Progenitors of our
Sovereign Lord the King in Places of less Dignity, were much encouraged with
the Hopes of Advancement. And whereas diverse of the said Places severally of
themselves, and necessarily require the whole care, industry, and attendance of
a most provident, and most able Person: He the said Duke, being young and
unexperienced, has, of late Years, with exorbitant Ambition, and for his own
profit and advantage, procured and engrossed into his own hands the said
several Offices, both to the danger of the State, the prejudice of that Service
which should have been performed in them, and to the great discouragement of
others; who by this his procuring and engrossing of the said Offices, are
precluded from such hopes, as their Virtues, Abilities and Public Employments,
might otherwise have given them.

p. 334.
Art. IX. Whereas the Titles of Honor of this Kingdom of England were wont to
be conferred as great Rewards, upon such virtuous and industrious Persons as
had merited them by their faithful Service; the said Duke, by his importunate
and subtle Procurement, had not only perverted that ancient and most honorable
Way, but also unduly, for his own particular Gain, he has enforced some that
were rich (though unwilling) to purchase Honor: as, the Lord R. Baron of T.
who, by practice of the said Duke and his Agents, was drawn up to London, in or
about October, in the Two and twentieth Year of the Reign of the late King
James of famous Memory, and there so threatened and dealt withal, that by reason
thereof he yielded to give, and accordingly did pay the sum of Ten thousand
pounds to the said Duke, and to his use: For which said Sum, the said Duke, in
the Month January, in the Two and twentieth Year of the said late King procured
the Title of Baron R. of T. to the said Lord R. In which practice, as the said
Lord R. was much wronged in this particular, so the example thereof tends to
the prejudice of the Gentry, and dishonor of the Nobility of this Kingdom.

p. 340.
Art. XII. He the said Duke not contented with the great Advancement formerly
received from the late King, of famous Memory, by his procurement and Practice,
in the fourteenth Year of the said King, for the support of the many Places,
Honors, and Dignities conferred on him, did obtain a Grant of diverse Manners,
Parcel of the Revenue of the Crown, and of the Duchy of Lancaster, to the
yearly value of One thousand six hundred ninety seven pounds two shillings
halfpenny farthing, of the old Rent, with all Woods, Timber, Trees, and
Advowson; part whereof amounting to the Sum of Seven hundred forty seven
pounds thirteen Shillings and four Pence, was rated at Two and thirty thousand
Pounds, but in truth of a far greater Value. And likewise in the Sixteenth Year
of the same Kings Reign, did procure diverse others Manners annexed to the Crown
of the yearly value, at the old Rent, of Twelve hundred Pounds or thereabouts,
according as in a Schedule hereunto annexed appears: In the Warrant for
passing of which Lands he, by his great Favor procured diverse unusual Clauses
to be incerted, (viz.) That no Perquisites of Courts should be valued, and that
all Bailiffs Fees should be reprised in the Particulars upon which those Lands
were rated; whereby a President has been introduced, which all those who,
since that time, have obtained any Lands from the Crown, have pursued to the
damage of his late Majesty, and of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, to
an exceeding great Value. And afterward he surrendered to his said Majesty
diverse Manors and Lands, parcel of those Lands formerly granted unto him, to
the Value of Seven hundred twenty three Pounds eighteen Shillings and two Pence
Halfpenny per annum; in consideration of which surrender, he procured diverse
other Lands of the said late King to be sold and contracted for, by his own
Servants and Agents, and thereupon has obtained Grants of the same, to pass
from his late Majesty, to several Persons of this Kingdom, and has caused
Tallies to be stricken for the Money, being the Consideration mentioned in
those Grants in the Receipt of the Exchequer, as if any such Moneys had really
come to his Majesty's Coffers; whereas the Duke (or some other by his
Appointment) has indeed received the same Sums, and expended them upon his
own Occasions. And notwithstanding the great and inestimable Gain by him made
by the sale of Offices, Honors, and by others Suits by him obtained from his
Majesty, and for the countenancing of diverse Projects, and other Courses,
burdensome to his Majesty's Realms, both of England and Ireland; the said Duke
has likewise, by his procurement and practice, received into his hands, and
disbursed to his own use, exceeding great Sums, that were the Moneys of the
late King of famous memory, as appears also in the said Schedule hereunto
annexed: And the better to color his doings in that behalf, has obtained
several Privy-Seals from his late Majesty, and his Majesty that now is,
warranting the Payment of great Sums to Persons by him named, causing it to be
recited in such Privy-Seals, as if those Sums were directed for seeret
Services concerning the State, which were notwithstanding disposed of to his
own use; and other Privy-Seals by him have been procured for the discharge of
those Persons without Account; and by the like fraud and practice, under color
of free Gifts from his Majesty he has gotten into his hands great Sums which
were intended by his Majesty, to be disbursed for the preparing, furnishing and
victualling of his Royal Navy; by which secret and colorable devices the
constant and ordinary course of the Exchequer has been broken, there being no
means by matter of Record to charge either the Treasurer or Victualler of the
Navy with those Sums which ought to have to come to their hands, and to be
accounted for to his Majesty; and such a Confusion and Mixture has been made
between the Kings Estates and the Dukes as cannot be cleared by the legal
Entries and Records, which ought to be truly and faithfully made, and kept,
both for the safety of his Majesty's Treasure, and for the indemnity of his
Officers, and Subjects whom it does concern. And also in the Sixteenth Year of
the said King, and in the Twentieth Year of the said King, he did procure to
himself several Releases from the said King of diverse great Sums of ^^ney of
the said King by him privately received, and which he procured, that he might
detain the same for the support of his Places, Honors, and Dignities. And
these things, and diverse others of the like kind, as appears in the Schedule
annexed, has he done, to the exceeding diminution of the Revenue of the Crown,
and in deceit both of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and of the late
King James of famous Memory, and to the detriment of the whole Kingdom.

The Duke escaped this Storm by the sudden Dissolution, which was chiefly to
save him, however in the next Parliament 4 Car. 1. he was again attacked as
freshly as before, which again he had Interest enough to get dissolved; but had
he lived to see another, he must undoubtedly have sunk under the just Anger of
the House of Commons.

For the People of England have never patiently born to see immoderate Wealth,
Power and Honors, with variety of Great Offices, conferred upon any single
Person.

Hardly any Favorite had Nobler Qualities than this great Man; He was
Beautiful* in his Person, Magnificent in his Nature, and not without either
Heart or Understanding. Many People had tasted of his Private Liberalities; He
would hunt out for Persons of Merit, and bring 'em from their most secret
Retirements, into Business. He was rough only to his Enemies, but most earnest
and ready to oblige his Friends; He would often get for others what he might
conveniently have kept for himself; He governed not only his Domestic Affairs,
but his Transactions in the State, by the Advice of a select number of Friends,
all able Men, but not engaged in Public Matters, whom he retained in his
Service by Pensions out of his own Purse. And yet, thus qualified as he was, it
was not thought reasonable in Parliament, that so high Honors, so much Wealth
and Power, and such a multiplicity of Employments, should be conferred upon so
young a Man.

If such a one could not stand before the People, much less will they, in any
future Reign, bear to see Men with the like Wealth, poured upon 'em, and in the
like Station of Power and Favor, who have none of his Qualifications, who are
contemptible in their Figures, who make no Expense but what tends to their
private Luxury, of whose Bounty no one ever tasted, who bar the Court Gates
to*any Merit, who never did any kind Office, who make a sale of all
Employments, who creep to their Enemies, and slight their Friends, who never
did good but for themselves, or to here and there an humble Flatterer, and who
never, in their Transactions for the State, govern themselves by the Advice of
grave Friends, but act all things upon their own giddy Heads, ever drowned in
Wine, or heated by Debauches.

Journal of the House of Commons.
But to return to our present Matter. Martis die 24 Nov. 1640. There were
Reported eight Articles in maintenance of the Commons Accusation against the
Earl of Strafford, which were agreed upon the day following, and of which the
IIId Article is, That the better to enrich and enable himself to go through
with his Traitorous Designs, he has detained a great Part of his Majesty's
Revenue, without giving Legal Account; and has taken great Sums out of the
Exchequer, converting them to his own use, when his Majesty wanted Money for
his own Urgent Occasions, and his Army had been a long time unpaid.

In the Heads of the Accusation against the Earl of Clarendon, reported by Sir
Thomas Little^on, Wednesday 6 Nov. 1667. one of the Articles was:

Journal of the House of Commons.
Art. 8. That he hath-in a short time gained to himself a greater Estate than
can be imagined to be gained lawfully in so short a time; and, contrary to his
Oath, has procured several Grants under the Great Seal from His Majejesty to
himself and Relations, of several of His Majesty's Lands, Hereditaments and
Leases, to the Disprofit of his Majesty.

We all know the Impeachment against that Noble Earl, was rather a
Court-Design, than carried on by good Patriots. The Zeal he had shown for the
Laws of his Country had stirred him up some Enemies: And because he would not
make a Difference between the King and Duke of York, he chose to retire, which
Retirement was followed by an Act to banish him: But had he he staid, and stood
his Trial, no doubt he had justified himself in this and in the other Articles.
For upon Enquiry, the Writer of these Papers is informed that he had not
procured any Grant of the Crown Demeasnes: And as to Clarendon Park, now in the
Family, and which was Crown-Land, that he bought it at the full Value of the
Old Duke of Albemarl, who had begged it of the King. But if he had received any
Gift of Forefeited Estates, or in Money, his long services and sufferings, and
his having been a Companion in his Master's Exile might very well deserve any
such sort of Bounty.

Journal of the House of Commons.
Jovis 15 die Jan. 1673. Articles of Treasonable and other Crimes of high
Misdemeanor against the Earl of Arlington, Principal Secretary of State, being
opened, were presented to the House, and read. The Articles containing matter
of Treason were seven. It was further opened, That the said Earl had been
guilty of many undue practices to promote his own Greatness, and had embezzel'd
and wasted the Treasure of his Nation.

Art. 1. By procuring vast and Exorbitant Grants for himself both in England
and Ireland, breaking into the Settlement of that Kingdom, and dispossessing
several English Adventurers and Soldiers of their Properties and Freeholds, in
which they were duly and legally stated, without any Color of Reason or
suggestion of Right.

Art. 2. By charging excessive and almost incredible Sums for false and
deceitful Intelligence.

Art. 3. By procuring His Majesty's Hand for the giving away between his first
Entrance into his Office, the Value of Three Millions of Sterling Money, at the
least, the several Grants whereof are extent, countersigned by him, and by him
only.

Martis 20 die Jan. 1673. The House resumed the adjourned Debate, concerning
the Lord Arlington. The Question being put, That an Address be presented to His
Majesty to remove the Earl of Arlington from all his Employments, that are
held, during His Majesty's Pleasure, and from His Majesty's Presence and
Council for ever. It passed in the Negative by 39 Voices.

Resolved, That a Committee be appointed to consider of the Articles against
the Earl of Arlington, and to report what Matter is therein contained, and can
be proved, that is fit for an Impeachment. Committed to Mr. Crouch, etc.

Memorandum, The Committee never made their Report; for the 24th of March the
Parliament was Prorogued to the 10th. of November, 1674, and so the Matter fell.

Journal of the House of Commons.
Lunae 26 die Apr. 1675. A Charge or Impeachment against Thomas Earl of Danby,
Lord High-Treasurer of England, containing several Offenses, Crimes, and
Misdemeanors, of a very high Nature, being presented and opened to the House,
and afterward brought in and delivered at the Clerk's Table, and read.

Art. 6. That the said Earl has procured great Gifts and Grants from the
Crown, whilst under great Debts, by Warrants counter-signed by himself.

The 2d. Article of the Impeachment being read, and the Matter thereof debated,
Resolved, That before the House do proceed farther in the Debate of this
Article, they will hear the Witnesses. The Witnesses were heard; then the House
Adjourned.

Lunae 3 die Maii, 1675. The House then proceeded in the farther Consideration
of the Articles against the Lord-Treasurer. And 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. and 7th.
Articles being read, and the Question being severally put, Whether any fit
Matter does appear in the Examination of those Articles, to impeach the
Lord-Treasurer? It passed in the Negative.

Journal of the House of Commons.
Sabbati 21 die December. 1678. Articles of Impeachment of High Treason, and
other High Crimes, Misdemeanors, and Offenses, against Thomas Earl of Danby,
Lord High-Treasurer of England, were delivered from the Committee.

Art. 5. That he has wasted the King's Treasure, by issuing out of His
Majesty's Exchequer, and several Branches of his Revenue, diverse great Sums of
Money for unnecessary Pensions, and secret Services, to the Value of 231602 l.
within Two Years: And thus he has wholly diverted out of the known Method and
Government of the Exchequer, one whole Branch of His Majesty's Revenue to
private Uses, without any Account to be made thereof in the Exchequer, contrary
to the express Act of Parliament which granted the same. And he has removed
two of His Majesty's Commissioners of that part of the Revenue, for refusing to
consent to such his unwarrantable Actings, and to advance Money upon that part
of the Revenue for private Uses.

Art. 6. That he has by indirect Means procured from His Majesty for himself
diverse Considerable Gifts and Grants of Inheritance of the Ancient Revenue of
the Crown, even contrary to Acts of Parliament.

Ordered, That the Articlee of Impeachment against the Lord High-Treesurer be
Engrossed, and that Sir Henry Capel do carry them up to the Lords on Monday
Morning next.

We have cited these two presidents, relating to the Earl of Danby, to show,
when the old Whigs were in the supermest Perfection of their Virtue, and
Public Zeal, That they then thought it a High Crime and Misdemeanor, For a
Minister to Picture to himself Giants out of the King's Revenue.

By the Authorities and Presidents we have quoted, it appears manifestly, that
our Ancestors have, from the first Institution of this Government, very highly
resented such Proceedings.

But here it may be asked how a Statesman is to behave himself* when the Prince
is inclined to Liberality, and overborn with Importunities to give away what
should subsist Him and the State? To which we answer, That the Lord
Chancellor's Oath plainly directs the Minister in his Duty, Ye shall neither
know nor suffer the King's Hurt, nor his Disheriting, nor that the Rights of
the Crown be distressed by any Means, as far forth as ye may let it: And if ye
may not let it, ye shall make Knowledge thereof clearly and expressly to the
King, with your True Advice and Council. By which Words, without doubt, the Law
must mean, (and the Chancellor's Oath is part of our Law and Constitution,)
That this high Officer is to oppose with all his Power and Intrest what he sees
tending to the King and Kingdom's Prejudice; and if he finds a great Number of
Grants passing, the Law intends, by binding him with such an Oath, That he
should from time to time represent to the King his Debts, the Taxes, and
Necessities of the Nation. But suppose that, notwithstanding this
Representation, the Prince will have the Grant to proceed, how is the Minister
to act in such a Case? Without doubt he is then to consider this Maxim of our
Law, That the King can do no hurt, and that the Minister only is accountable
for any Maladministration.

He is to contemplate what high Officers in the State have been impeached upon
the like Account, and without all Controversy he is rather to leave the Court,
and quit his Employment, than to do a thing which cannot be justified by the
Laws and Constitution of this Kingdom.

Daniel. P. 134.
Simon Normannus, Keeper of the Great Seal under Henry III. and Jeffery his
Brother, both Knights-Templars, and Men in great Powrr, suffered themselves to
be turned out of their Employment, rather than to pass a Grant from the King,
of Four Pence upon every Sack of Wool, to Thomas Earl of Flanders, the King's
Uncle. P. 519.
Matthew Parris, speaking of these two Brothers being put from Court, says,
Seminarium and Causa praecipua fuit hujus Irae Regiae, quod idem Simon noluit
consignare quoddam detestabile Scriptum, contra Coronam Domini Regis confectum.
Cujus Tenor talis fuit, ut Comes Flandriae Thomas perciperet de quolibet sacco
Lanae delatae ab Anglia per parts suas, Telonium: Scilicet de quolibet sacco
quatuor denariorum. Nec Galfridus Templarius huic enormi facto consensit, licet
Rex ad hoc avide nimis anhelaverit.

It Is true, Men are very unwilling to quit Great Employments, attended with
much Wealth and High Honors; and the common Excuse of such as comply more than
they ought, is, That others will be readily found to do the same thing: So that
they shall prejudice themselves without any Advantage to the Public. Nay, they
often pretend to remain at Court only to prevent greater and farther Mischiefs.

Suppose then this to be Case, and that the Tide runs so strongly one way that
no single Minister in his Station is able to stem it, and that the Prince will
divest himself of his Revenues, notwithstanding he is otherwise advised, what
does the Constitution of this Kingdom require from a Lord Chancellor, a Lord
Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, and the Secretary of State, when such Measures are
taken? What Proofs will clear them before the whole World, that they are no
ways consenting to such Proceedings, and that things are carried by an
irresistible Strength against that Council they would be thought to give?

Without doubt they stand justified before a Parliament* and in the Opinions of
the People, if they give manifest Evidence that their own Hands are clean, and
that they do not at all participate in the Depredations that are made upon the
Public: If they have asked nothing for themselves, it is a sign they did not
promote Grants; for he who ventures to wrong the King, will rather do it for
his own Gain than for the Advantage of another: Therefore a total Self-denial
in the Minister is a great Mark of Innocence.

If they were seen to have as large a share in the Plunder as any others; if
the King's best Lands and Manors were found in their hands; or, which is
worse, if they had devoured all the Flesh themselves, and left to others only
the Bones to pick; if, while the Public was poor, they had procured to
themselves outrageous Gifts of Money, as they are called in the Records; if it
was known that they had procured immoderate Releases for Money, (now they term
'em Privy-Seals,) and that in an unwarrantable manner: Our Ancestors looked no
farther, but took the Ministers to be guilty, and presumed, that they, singly,
for their own Gain and Profit, had incited the Prince to Liberalities
inconsistent with the Welfare of his Crown and Government; and thereupon our
Forefathers grounded the Impeachments we have mentioned in this Section.

We do not find in the Records, (except in the Lady Vescie's Case,) that the
Anger of Parliaments was provoked against the Common Herd of Courtiers, who in
all Ages have raked from the Prince whatsoever they could: But the Sword of the
Legislature was directed against their Heads, who being Ministers of State, in
his Privy Council bound up by Oaths, (Astricts per lour serments,) and having
Offices attended with large Sallaries and Profits, did nevertheless, with
insatiable Avarice and Ambition, and without any Consideration of the Public
Wants and Miseries, rob the Crown of all they could, by a Practice as foul in
it self as it was fatal in its Example: For in these Cases, the Law has only an
Eye to those who are entrusted, and expects the Town should not be sold,
surrendered, or betrayed by the very Sentinels who are set to watch the Gates.

Perhaps these Great Men alleged in their Excuse, That none will serve a Court
without Rewards: But our Ancestors thought the Appointments belonging to their
Offices a sufficient Recompense; and that Government grows very costly, when
Ministers must go away with Ten thousand Pounds per Annum Estate, for Five or
Six Years Service. Nor did our Forefathers think it Reasonable, that out of
the Substance of the Commons of England there should be built up every Year
Three or Four New and Wealthy Families.

It Is true indeed, the Ranulphs, the De la Pools, the Beurlees, and the
Buckinghams, of former Ages, might very well expect all they got, or could get,
if every Day they were making bold Steps, by which they ran a Hazard of their
Necks. But in Times when the Laws govern, and when extraordinary things are
neither expected by the Prince, nor suffered by the People, Ministers for their
Service ought to be contented with a moderate Reward.

It Is probable likewise, that when they begged those large Grants of former
Kings, (for which they were impeached,) they suggested to 'em what immense
Sums of Money they had got granted for them by the Commons. But if the true
Necessities of the State required it, the Gifts would have proceeded without
their urging. Nor do we find that Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, a good and
faithful Servant, got, or was impeached for getting Grants, though he had
obtained Eleven hundred thousand Marks for the Redemption of King Richard.
Besides, our Ancestors never thought that procuring Money from the People ought
to commute for robbing the Prince, well-knowing that to be true which my Lord
Verulam has since observed, that these Men, so dextrous at finding out
Projects, and at inventing new Taxes, Life Henry VII. p. 210.
Prey upon the People like tame Hawks for their Master, and like wild Hawks for
themselves.

Our Forefathers had good Reason to animadvert upon these Proceedings; for
nothing more tends to corrupt a Country than the easy way of getting Wealth by
the Profusion of a Court. It makes Men abandon the Thoughts of raising
themselves by Virtue and Merit, and reduces a Nation to the State of which Mr.
Pym speaks, when he says, There are but few now that apply themselves either to
do well, or to deserve well; finding Flattery and Compliance to be the easier
way to attain their Ends and Expectations.

But the Advocates for Maladministration, and they who give a fair Color to
Corruptions of this Nature, will perhaps urge, that generally the Heirs of such
as here are mentioned to have been attainted for these Crimes, have been
restored in Blood. We grant the Fact to be so; but this is no Argument that
they were wrongfully accused or coudemn'd. Perhaps, to make the Punishment
extend beyond the Person of the Criminal, is wrong in our Constitution; and
that all Restitutions in Blood whatsoever ought to be favored: But Families
have been restored, whose Parents no Man will pretend to justify. Rot. Parl. 2
Hen. V. Numb. 19.
Hamond Belknap was enabled in Blood, 2. Hen. V. and the Family was afterward
fully restored, 6 Hen. VIII. And yet no English Man will offer to say, that
Belknap did not deserve his Death. The Attaindures showed the severe Justice of
our Ancestors; and the Restitutions that came afterward, are Signs only, that
we are born in a Country where the People are well natured, and who cannot long
entertain angry and revengeful Thoughts, but where Lenity has encouraged many
Persons more boldly to enterprise against the Public.

Thus far as to what has been done in these Matters. But before we conclude
this Section, we shall observe, That other Countries as well as England have
relieved the Affairs of the Prince by Resumptions, for which Grotius cites
several Authorities. Grotius de Jure Belli ac Pacis, L. 2. Annot. ad Cap. 14.
Donata etiam ab Emptoribus repetiit Galba, relicta decima. Tacit. Hist. 1.
Pertinax etiam a liberis ea exegit quae sub specie venditionis Commodo Principe
lucrifecerant. Basilius Macedo Imperator repetiit quae Michael Imperator
elargitus fuerat. Zonaras de eo: Communi consensu placuit, ut qui pecunias
nulla probabili ex causa accepissent, partim totas, partim dimidium redderent.
Vide eundem Isaacio Comneno de donationibus Ludovici XI. vide Serranum Carolo
VIII. de ejusdem donationibus, etiam quae Ecclesiis factae, non servatis,
Philippum Cominaeum lib. ix. Marianam vero de donationibus quas Arragoniae Rex
Ramirus fecerat, rescissis lib. x. cap. xvi. de Isabellae donationibus
rescissis per ipsam xxvii. cap. ii..

The same has been done in Scotland: Drammond 's Hist. of Scotland. p. 27, 28.
James the 1st. recalled all such Lands as had been either alienated, or
wrongfully Usurped from the Crown. And also what was wont to be idly given
away, as Forfeitures, Escheats and Wards, were restrained to the Crown, and
kept to the King himself.

And in other Countries, as well as in England: They who deceived or robbed the
Prince, were highly punished. Among the Romans, the Crimen peculatus was
accounted Capital. Crimen Peculatus hoc est Furtum Principis aut Reipublicae.
Quisquis igitur in administrandis, aut dispensandis Principum bonis, ita
infideliter se gerit, ut eas Pecunias furetur, aut Clanculariis Technis
eripiat, aut ad proprium commodum ab utatur, aut ad alios certe usus, quam ad
usum Principis; is puniendus quadruplo, and exilio. Imo juxta multorum
sententiam, puniendus est capitaliter, L. unica C. de crimine peculat. Cap. de
Pec. p. 444.
Damhouderii Praxis Rer. Crim. Hujus Criminis Accusatio quinquennio durat, ejus
poena, aquae and ignis inter dictio, in cujus locum, hodie, successit
deportatio. Wesenbecius ad Leg. Jul. de Peculat.

In France, several Persons of the highest Rank have been Capitally punished
for Frauds committed in the Princes Revenue, of which we shall give several
Instances.

But First, we shall give a President of a Financier, or Treasurer, who was
Honest of his own accord: But Mezeray observes, the Example will always remain
singular. Girard de Possi, in the Reign * Mezeray vic. de Phil; Aug.
of Phillip Augustus, had wronged his Master of Eleven thousand Marks of
Silver; which he refunded into the Exchequer. Girard de Possi qui manioit les
Finances, y remit de son propre fond onze Mill Mares d' Argent, il est a
croire qu'il les avoit gagne avec le Roy mais quoy qu'il en soit, on peut dire
que cet Exemple sera toujours unique, and qu'on ne verra jamais de Financier
qui le veuille suivre. Quelque chose qu'on fasse, ces Gens la iront plustot au
Gibet, que de venir a Restitution.

Vie Philip le Bell.
In the Reign of Phillip ^e Bell, Engherand le Portier, Seigneur de Marigni,
raised excessive Taxes upon the People, filling his own Coffers at the same
time. Il y avoit quatre Cheffs d' Accusation contre luy Davoir altere les
Monoys, Charge le Peuple d' Imposts, vole plusieurs grandes sommes, and degrade
les Forests du Roy. There were four Heads of Accusation against him. That he
had altered the Coin, loaded the People with Taxes, Robbed the King of a great
Sum of Money, and cut down the Timber of his Forests. He was tried by the
Peers and Barons of the Kingdom, condemned and hanged.

This Man was succeeded in his Employment by one Peter de Remy Sieur de
Montigny, who trod in the Steps of his Predecessor, and was likewise sentenced
to death in Parliament, in the Vie de Phil. de Valois.
Reign of Phillip de Valois. His Confiscation amounted to Twelve hundred
thousand Livres; a prodigious Sum for those Times. Par Arrest du Parliament ou
se trouverent 18 Chevaliers 25 Seigneurs and Princes and le Roy Mesme, il fust
condemn a traisner and pendre, comme Traistre, au Gibet de Montsaucon qu'il
avoit fait rebastir: Sa Confiscation montoit a douze cents mill Livres sommes
prodigieuse pour ce Temps la.

Vie de Charles 6.
In the Reign of Charles the 6th, There was one John de Montaigu, who was a
kind of Surintendant des Finances, or what we call Commissioner of the
Treasury, whom Mezeray describes to have been a little insolent Fellow; who
from a low Degree, and without any great Merit of his own, and only by the
King's Favor, was got into great Employments, where giving Offense by his
Pride and Arrogance; the Great ones, at last fell upon him; and he was Accused,
Condemned and Hanged. But take the Author's own Words, and his Description of
him. C'estoit un homme de mediocre Naissance, fills d'un Burgeois de Paris, que
la faveur du Roy, sans beaucoup de merit de son cost, avoit esleve jusqu'a la
charge de Grand Maistre de sa maison, and ses freres, l'un a l'Archevesche de
Sens, l'autre a celuy de Paris. Ses richesses immenses, qui ne s'acquierent
jamais sans crime, aveuglerent ce petit Homme, and donnerent dans les yeux des
Grands; En sort qu'il avoit marie son fills avec la fille du Connestable
d'Albret, and ses filles a des plus grands Seigneurs du Royaume.

Quoy qu'il eust fort servy a la Negotiation du Traitte de Chartres: Neantmoins
le Duc de Bourgogne and le Roy de Navarre conspirerent sa perte, parce qu'il
avoit done le conseil d'emmener le Roy a Tours. Ils le firent accuser de
plusieur crimes enormes, prenant leur temps, que le Roy que l'aymoit, etoit
dans sa folly. Il fut arreste par Pierre des Essards, Prevost de Paris examine
par des Commissaires du Parliament, and tourmente horriblement a la Question. La
donleur ne tira rien de sa bouche, neantmoins il eut la test trenchee aux
Halles. A la mort il confessa de son bon gre la depredation des Finances, qni
contient en soy tous les plus grands crimes. Le tronc de son Corpse fut pendu au
Gibet, sa test plantee sur un pieu.

SECT. V. That the Forfeited Estates in Ireland ought to be applied Toward
Payment of the Public Debts.
LAST Year there was delivered in an Account of such Parliamentary Fonds as
were deficient, and for which no Provision was made, March 4. School/9. The Heads
of which are as follow.

ll. s. d. That in the Duty upon Low Wines, there would at Lady Day 1701. be a
Deficiency of -- 20,000 0 0 The Deficiencies in several Fonds granted to pay
off the Exchequer-Bills (besides the Interest due, and to be due upon them)
computed at -- 923,244, 12 8 Carry over, 943,244 12 8

ll. s. d. Brought over 943,244 12 8 The Deficiency in the 3 Shill. Aid granted
1695 (besides Interest) computed at -- 416,000 0 0 In the Duties upon Parchment
and Paper a Deficiency of -- 15,400 0 0 The Deficiency in the Leather Duty,
computed to the 20th of Apr. 1700, to be about -- 426,438 0 0 In the Duty upon
Malt, a Deficiency of about -- 625,000 0 0 In the Aid by a Quarterly Poll
granted 1697, a Deficiency of -- 180,000 0 0 Deficiencies in the three
Ninepences upon Beer and Ale, -- 153,771 19 8 In all -- 2,759,854 12 4

It Is to be apprehended, this Account is rather increased than diminished since
last Year; particularly the Interest due upon Exchequer-Bills, and Malt-Tickets
will amount to a very considerable Sum*

Besides which, there are Arrears of several kinds, not yet provided for, which
will be reckoned a Debt upon the Nation.

And over and above all this, a Provision is to be made for the Expenses of the
current Year.

But the Honor of the House of Commons, and the Credit of the Nation seem
absolutely engaged to make good several Deficiencies, to which we are not only
bound by Public Faith, which ought to be inviolable, but by direct and express
Clauses in Acts of Parliament; so that when a Law has Enacted, That such a Debt
should be paid by a prefixed time, all Ways and Means ought to be thought upon
to make that Promise good, not so much for the sake of Credit to go a borrowing
with (which Parliaments can hardly loose) but to keep sacred the Dignity and
Majesty of the Commonwealth.

There is no Man will pretend to say, but that the Ways and Means of raising
Money are extremely difficult. Almost every Branch of our home Consumption has a
Load upon it. Our Foreign Traffic is already more charged than can possibly
consist which the Interest of a Trading Country. Three Shillings per Pound, with
the strictness it is now levied, is such a Weight, that if it be much longer
continued, must, in time, certainly ruin all the less Freeholders, and greatly
hurt the Gentry of this Kingdom.

To lay farther Excises upon the same Commodities, cannot be done without
apparent prejudice to the Duties already granted, the same will hold in laying
higher Customs. To charge Land for any long term of Years in times of Peace, is
a thing unheard of among our Ancestor; and though past Conduct has made it
perhaps unavoidable for some Years to come, yet the People will think
themselves very ill dealt with by their Representatives, if Care be not taken
to lay as few Burdens upon their Land as possible.

Some indeed have been of Opinion that the Deficiencies may be satisfied, and
that the Debts may be paid by prolonging the Fonds already granted for a
further term of time; but others who love their Country, have thought it
dishonorable and dangerous, that England should be so long pawned, and
continue for so many Years in Mortgage. They think it not safe for our
Constitution, nor consistant with our Civil Rights, that there should be levied
in this Kingdom, for any number of Years, near four Millions annually, in
Customs, Excises, and such like Duties, which in some future Reign, bad
Ministers may perhaps seize upon, and intercept, by stopping the Exchequer, in
order to set up an Army, and to subsist without a Parliament: Of this, good
Patriots will be always apprehensive, and have therefore ever abhorred these
long Fonds, which all the Neighboring Princes round about us have constantly
made use of for subverting the Liberties of their People.

Some without Doors, have been for trying such wild Projects, as was that of
increasing the number of Exchequer-Bills, which indeed was a good Expedient to
lull our Creditors asleep, and to quiet Things for the present, while certain
Persons might have the Opportunity of doing their own Business, and of Building
up their own Fortunes, but the Public could thereby have reaped no Benefit. On
the contrary, this Calm in our Affairs, and the not being pressed by any
clamorous demands, would have occasioned and encouraged still more and more bad
Husbandry; and at last, the Debt must have come upon us, with the addition of a
heavy load of Interest; besides (which is unanswerable) if a War had overtaken
the Nation with such a Debt upon it, all due and demandable at a Day, Public
Credit must have sunk at once, upon which would have followed Ruin, without
Redemption.

Good Patriots will never think England can be effectually relieved by any Ways
and Means of raising Money, but such as shall sink part of the Principal Debt,
and hinder us from being eaten up by that Canker of Usury, which has been so
destructive to this Government.

Nor will Englishmen (we mean such of 'em as consider at all) think that Trade
can flourish, or that Liberty is entirely safe, 'till our Payments to the
Public are reduced to what they were before the War, viz. two Milions Yearly;
for this Nation will be ever apprehensive, That such mighty Sums as we now pay,
may hereafter, in the Reign of some other Prince, be turned against the People,
though given and granted for their Preservation.

Since therefore the common Ways and Means of raising Money, may be dangerous
in their future Consequence, or a present Burden upon the Nation, it imports
good Patriots to consider whether or no the Necessities of the Government may
not be supplied by the Methods which our Ancestors have so frequently put in
Practice. By which we mean, whether or no a Resumption of such Lands in
England, and more especially in Ireland, as have lately been granted away from
the Crown, would not be a great Relief and Ease to the People in their Taxes.

If a Resumption can be made without breaking into the Rules of Justice, or
without bringing any Reflection upon the King, whose Honor above all things
ought to be regarded, and if thereby two Millions can be raised, to come in the
room and place of a Land Tax, very few People will think it strange for the
Legislative Authority to *exert it self in a matter so much for the Common Ease
and Benefit: And where the Public is so deeply concerned, but very few Persons
will consider or consult the private Interest of such as have procured the
Grants. Therefore in handling this Subject, we shall endeavor to examine into,
and state these following Points.

I. How far it is consistent with the Honor of a Prince to desire and promote
a Resumption by Act of Parliament.

II. What Interest the People of England have in the Lands granted away, and
especially as to the forfeited Estates in Ireland.

III. How far in an Act of Resumption it is just and reasonable to look
backwards.

1st. How far it is consistent with the Honor of a Prince to desire and promote
a Resumption by Act of Parliament. There is nothing more evident in our
Histories, than that the most magnanimous of our Kings have been the most free
in confirming to the People their Ancient Liberties, Magna Charta, as it is now
derived down to us, was modeled by Henry the 1st, a Math. Par. fol. 74.
Prince famous for his Military Virtues, which was confirmed by Stephen, a King
active enough in the Field. This Sheet-Anchor of our Liberties, was yet more
strengthened by Edward 3d, as Renowned as any of our Kings for Personal Valor
and Victories abroad. That, which heretofore by Flatterers and Corrupt
Ministers has been called Prerogative, was never insisted upon, but by weak and
effeminate Princes, who desired that their Immoderate Appetites of doing Ill,
might be justified and strengthened by more Power than was allowed 'em by the
Laws. Magnanimous Kings have always thought, That the Royal Prerogative
consisted chiefly in the Power of doing Good to so many Millions of Men, who
depend upon their Wisdom and Courage. Henry the 4th, that Heroic Prince, who
obtained the Crown by his own Personal Merits, was so far from thinking his
Prerogative injured by Acts of Grace and Favor, by which good Government might
be promoted, that he himself desired of the House of Commons, that his whole
Privy Council might be named and Established Rot. Parl. 7, and 8. Hen. 4. Number*
31.
in Parliament. Et rehercea outre coment l'Erceveqe de Canterbirs lour avoit
fait report qe le Roy vorroit estre conseilez per les pluis sages Seignours du
Royalme, lesqeux deussent avoir survieu de tout ceo qe seroit fait pur la bone
Gouvernance de son Royalme. A qel cbose fair, le Roy sagrea, and rehercea per
son bouche propre qil fuist savolonte entier. Et sur ceo, fust lue une Bille
fait per le Roy mesme, and de sa volonte propre, de les noms des Seignours qi
seront de son Conseil. Afterward the Privy Counselors are actually named in
the Bill, and the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Privy Seal, and other great
Officers are therein directed, to act nothing of Importance, without the
concurrent Advice of the rest of the Council, Et qe Bills a endorser per le
Chambrelayn and Lettres dessous le Signet de nostre dit Seignour le Roy a
Adressers and autres Mandements a doner as Chanceller, Tresorer and Gardien du
Privee Seal, and autres Officiers qeconqes, desore en avaunt, en tielx Causes
come desuis, seront endorsez ou faitz per advys du Conseil. Et qe les dits
Chanceller Tresorer and Gardien du Privee Seal, and autres Officiers, ne
facent en tielx Causes si non per advys du dit Consil. The King goes on
farther, and desires his own Authority may be circumscribed in several Points;
and yet when he made those Concessions, he was neither in his Nonage, nor did
he dote, nor was he pressed by any Insurrection of the People; and it is
notorious, he neither wanted Policy, nor Courage. But it is rather probable,
that he thought it Honest and Wise, and no diminution to his Honor, to oblige
that People with wholesome Laws and good Government, who had given him the
Crown, and who had been at such Expenses to support his Title.

Magnanimous Kings have not only been Favorers of Public Liberty, but they
have likewise been frugal of the Peoples Money, as appears in the Instances of
Henry the 1st, Henry the 2d, Edward the 1st, Henry the 4th, Henry the 5th,
Henry the 7th, and Q. Elizabeth; which shows how wrong their Notion is, who
think Wise and Thrifty Princes dangerous to the Freedom of a Country, whereas
profuse Kings, such as John, Henry the 3d, Edward and Richard the 2d, did not
ouly waste the Nations Treasure, but every one of 'em compelled the People to
fight Pitched Battles, in defense of their Civil Rights.

Gallant Princes desire to make the People easy. Henry the 4th of France, our
present King's great Grandfather, said once, he hoped to order Matters so,
that every Man in his Kingdom should have a boiled Capon to his Dinner. None of
the Apothegms uttered by great Men, and so much commended by the Ancients,
could become the Mouth of a King so well, as this Noble and Well-natur'd
Saying. It Is probable, had he lived, he would have brought it about; which if
he could have done, 'twould have been a nobler Trophey to his Fame, than all
the Victories he had obtained. The Honor of a King consists chiefly in doing
good to the Universal Body of his People, and the Public Welfare is to weigh
with him above all other Respects. He is often to divest himself of the narrow
Thoughts which sway among private Men; and he can hardly be a good Ruler unless
he does now and then in his Politic, what he would not do in his Natural
Capacity. He is a Person entrusted by the Commonwealth, and what he acts in
discharge of that Trust, cannot be called dishonorable.

The Commons in the Resumption, made 1 Hen. 7. tell the King in their Bill; It
is for his own Suerty, Honor and Weal, and for the Universal Weal, Ease, Rest,
and Suerty of his Land, the which he ought to prefer before the Favor of any
Person, or any Place, or other thing Earthly. The same Words made a part of the
Preamble in most-of the other Bills of the like Nature, by which it appears to
have been the continued Sense of our Ancestors, that the Reputation of a Prince
was never injured by Acts wherein the Ease and Relief of his People was
consulted: It Is true, such a Minister as the Chancellor de la Pool had other
Sentiments, and gave Advice of another kind, being willing to countenance his
own Depredations by the Example of others: Such as he may engage the King's
Honor in the Protection of their Crimes, so to shelter themselves under his
Wings, and pretend things lessen his Fame, which will only lessen their
Estates: But good Ministers have always thought that nothing could more hurt
the Reputation of a Prince, than to be reduced by Profusion to Courses, by
which his Country must be oppressed with Taxes. 'Twas a common practice with the
Duke of Sully, to obstruct and often to vacate his Masters Gifts and Grants;
yet this great Man was sufficiently jealous of his Princes Fame. In Spain,
Henry the Amirante, Pacieco d' Ascolone and Henry de la Fortuna, three
Grandees, had obtained of Ferdinand, each of em a Million of Livres of Gold,
charged on the Revenue of Peru, and should have received it at the Return of
the Plate-Fleet, but Cardinal Ximenes utterly * Bandier le Ministere du Card.
Ximenes.
annulled these immoderate Gifts, though de la Fortuna was the King's own Kinsman,
saying; The Revenue of Princes, though great in it self, is always too little for
the Necessities of the State. And notwithstanding the Spanish Punto of Honor,
we do not find this Proceeding resented by King Ferdinand. Before his Greatness
was so established, seeing a very disadvantagious Farm of the Silks of Granada
let for Ten Years, by the Advice of Don Manuel the Treasurer, to which the King
had consented, and which was offered at Council to be sealed, he took the
Charter and tore it pnblickly (of which the Pieces are kept among the Records
of Arcala, as a Memorial of this Ministers Courage and Integrity) saying,
Salto, Don Manuel, were you not my very good Friend, the King should cause your
Head to be taken off: Dare you make Grants so prejudicial to the State? Nor did
Phillip the 1st. take it ill that his own, and his Favorites Doings were thus
revoked.

We agree that Princes in all their Actions are to consider Fame, because
Opinion is one of the main Pillars to support their Authority. But let any
reasonable Man answer, Is it not more glorious for a Prince to let the whole
People under his Reign, enjoy Ease and Plenty, without new Impositions and
Duties, than to enrich a few Minions and Favorites, with the Spoils of a whole
Country? A Prince thirsting after present or future Renown, whose Example would
he desire to follow? That of Henry the 4th, who by his Frugality brought the
Crown of France out of Debt; or that of Henry the 3d, who harrass'd his whole
Kingdom to build up four or five great Families, whereby he got no more than to
leave behind him so many conspicuous Monuments of his Weakness.

No doubt it has heretofore been thought injurious to the Reputation of a
Prince, to be urged by clamorous Debts, to suffer many thousands of miserable
Persons to want what is their due; to have his Troops unpaid, and his Seamen in
vast Arrears, and to let his menial Servants starve, first by retrenchments,
and then by being without their settled Wages and Allowances.

These are truly Blemishes upon a Princes Glory, and were represented as such,
by the Commons of England, assembled in Parliament, 28 Hen. 6. when they* made
Application, That these Reflections might be taken away, and that these
Grievances might be redressed; and affirmed at the same time, That they could
not grant any Aid, unless the King would actually resume what had been obtained
from the Crown by Importunity or Surprise, upon false Suggestions, or by
Contrivance among the Great ones.

Seldom any Prince has miscarried in his Fame or Fortune, who has constantly
pursued the Public Good; and who has directed all his Counsels to his
Countries Ease and Benefit; but History is full of their Troubles and
Disasters, who have obstinately adhear'd to a few, against the whole, and who
have confined to particular Objects, that Affection which ought to be extended
to the universal Body of their People.

What was done by Henry the 1st, Henry the 2d. and by that Hero Richard
Cordelyon? What was done by that Conqueror of France, Henry the 5th? What that
Spirited and Martial Prince, Edward the 4th, desired his Parliament in a Speech
from the Throne, to put in Execution, and which he thanked them afterward for
doing, can never be thought dishonorable in any other King; and among English
Men, a Prince will never suffer in his present, or future Renown, for treading
in their Steps, and following their Examples.

And without doubt, these Noble and Warlike Princes did not think the Regal
Power at all impaired, by giving Way to the Resumptions which were made during
their Reigns; for in all these Exercises of the Legislative Authority, Lords
and Commons do but act subserviently under a King for his Profit, Grctiu s de
Jure Belli ac Pacis.

l. 1. Cap. 3. Number. 18.


which Grotius very finely thus Illustrates. Multum falluntur qui existimant,
cum Reges Acta quaedam sua nolunt rata esse, nisi a Senatu, aut alio Coetu
aliquo probentur, partitionem fieri potestatis: nam quae Acta eum in modum
rescinduntur, intelligi debent rescindi Regis ipsius Imperio, qui eo modo sibi
cavere voluit, ne quid fallaciter impetratum, pro vera ipsius voluntate
haberetur.

2dly. What Interest the People of England have in the Lands granted away, and
especially as to the Forfeited Estates in Ireland. As to Lands appertaining to
the Imperial Crown of England, and of its Ancient Demeasnes; it is not at all
clear that they can be alienated, the Fundamentals and general Grounds of
Government considered. Grotius is directly Lib. 2. Cap. 6. Number. 1^.
of this Sentiment. Patrimonium quoque Populi, cujus fructus distinati sunt ad
sustentanda Reipublicae aut Regiae dignitatis onera, a Regibus alienari, nec in
totum nec in part^m potest. Nam and in hoc jus majus Fructuario non habent. And
to fortisie his own Opinion, he produces very many great Authorities. But we
shall take notiee of some he has not mentioned. Hotman is clearly of Opinion,
Hotman. de J^r. Reg. Gall. T. 3. Col. 139.
That the Kings of France could not alienate the Demeasnes of the Crown. Itaque
Anno cio ccc xcix. cum Rex Carolus comiti sampaulino particulam quandam sui
domanii donasset, Senatus Parisiensis pro vetere veteris trium statuum
Parlamenti jure intercessit: ac pronuntiavit, Regii dominii diminutionem
nullius esse momenti, nisi cujus auctor Senatus ille Parisiensis fuisset: Quod*
decretum Paponius inter arresta sua retulit, lib. 5. tit. 10. ubi alia complura
generis ejusdem Senatus consulta commemorat. And a little lower, Quae sane lex
Reipublicae per quam utilis est ad regii dominii conservationem. Quia tum demum
ad tributa and indictiones extraordinarias, quibus plebs oneratur, decurri
tanquam ad subsidium solet, cum illud dominium Col. 140.
regium exhaustum est. And again, Jus Regum Francorum ita constitutum est, ut
non infinitam and immensam regno atque imperio suo abutendi potestatem
haberent, non regni Patrimonium insanis largitionibus and donationibus
immodicis prodigorum instar dissiparent, sed utpatriae ac populorum suorum
salutem fidei suae creditam incolumem servarent, neque ulla ex part
Rempublicam sibi commissam violarent: denique ut sanctissimum illud M. Tullii
praeceptum servarent, Vt tutelam sic procurationem Reip. ad utilitatem eorum,
qui commssi sunt, non ad eorum quibus commissa est, gerendam esse.

But as we have noted in the precedent Section, this Point is become more
doubtful, since the late Act for declaring the Rights and Liberties of the
Subject; which Act absolutely condemns those Clauses of non Obstante, whereby
these Alienations were formerly supported; and such Clauses being condemned,
there are strong Reasons to think, that the Act 11 H. 4. which clearly
prohibits such Grants, is now returned to its first Force and Vigor. However
let this Matter stand as it will, we shall probably make it appear, That the
Lands in Ireland (which the People of England have within a few Years
repurchased with so much Blood and Treasure) are quite upon another Foot.

Lib. 3. Cap. 6. Number. 10.
Grotiuus affirms, it is the Law of Natious, Ex Jure Gentium, That the Lands of
the Vanquished should go to the Conquering People. Ex quo gentium Jure Scipio
agit ^um Masinissa apud Livium: Syphax Populi Romani Auspiciis victus Captusque
est. Itaque Conjux, Regnum, Ager, Oppida, homines qui incolunt, quicquid
Syphacis fuit, Praeda Populi Romani est. What he terms the Law of Nations is
all the highest Result of Reason; for is it not just that what is gained at
their Expense should belong to them? Hotman, putting the Case how it should be,
if the Lands to be given away are newly Conquered, says, Hotman. Quaest.
Il-Iust. T. 1. Col. 850.
Restat pars ultima, cum armis and Bello regnum quaesitum est. Nam cum armis
Principis partum atque in ejus ditionem redactum sit, consentaneum videtur, ut
de eo statuere arbitratu suo possit. Sed cum eam ditionem solus ac per se non
adquesierit, sed civium suorum sanguine, laboribus periculis, non alienum
videtur regulam juris Civilis sequi, ut quod communibus multorum laboribus
quaesitum est, non nisi communi eorum Consilio and consensu alienari possit.
The Romans were so strict in this Point, that to intercept any Spoils gotten in
War, was accounted robbing the Public. Modestinus the Lawyer says, Is qui
Praedam ab Hostibus surripuit Peculatus Lex penult. digest. ad leg. Jul.
Peculat.
tenetur. Gellius takes notice, that Cato in an Oration he spoke, concerning
Spoils, complained in vehement Words, Gellius Lib. 11. Cap. 13.
That poor Thieves were manacled in Fetters, but that the Public Robbers shined
in Gold and rich Attire. Fures Privatorum Furtorum in nervo atque compedibus
aetatem agunt, Fures Publici in Auro atque Purpura. Indeed, if a Prince makes
the War at his own single Charge, Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Number. 11.
(as Grotius observes in another Place) Fieri potuit ut Rex ex sua privata
substantia Exercitum aluerit. In such a Case he alone will have a Right to the
Conquered Country.

And this is so true, that if William the Norman had been able by his own
Strength, and at his particular Expenses, to have made the Conquest of England,
according to the Law of Nations, he must have had this Kingdom in Patrimonio*
with as absolute Dominion in it, as the Eastern Princes can pretend to.

But the Case being quite otherwise, and he not able to bear the whole Charge,
he took to his assistance several Barons of his own Dukedom, and some great Men
of other Countries, who were joined with him in the Adventure, to whom, as the
Recompense of their Service, he first promised, and afterward made sundry
Concessions, and granted many Privileges: But still with all this assistance
he could not quite subdue the Natives, with whom he was compelled to make
Compacts, from which Concessions and Compacts, it comes that we continue still
to be a free People, notwithstanding this pretended Conquest.

In the same manner, if Henry the 2d had Conquered Ireland with only the
Revenues of the Crown, without any Aids from his People, that Kingdom had been
his own, Plen^ Jure, as the Civilians call it; and he might have disposed of it
at his own Will and Pleasure: For as Aristotle says, Lex est veluti pactum
quoddam commune quo Bello capta capientium ^iunt. Nor is it a thing at all
strange, for a Prince to hold different Kingdoms by different Titles, and to
Govern 'em by different Methods; in one he may be absolute, according to the
Ancient Constitution of the Country; in another, his Power may be circumscribed
and* limited by Law: One Kingdom he may hold by Election, and another by the
Right of Succession. He may have a Kingdom of his own Acquisition, which shall
be as it were his * De Jure inter Gentes P. 1. Sect. 3. R. Z.
own private Patrimony. A Principibus aliquando Regna vel Territoria pleno Jure
habentur, ita Strabo tradit Cytheram, Insulam Toenaro objacentem, fuisse
Euriclis Lacedaemoniorum Principis, privato ipsius Jure. And the same Right
would Henry the 2d have had in Ireland, if he had made the Acquisition by his
own Sword and Bow, and by Troops paid out of his own Purse; but because the
Kingdom was conquered at the general Expense of England, the Commonwealth here
has always took it self to have an Interest to bind that Kingdom by Laws, to
inquire into the Administration of it, as Parliaments have several times done,
and to extend the Acts of Resumption as well to Ireland as to England,
constantly believing that Island to have been an Acquisition to the Crown, not
of any King's own Making, but purchased with the Labor and Blood, and at the
common Expense of this Nation, which in several Expeditions and Wars to quiet
52 Rebellions, has expended five times more Treasure than the Fee Simple of all
Ireland is worth.

The Writer of these Papers is not at all afraid or ashamed to offer at
Accounts, though a certain Person did please to say (but without any Proof then
or afterward) that in one Computation we were mistaken twenty Millions.

An Account of the Expenses for the Reduction of Ireland.
ll. s. d. Issued from the Exchequer, and wholly applied to the Irish Service,
to Jan. 25. 1694/5. 3,388,672 5 3 Arrears due to the Irish Army, to March 31,
1692, about 190,000 00 0 To the Irish Transports about 350,000 00 0 For the
Service of the Ordinance, on Account of the Train that attended the Irish Army,
computed at about 80,000 ll. per Ann.) for two Years and a half. 200,000 00 0
Carry over 4,128,672 05 3

ll. s. d. Brought over 4,128,672 05 3 Besides which, there was received by us
of the Irish Revenue, 177,020 15 5 By Poundage and Days Pay, and Profits by
Guinea's about 70,000 00 0 By Quarters in Ireland about 140,000 00 0 So that
the Reduction of the Irish stood both Nations in about 4,515,693 00 8

The Peoples Right to the Forfeited Estates in Ireland, to dispose of 'em in
Parliament, either for the Service of the current Year, instead of a Land Tax,
or to make 'em a Fond toward paying off the Deficiencies, is grounded upon
this Sum of Four Millions, which has been levied in England, and expended upon
that War.

Where the Honor of the Prince, and the Honor or Interest of the Nation are
concerned against a Foreign Enemy, most certainly we are to give necessary Aids
and Subsidies without prospect of reaping any other Fruit from our Expenses,
than Fame and Safety; but when England has to do with its own Subjects, and
that they can be brought to pay part of the Reckoning, it would be very hard if
all this should be intercepted from the Public, and that we should waste our
Blood and Treasure, only to enrich a few private Persons.

From the time of Henry the 2d. Ireland has almost constantly been made to
contribute something toward its Conquest or Reduction. In the very beginning,
Vide Dr. H^mmer Fol. 136.
viz. Anno 1170, part of its Lands were given to the Adventurers Robert Fitz
Stephen, and Maurice Fitz Gerald, David Barry, Hervy de Monte Marisco, William
Not, Maurice de Prendregast, Meyler, Richard Strongbowe Earl of Chepstow, and
others. And Anno 1172. another Adventure was set a-foot, and a new* Partition
of Lands was made, and King Hen. 2d stands himself in the Front of the
Adventurers, with Hugo de Lacy, William Fitz Adelm, Humphrey de Bohun,
Sylvester Giraldus, Cambrensis, who was Tutor to the young King Vide Rogerus
Hovidon.
John, and others. In the distribution of these Lands, the Service of so many
Knights was reserved to the King in the Grant of each Estate. Hugo de Lacy Lord
Lieutenant, sold several Estates there, which Sales Philip of Worcester, his
Successor, revoked. Nec mora revocato Hugone de Lacy, Giraldus Cambrensis, cap.
24.
Philippus Wigorniensis, vir Militaris dapsilis and liberalis: circa Call.
September. cum Militibus XL. Procurator est in Insulam transmissus. Inter ipsa
igitur operum suorum initialia terras, quas Hugo de Lacy alienaverit, terram,
viz. Ocathesi, and alias quam plures ad Regiam mensam cum omni solicitudine
revocavit.

The Writer of these Papers has not leisure to inquire into the Particulars,
but according to the best of his Remembrance, a distribution of Lands was made
to Adventurers, concerned in suppressing the Insurrections which the Irish made
during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. And most certainly, the War England had
with that Kingdom in the Reign of Charles the 1st, was in a great measure
carried on by Money subscribed here* with a view, that the Subscribers should
have the Lands Conquered and forfeited, which afterward, partly they had and
the rest was divided among the Soldiers in satisfaction of their Debentures.

In our present Case the War was not either begun, or carried on at the Expense
of any Single Person, or private Men, but at the common Charges of the whole
Nation; therefore in Reason and Justice the People of England ought here to be
looked upon as the General Adventurers: That the Four Millions levied and
expended, is their Adventure, of which the Forfeited Estates ought to be the
Return; and if any thing considerable can be made of 'em, it ought to go
toward easing England in its Taxes.

But there is a strong Reason of State why the Lands of Ireland, in cases of
Rebellion, should never be granted away, but be either distributed among
Adventurers, or sold toward defraying the Charges of the War; for if England
is to be at all the Expense, and Courtiers are to go away with all the Profit,
how do we know but that hereafter, for their own Gain, they may purposely and
advisedly encourage and Foment Rebellions there? Fourteen Hundred thousand
Pound, once in Thirty or Forty Years, to be shared among them, would be a very
fine Crop for the Men in Business. But probably the Ministers in future Ages
will be watchful over that Kingdom, and suppress an Insurrection betimes (when
it may be done for a less Sum than Four Millions, and perhaps with three or
four Thousand Men) nor in all likelihood will they so notoriously neglect a
matter of that Importance, when they are to reap to themselves no Advantage by
such a Negligence.

Some will pretend the Prince has more Power to alienate what comes to him by
Forfeiture, than to part with the Revenues of the Crown, reckoning Forfeitures
to be In Fructu Patrimonii Principis; according De Jure Belli ac Pacis, lib. 2.
cap. 6. Number. 12.
to this of Grotius, Sed in eo falluntur multi, quod res quae in fructu sunt
Patrimonii cum rebus Patrimonii confundant. Sic jus Alluvionum in Patrimonio
esse solet, ipsae res quas fecit Alluvio in fructu: Jus vectigalia exigendi in
Patrimonio, Pecunia ex vectigalibus procedeus in fructu: Jus confiscandi in
Patrimonio, fundi confiscati in fructu. All which is right, if rightly
distinguished. No doubt it is not only Legal, but for the Good of* any
Government, that common Confiscations should be at the Disposal of the Prince,
that he may have an Opportunity of extending his Mercy to the Children or
Relations of the Delinquent: Besides, in common* Confiscations the Traitor is
prosecuted and brought to Punishment at the King's sole Expense. But the Case
is quite otherwise when a whole Nation rebels, and when that Rebellion is to be
suppressed at the infinite Expenses of the People, it seems rather that what
accrues thus to the Prince and People (for they always have, or should have a
Joint Interest) ought to be more Sacredly devoted to public Uses, than any
other thing, because it is the Price of Blood.

We have perhaps made it appear, that the People have some Interest in the
Public Revenues: We shall therefore examine whether this Right is any way lost
or lapsed for want of putting in a Claim. If the Nation had sat still while
these Grants were making, and done nothing which looked like a Protest against
it, peradventure it had been such an Abandoning or Dereliction of the matter,
as in some sort might have transferred the Dominion of the things in question
to the present ^^otius de Jure B^lli a^ pacis, l. 2. c. 4. Number. 5.
Possessors. Qui sciens and praesens tacet, videtur consentire. But the Case is
quite otherwise here. The Parliament has very early desired that the
Forfeitures both in England and Ireland might be appropriated to the Uses of
the War and those Desires have been earnestly and frequently repeated. And
because it tends much to the clearing of our present point, we shall so far
trespass upon the Reader's patience, as to give a brief Account of what has
been from time to time done in Parliament in relation to this Affair.

The Sessions 2. Gul. and Mar. began 2. October. 1690.

Veneris 17. die Oct. The House resolved itself into a Committee of the whole
House to consider farther of Ways and Means for the raising of Supplies to be
granted to their Majesty's. Mr. Solicitor Reports from the Committee the
following Resolution.

Resolved, that it is the Opinion of this Committee that toward the raising the
Supplies to be granted to their Majesty's the Sum of Ten Hundred Thousand
Pounds be raised upon the Credit, or by Sale of the Forfeited Estates in
Ireland.

The Resolution being read a second Time.

Resolved, nemine contradicente, that this House does agree with the Committee,
in the said Resolution.

Lunae 20. Die Oct. 1690. Resolved, that an humble Address be made to his
Majesty, that he will please to command the Commissioners in Ireland, to make a
Return to his Majesty of the Names of the Persons in Rebellion in Ireland, and
of their Estates, and the yearly value thereof, and that his Majesty will
graciously please to order the same to be transmitted to this House.

Mereurii22. Die Oct. 1690. Resolved, that a Bill be brought in upon the Debate
of the House for attainting the Persons that are, or have been in Rebellion in
England, or Ireland, and for confiscating their Estates, and for applying the
same to bear the Charges of the War.

Martis 2. Die Dec. 1690. The said Bill was read a first Time.

Jovis 4. Die December. 1690. The said Bill was read a second time, and the same
Day the House resolved itself into a Committee of the whole House to consider
of the said Bill.

Veneris 19. Die Dec. 1690. Mr. Solicitor reported the Bill. Resolved, nemine
contradicente, that the said Bill, with the Amendments be engrossed.

Martis 23. Die Dec. 1690. Resolved the said Bill do pass, and that Mr.
Solicitor carry it to the Lords.

Mercurii 31. Die Dec. 1690. Ordered that a Message be sent to the Lords to put
them in mind of the said Bill, and that Sir Robert Rich carry the said Message.

The Bill fell in the House of Lords, by Reason of the shortness of the
Session, for on the 5th of January the Parliament was adjourned to the 31st of
March, and so by short Adjournments till the following Year. But before the
Recess his Majesty was graciously pleased, in his speech to both Houses, on the
5th of January, to say as follows.

-- And I do likewise think it proper to assure you, that I shall not make any
Grant of the forfeited Lands in England or Ireland, till there be another
Opportunity of settling that matter in Parliament in such manner as shall be
thought most expedient.

The following Sessions began 22 die Oct. 1691.

Sabbati 16. die Jan. 1691. Ordered that leave be given to bring in a Bill to
vest the Forfeited Estates in Ireland, in their Majesty's, to be applied to the
Uses of the War.

Ordered that leave be given to bring in a Bill for vesting the Forfeited
Estates in England in their Majesty's, to be applied to the Uses of the War;
and it is referred to Mr. Smith etc.

Sabbati 23 die Jan. 1691. Mr. Smith presented the two Bills.

Martis 26 die Jan. 1691. Each of the Bills were read a first time, and ordered
a second Reading.

Jovis 28. die Jan. 1691. Each of the said Bills were read a Second time, and
committed to a Committee of the whole House.

Lunae 1. die Feb. 1691. The House resolved it self into a Committee of the
whole House, etc. Mr. Palms Reported from the Committee that they had gone
through the Bill for vesting the Forfeited Estates in England, and had made
some Progress in the Bill relating to Ireland.

Jovis 4. die Feb. 1691. Mr. Palms Reported the Amendments made by the
Committee to the Bill for vesting the Forfeited Estates in England, etc. which
were read and agreed to by the House.

Several Clauses or Savings were offered and agreed to. Among the Rest, that
nothing in the Bill contained, should extend to Grants made to the Earls of
Monmouth and Torrington.

Ordered, That the Bill with the Amendments be engrossed. Mr. Palms also
Reported the Amendments to the Bill for vesting the Forfeited Estates in
Ireland.

Veneris 5. die Feb. 1691. The House proceeded to take into Consideration the
Report of the Amendments to the said Bill, and several of them were read a
second time, and agreed to, etc.

Martis 9. die Feb. 1691. The House proceeded in the further Consideration of
the Report, etc.

A Clause was offered for their Majesty's to grant to any Person or Persons, as
a Reward for their Service, any of the Lands and Hereditaments vested in their
Majesty's, by virtue of this Act, so as such Lands and Hereditaments do not
exceed..... in Value of the whole Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments so vested
in their Majesty's, to any such Person or Persons, as a Reward for his or their
Service.

A Clause offered that it should be lawful for their Majesty's to Grant to
James Duke of Ormond and his Heirs, any of the Forfeitures made by this Act* or
any other Means within, or on any the Estate or Estates of the said Duke.

Twice Read and Agreed to.

Other Clauses Read and Agreed to. Ordered, That the Bill with the Amendments
be engrossed.

Veneris 12. die Feb. 1691. An Engrossed Bill for vesting the Forfeited Estates
in England in their Majesty's to the use of the War, was read the third time.

Riders offered and agreed to. Resolved, That the Bill do pass.

Ordered, That Mr. Palms do carry the Bill to the Lords, and desire their
Concurrence.

An Engrossed Billfor vesting the forfeited Estates in Ireland in their
Majesty's, to be applied to the Use of the War, was read the Third time.

Several Riders presented and agreed to. Resolved, That the Bill do pass.

Ordered, That Mr. Palms do carry the Bill to the Lords for their Concurrence.

Note* In the Bill relating to the Irish Forfeitures, there was reserved to
their Majesty's one third part of the Forfeitures, To be disposed and given to
such Military Officers and Soldiers as their Majesty's should think fit, who
actually served in the Wars in Ireland, in Person there, and to no other Person
or Persons whatsoever.

During this Sessions, Proposals were offered for raising Money upon the
forfeited Estates.

Jan. 1st. 1691. Resolved, That a Committee be appointed to receive Proposals
for raising Money upon the forfeited Estates in Ireland, and it is referred to
Mr. Smith, etc.

Martis 26. die Jan. 1691. Ordered, That the Committee, to whom it was referred
to receive Proposals for raising of Money upon the forfeited Estates in
Ireland, be empowered to inquire into the disposal of forfeited Estates there.

Sabb. 13. die Feb. 1691. Ordered, That the Report of the Committee appointed
to receive Proposals, etc. be made upon Monday Morning next.

Mercurii 17. die Feb. 1691. The said Report was made. It Is very long, but well
worth the Perusal of all Members, and is to be found in the Journal of 1691.
Fol. 866.

What passed in 1690, and 1691, is a sufficient Indication that the People of
England had no mind this Matter should sleep.

The next Year, viz. 1692/3. We may say a Claim to these Estates was continued,
and kept afoot, by an humble Address from the House of Commons to the Throne,
Sabbati 4. die Martii 1692/3. where, among other things, it is thus prayed.

And for as much as the Reducing of Ireland has been of great Expense to this
Kingdom, We humbly beseech your Majesty, That (according to the Assurance Your
Majesty has been pleased to give No grant may be made of the forfeited Estates
in Ireland, till there be an opportunity of settling that Matter in Parliament,
in such manner as shall be thought most expedient.

That a true Account of the Escheats and Forfeited Estates both Real and
Personal, and Stores left by the late K. James, may be laid before your Commons
in Parliament assembled, to the end that the said Escheats, Forfeitures, and
Stores, and the Embezzlement thereof may be inquired into.

Veneris 10. die Martii 1692/3. To this Address His Majesty was graciously
pleased to give the following Answer.

Gentlemen,
I shall always have great Consideration of what comes from the House of
Commons, and I shall take great Care that what is amiss shall be remedied.


The Year following the Matter was again revived, and other Bills brought in of
the same Purport with the former.

Veneris 12. die Jan. 1693. Ordered, That a Bill be brought in to vest the
forfeited Estates in Ireland in their Majesty's to be applied to the use of the
War.

The like Order for the forfeited Estates in England.

Mercur. 24. die Jan. 1693. The Honorable Henry Boil Esquire according to Order,
presented to the House a Bill to vest the forfeited Estates in Ireland in their
Majesty's, to be applied to the Use of the War. And also

A Bill to vest the forfeited Estates in England in their Majesty's, to be
applied to the Use of the War; and the same were read.

Sabbati 3. die Feb. 1693. A Bill for vesting the forfeited Estates in Ireland,
etc. was read the second time.

Resolved, That the Bill be Committed to a Committee of the whole House.

Martis 27. die Feb, 1693. The House resolved it self into a Committee of the
whole House to consider of the Bill for vesting the forfeited Estates in
Ireland, etc.

Mr. Boil reported from the Committee that they had made some Progress, etc.
and desired leave to sit again.

The House resolved it self into a Committee of the whole House to consider
further of the said Bill.

Mr. Boil reported from the Committee that they had made a farther Progress
etc, and desired Leave to sit again.

This Sessions a Commitee was likewise appointed to receive Proposals
concerning these Forfeitures.

Veneris 12. die Jan. 1693. Sr. Rowland Guin reports from the Commitee
appointed to receive Proposals concerning the Forfeitures in Ireland, and
likewise for securing the Protestant Interest there.

The Proposals received by the Committee may be seen in the Journals of that
Year from Fol. 314. to Fol. 324.

December 3, 1694. A Bill was presented to the House, to vest the forfeited
Estates in Ireland in their Majesty's, read. And read again a second time, 10
die December. 1694.

Anno, 1695. A Bill was presented to the House, to vest in the Crown all
forfeited Estates in Ireland. And to vacate all Grants made thereof. 11 die
Feb. 1695. Lecta 1 vice.

Anno 1695. A Bill was presented to the House to vest in the Crown all
forfeited Estates in England, and to vacate all Grants made thereof. 11 die
Feb. 1695, Lecta 1. vice.

Anno 1697. A Bill was presented for vacating all Grants of Estates and other
Interests in Engl. and Irel. from the Crown during the Reign of the late King
Charles the 2d. And for appropriating the same to the use of the Public. 12
die Feb. 1697. Lecta 1 vice. 25 die Feb. 1697. Lecta 2. vice.

Anno ditto. A Bill was presented for vacating all Grants of Estates and other
Interests in England and Ireland, from the Crown since the 13th. day of
February 1688. And for appropriating the same to the use of the Public. 12 die
Feb. 1697. Lecta 1. vice. 25. die Feb. 1697. Lecta 2 vice.

Anno ditto. A Bill was presented for vacating all Grants of Estates and other
Interests forfeited in Ireland since the 13th of Feb. 1688. And for
appropriating the same to the use of the Public. 9 die Feb. 1697. Lecta 1.
vice. 12 die Feb. 1697. Lecta 2. vice.

Anno School. 9 die Maii. A Bill was presented for granting an Aid to his Majesty
by an imposition upon Beneficial Grants and other things therein mentioned. 10
die Maii Lecta 1 vice. 11 die Maii Lecta 2 vice.

Thus we have shown a continued Series (the Year 1696 excepted) of Bills or
Adresses from Year to Year relating to this matter; so that if the People of
England have any Right or Interest in these Lands and Forfeitures, it has not
been lost or lapsed for want of putting in their Claim.

3dly. How far in an Act of Resumption it is just and reasonable to look
backwards.

In matters of Government it is generally the safest Course to tread in the
Steps of our Ancestors, were it only for this single Reason, that it is
returning so far toward our Ancient Constitution, which all sides will agree
to have been formed with admirable Gravity and Wisdom. In the present Question
we shall therefore see (as far we can find in old Histories, or in the Records)
how our Forefathers proceeded in Acts of the like Nature, for which we have
recited our Authorities in the third Section.

Henry the 1st. resumed such Lands as his Brother Duke Robert, who was an easy
Prince, had bestowed in Normandy upon undeserving Persons. But we do not find
he touched upon any thing that had been done by his Father, or by William Rufus.

Stephen was pressed by the Nation, as well as by Henry Fitz Empress, to resume
only his own Grants.

Henry the 2d. resumed the Grants of Stephen, but the matter had been agreed
upon in the preceding Reign.

Richard the 1st. did only resume the Alienations he himself had made.

Henry the 3d. was persuaded by his Barons to resume what had been granted away
by King John his Father, a Prince so profuse, that in a manner he had quite
undone the Nation.

The Resumption made by Edward the 2d. had relation only to what was done in
his own Reign,

In the Reign of Richard the 2d. the Commons indeed pray that the Gifts of
Edward the 3d. to unworthy Persons might be looked into, which perhaps was done
in respect of the dotage and Weakness this great Prince fell into the last Ten
Years of his Life. But what had been worthily bestowed was to be confirmed.

In the Reign of Henry the 4th. the Petition of the Commons was, that the
Resumption might look as far backward as the 40th of Edward the 3d. and
therefore we see it came to nothing, and only ended in taking the Profits of
all the Lands and Pensions granted for one Year.

The Resumptions made in the Reign of Henry the 6th. extended only to the first
Day of his coming to the Crown.

It Is true, the Commons in their Petition to Edward the 4th. pray that the
Resumption might extend to the Reigns of all the three Henry's, and the Act
passed accordingly: But we may plainly see this was chiefly done to condemn
their Titles to the Crown; And the Resumption retrospecting so far, was found
so impracticable, that in the 3d. and 4th. of his Reign, a new Act became
necessary, which looked no further backward than the 4th of March, in the first
Year of his own Reign.

The Resumption made by Henry the 7th. does indeed look as far backward as 34
Hen. 6. and so takes in the Grants of Richard the 3d. and Edward the 4th. But
because there passed four several Acts of the same Nature in the Reign of
Edward, we may presume that this long Retrospect could not affect any
considerable number of Families, and that it was chiefly levelled at those who
by Power and Interest in Edward's Reign still kept the Crown Lands, and who
perhaps, by new Grants from Edward and Richard, had defeated the Intentions of
former Parliaments.

The Reader may see, that in these Resumption most of the Presidents reach only
to the present, or to the Reign immediately preceding, which is consonant to
the Laws of all Nations, that have prefixed some limited time, after which Men
should think themselves safe and quiet in their Possessions.

They without Doors who have desired that forfeited Estates of Ireland might
not be looked into, have endeavored to obst ruct the good Intentions of the
Parliament, by crying we are willing to Resume, provided you will go far enough
backwards: We shall join in it if you will take in all the Grants since the
Restoration of King Charles the Second. But few are so short sighted as not to
see into this Artifice; such as are for making their Resumption so large,
desire none at all, and would engage a great many different Titles to oppose it.

If it could possibly consist with the Rules of Justice, if to do so would not
produce unspeakable Disorders, if it would not utterly ruin a great number of
Families, no doubt, the Public laboring under so many Debts, and
Difficulties, such a general Resumption would be advisable, all which are
strong Objections to the making it so extensive.

To which may be answered, that the same Inconveniences will happen by resuming
the Irish Forfeitures; we shall therefore try to show how the Cases differ.

But to clear these Points we must repeat some things that have been laid down
in the foregoing part of this Discourse.

That the Kings of this Realm have always prescribed a Power of alienating the
Crown-Revenue by their Great Seals.

That it would not have been convenient in the beginning of this Constitution
to have bound up the Prince's Hands from all kind of Alienations, for then, by
Forfeitures and Attainders, in process of time, the King would have been Lord
of the whole Soil.

That however, Parliments by Petitions, Bills or Acts of Resumption, have all
along laid in a claim of the People's Interest in this Revenue, especially when
the Grants were become exorbitant.

That the Wastes committed upon the Crown-Revenue produced at last [viz. 11.
Hen. 4.] a positive Law porhibiting these sort of Alienations.

That the force of the Law was evaded by Clauses of non obstante incerted in
the Letters Patents.

That these Clauses seem condemned by the late Act for declaring the Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects.

When King Charles the 2d. came in, the Doctrine of the Court was, sow a little
that you may reap much, and they who were then entrusted with the Nation's
Purse, were themselves for diving into the Princes Pocket. And at the same time
the Doctrine of Westminster Hall was to advance the Prerogative as high as
possible; thus the King was persuaded to give away the greatest part of his
Crown Lands, and by the Proceedings of Westminster Hall the People were
encouraged to think such Grants were good in Law, the Courtier begged and the
Citizen bought, so that immediately he was in a manner divested of all, and yet
they who had suffered for him and his Father, were few of 'em the better for
all this immoderate Bounty.

These Liberalities of his were not bestowed as the Recompense of ancient
Merit, but were often the Price of Treachery, and the Rewards of Vice. And as
Cyrus observed, that in Camps the most worthless Soldiers are the busiest to
get Plunder, so the same thing may be said of a Court exposed to Spoil, the
worst Men in it are the most ravenous and generally make the best Advantages.

The Observation we have now made, did apparently hold true as to King
Charles's Court; however ill-gotten Goods seldom thrive, and very little of
what was thus obtained remains with the first Possessors, but is now dispersed
into a Multitude of Hands.

Though what he did was so prejudicial to the Crown yet such was then the
flourishing Condition of our Affairs, that we could bear* a great deal of ill
Management. Besides some were glad enough to see a young Prince necessitated to
depend upon his People, who was apprehended to meditate arbitrary Power. But
whatever governed the Councels of those times, certain it is that there was no
actual Bar put in the Way of his destructive Bounty.

It Is true (as we have noted in the third Section) 'twas complained of, but all
ended in an Address which had very little in it of the Spirit which our
Ancestors had shown upon the like Occasions.

Leave was given at the beginning of that Reign to bring in a Bill of
Resumption; A Bill was twice read, to regulate and restrain such Alienations,
and an Address was thereupon made, but no consequence following upon all this,
the People of England had reason to believe that the Parliament acquiesced in
what was done at Court.

The matter did not only Sleep then, but was not, as we can find, afterward
revived, and for many Years it was hardly mentioned in the House of Commons,
insomuch that Estates, though so newly derived from the Crown, came in a short
space of Time to bear almost an equal value with any other sort of Land.

But if, as in ancient times, such a Proceeding of the Court had been
complained of from Sessions to Sessions, if, as heretofore, the Ministers that
procured the Grants, had been impeached, if Bills of Resumption had been
frequently offered though rejected, such Motions would have been some Warning
to the Nation, the Purchasers would have looked about 'em, every Man must have
known the Hazard he was to undergo, and he can only accuse himself, who will
run into it, when before hand he is acquainted with the Danger.

But the Legislative Authority continuing so long silent in the matter, and the
Lawyers of those times making no Objection to Titles of this Sort, depending
upon their Ex certa Scientia, mero Mortu, and Gratia speciali, and yet more
upon their Clauses of non obstante, the People were induced to think they might
as safely make these as any other Sort of Purchases.

Hence it was that what belonged to the Crown but so lately, came to be a
matter of Public Traffic among the People, insomuch that the whole Fortune of
very many Families is therein embarked.

What Cato said is indeed true, if rightly distinguished, that there ought to
be no praescription against the Public. Plut. vit. Cat.
Ne^ Mortales contra Deum immortalem, nec privatos contra Rempublicam
praescribere posse. This *holds without doubt when private Men get fraudulently
or by Force into Possession of what belongs to the Public, and at the
beginning were Possessores mala Fide, which length of time ought not to purge.
But in a mixed Government, if one Part of the State suffers the other Part to
alienate what the whole have an Interest in, and if the said Part had power and
Opportunity to make an Opposition, and yet made none, it implies such a Consent
as according to the Law of Nations, and the Rules of Justice, ought to
indemnifie to all Intents and Purposes the Possessor bona fide, and the
Purchaser upon a valuable Consideration. Grotius Dc Jure Belli ac Pacis. l. 2.
Cap. 6. n. 10.
speaking upon Alienations says, * Inconsulto vero Populo Rex id non potest, si
maneamus inter terminos naturales: quia juris temporarii, quale est Regnum
electorum, aut lege succedentium ad Imperium, effectus nisi temporarii esse non
possunt: potuit tamen Populi, ut expressus consensus, ita tacitus consuetudine
introductus qualem nunc passim vigere cernimus, id jus Regibus tribuere. And a
little before. * Subscribere Ibid. n. 8.
non possumus Jurisconsultis, qui ad Regulam de non alienandis Imperii partibus,
adjiciunt exceptiones duas, de publica utilitate, and de necessitate: nisi hoc
sensu, ut ubi eadem est utilitas communis and Corporis and Partis, facile ex
silentio* etiam non longi temporis, consensus and populi and partis
intervenisse videatur, facilius vero si etiam necessitas appareat. At ubi
manifesta est in contrarium voluntas aut corporis, aut partis nihil actum debet
intelligi. And a little lower he says. Ibid. n. 11.
* Nec admitto exceptionem, si res modisticum valeat quia quod meum non est,
ejus nec exiguam partem alienare mihi jus est: sed in rebus modicis quam in
magnis consensus Populiex scientia, and ex silentio facilius praesumitur.

So that this great Civilian is of Opinion that the Acquiescence and long
silence of one of the Constituent parts of a State is in a manner an
Approbation of what the other does.

No doubt the People by their Representatives have a Right to complain when
they see that wasted which must be supplied out of their Purses, and they have
a Right to propose Resumptions when they become of absolute Necessity. But this
Right they may suspend for a Season, and, pro hac vice, Ibid. cap 4. n. 4.
renounce. * Venit enim hoc non ex Jure Civili, sed ex Jure Naturali, quo
qu^sque suum potest abdicare.

No doubt the People may lay claim to what the whole has an Interest in, to wit
the Public Revenues, but this claim ought to be made within some moderate
Compass of Time, so as not to produce any distraction or disturbance in Men's
Titles and Possessions. For otherwise such a Claim will occasion more Disorders
than it can propose to remedy.

But when it has been forborne too long, and when the People have been suffered
to imagine that the Circumstances of the time admitted of a such a Profusion, or
that their Representatives have acted upon some Reason of State, and that they
did not resume because 'twas better these Estates of the Crown should be in
private Hands: When the Silence of those who had right to complain seems to
have justified such proceedings, and when upon all these Presumptions private
Men have gone on for many Years to buy and sell in the way of their common
Business, to come afterward with Cato's Rule and say, There is no praescribing
against the Public would be unjust and dangerous.

Sylla made strange Alterations in the State of Rome, in its Governments,
Magistracies, and also in the Properties of Men; however the Senate had
submitted, and in a tract of Time the People was accustomed to these
Establishments; but Cataline and his Accomplices, not out of Love to the
Commonwealth, Vit. Cic.
(as * Plutarch notes) and rather to innovate in things, and to find matter for
Civil War, would change what was already fixed; but Cicero and the best
Citizens of Rome, thought the Mischief had taken too deep a Root, that to alter
what had been done some Years before, and which concerned so many, would alarm
and affect too great a number of Persons, therefore the good Patriots of that
Age would not consent to break into the Acts of Sylla

In the same manner most certainly King Charles acted against the Trust of his
high Office, in permitting such a Spoil to be made of his and the Nations
Revenue, but no good Man who loves the Peace and Quiet of his Country would
desire to unravel what has been done so many Years ago, and in which so many
Thousands are concerned. The Evil is grown too big for Correction, It Is like a
Disease which is become in a manner part of the Constitution, of which to
attempt the Cure would be to kill the Patient. They whose Duty it was to take
Care of the Body Politic have suffered the Distemper to proceed too far. By
the Negligence of the State which for Forty Years together has let this Matter
go on without Check and Inquiry, most of those who are in Possession of Grants
from King Charles are now Possessors bona fide and purchasors upon a valuable
Consideration. Were they now in the Possession of those who had first procured
the Grants, no doubt according to the Constitution of this Kingdom they might
justly be resumed. But the Case is notoriously quite otherwise; in the space of
Forty Years most of those Estates have been sold over and over, and from time
to time have passed through so many Hands, that a Resumption from the 1st. Day
of his Reign (as they propose who would load this matter to perplex and defeat
it) cannot be made without breaking into so many private Contracts, Marriage
Settlements, Jointures Mortgages, and Sales for Valuable Consideration, that
there is hardly any Tax which probably the People of England would not consent
to, rather than bring so vast a Disorder and Ruin upon such a number of private
Families.

From what has been here laid down it will appear to any disinterested Reader,
that King Charles's Grants and those lately made do not stand upon the same
Foot, and that the Cases differ in many and very material Circumstances.

1st. The Law is perhaps otherwise now than the common and received Practice of
it then was, but, as we have before said, it is submitted to the Gentlemen of
the long Robe to determine in that Point.

2dly. What King Charles had done was winked at, because the flourishing Trade,
Wealth of the Nation and its long Peace might bear such Gifts which were not to
be supplied by new and heavy Taxes. But our present Condition is not the same,
there was not then raised upon the People quite two Millions per Annum. England
of late has paid, and for some time to come will pay, at least Five Millions
per Annum. The Public had not then been exhausted, and was not in Debt; we
have in Ten Years actually levied Thirty Millions and still owe near Twenty
Millions, above four of which are not yet provided for.

3dly. The Nation seemed to acquiesce in what King Charles had done, for though
something was moved at first to restrain and regulate Alienations from the
Crown the matter had little Progress and afterward we have not heard it was
pushed on with any Vigor, the Claim was not so strongly made as by the Rules
of Justice to take away from the Possessors any Pretenses to Praescription. But
in our present Case a solemn Assurance has been given from the Throne, That no
grant should be made of the forfeited Lands in England and Ireland till there
should be another Opportunity of settling that Matter in Parliament in such
manner as should be thought expedient. Afterward, as we have shown, an Address
was presented that no Grant might be made of the forfeited Lands in Ireland.
And almost in every Sessions a Claim has been put in by the Representatives of
the People, and as we have set forth Twelve several Bills have been presented
and read all tending to appropriate these Forfeitures to the uses of the War.
So that the new Possessors of these Estates cannot pretend that any Silence has
given a Sanction to what has been done, or that a quiet and unquestiond
enjoyment has so far confirmed their Right as that thereby they may plead
Praescription. If any of these Lands have been sold or traffick'd about the
Purchasers cannot plead Ignorance; by the Steps made in Parliament they could
not but know they bought a litigated Title; the same may be said as to
Marriage, Settlements, Jointures, or any other civil contract that has Relation
to the Grants lately made.

4thly. What Crown Lands K. Charles gave away descended lineally to him from
his Ancestors, The Irish Forfeitures have been lately purchased with the Blood
and Treasure of this Kingdom.

If any Man could think that a Resumption retrospecting so far as the beginning
of King Charles Il's Reign would be for the Public Good, why has it been never
set afoot or mentioned at any other time but when the Parliament had a desire,
by a Resumption in Ireland, to ease the People in their Taxes?

All the Premises considered, perhaps it will appear to any unbiased Person
who desires to help the Affairs of England by a Resumption, That, to follow the
greatest Number of Presidents and according to the Rules of Prudence and
Justice, the Bill ought to look no farther backwards than this, or the Reign
immediately preceding.

We hope to have made it evident in the Series of this Discourse, That
according to the Constitution of this Kingdom the late Grants may be resumed,
We have produced variety of Presidents to justify such a Proceeding. It Is hoped
we have given them a full Answer who would engage the Kings Honor in
Countenancing their Depredations upon the Public. Peradventure we have
produced undeniable Proofs that the People of England have an Interest in these
Lands, and Perhaps we have silenced those, who to clog a good thing, would put
us upon a wrong scent, by proposing to look farther backwards than in Justice
and Reason we ought to do.

And, if we have made out all these Positions, it will not be difficult for
good Englishmen to think, infer, and conclude, That more especially the
forfeited Estates in Ireland ought to be applied toward Payment of the Public
Debts.

The Writer of these Papers, from the first time he bent his Studies to Matters
of this Nature, has all along endeavored to propose such Ways and Means of
raising Money as might give ease to the Landed Interest of which he hopes what
he has formerly published is a sufficient Evidence.

It Is true the freedom and Sincerity with which he has handled these Points may
have drawn upon him powerful enmities but if he has given any Hints by which
England may save two Millions and remain this Yearwithout a Land Tax, he shall
think his Labor well employed, and little value the displeasure of Particular
and Interested Persons, whose, Resentments ought truly not to fall upon him,
but rather upon those whose general ill Conduct has made so rough a thing as a
Resumption necessary.

However he who looks into any Male administration stirs up a Nest of Hornets.
If any one be touched who has been concerned in Procuring Grants all that have
participated in his Guilt will be alarmed, Tacit. Hist. l. 4.
and think themselves bound to act in his Defense, for if one Criminal falls the
rest are all in danger * Nam si Marcellus Eprius caderet Agmen Reorum
Sterneretur.

There is an Anecdote, or secret History belonging to these Grants well worth
the Knowledge of good Patriots; the Writer of these Papers is not quite without
Materials for it: Nor is he at all withheld by any of those private and mean
Fears which commonly obstruct National Designs, but the Truth is he has not
this time had leisure to put so Dark and Int^icate a matter into any tolerable
Method.

The Manner of procuring several of the Irish Forfeitures has been as criminal
by its Circumstances, as in itsself; but of this at another Season. To look
into the Depredations lately committed is so copious a subject, that he who
bends his Thoughts this way, is sure to have matter enough before him; and if
all things were well examined, it would perhaps be found that the Resumption
here proposed is not the only way of raising Money to ease the People in their
Taxes.

There have been of late Years given in Parliament upwards of Fifty Millions.
This immense Sum as we all know, has been transmitted into two Offices for the
use of the War. And by an Inquisition into those Offices peradventure something
very considerable is to be recovered.

The Author thinks he cannot employ his Hours of Leisure more to his Country's
Service than in Inquiries of this Nature. And next Year (if he finds a
Continuation of these Foul Practices which have been so destructive to England,
and so prejudicial to the King's Interest) he purposes to open a new Scene:
That Zeal for the Public which has now warmed him shall not in the least cool,
and though he should be left to stand alone, he will still combat on, and
neither ask nor give Quarter in the Conflict he intends to maintain with the
Corruptions of the Age.

FINIS.
Compare page 335, image 168

on the sudden, he could not govern himself in the Change: But Prosperity laid
open the secret Faults of his Mind, which were suppressed and choked before.
Thomas of Walsingham calls him Michael At Pole, and says he was convicted in
Parliament of notorious Frauds, Walsing. p. 324. Number. 10.
Convicerant eum nempe de multis Fraudibus, et quibusdam proditionibus in
Regem, quos nequaquam inficiari nequibat, unde et cum responsis astaret, et
objecta negare nequibat, Rex pro ipso verecundatus et rubore suffusus, caput
agitans, heu! heu! inquit Michael, vide quid fecisti. But as soon as the
Parliament was up, the King took him into greater Favor than before. But the
Weight of a Parliament will at last bear down a bad Minister, so that de
la-Pool durst not stand the next Sessions, but fled to France where he died in
Exile. But take from Walsingham the Character of this Chancellor, with the
Account of his Death. Ibid. p. 339.
Hac Aestata persidiae promptuarium; Sentina Avaritiae, Auriga Proditionis,
Archa Malitiae, Odii Seminator, Mendacii Fabricator, susurro nequissimus, dolo
praestantissimus, artificiosus detractor, Patriae delator, Michael At Pole,
quondam Comes Southfolchiae Regnique Cancellarius

Compare page 297, image 149

he is to make it clearly and expressly known to the King, with true Advice and
Counsel; And, in all that he may, he is to do, and purchase the King's Profit.
So that more than any other, as the highest Officer, and as the last Check, the
Laws presume him to consult for the King's good. Therefore if the Grant be
exorbitant, if it be made to an undeserving Person, if it notoriously surpasses
the Merits of the Suitor, if it was obtained upon wrong Suggestions, if it
occasions Obloquy to the Government, or Discontent among the People, if the
King's Debts are many and clamorous, if the Nation labors, at the same time as
the Gift is made, under heavy Taxes; and if the Grant tends greatly to the Hurt
and Impoverishment of the Crown (with all which Matters the Law presumes so
great a Minister in the State to be acquainted) he is bound in Duty and by his
Oath not to fix the Great Sale to the said Grant, but thereupon faithfully and
impartially to advise the King: And Chancellors who have acted otherwise, and
who, contrary to the Trust of their Office, have ventured to pass outrageous
Gifts, Douns Outrageuses, as the Records call 'em, whereby the Crown has


