THE Dying Speeches OF Several Excellent PERSONS, WHO Suffered for their Zeal
against Popery, and Arbitrary Government; VIZ.

I. Mr. Stephen College, at Oxford, August 31. 1681.

II. The Lord Russel in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, July 21. 1683.

III. Col. Sidney, on Tower Hill, December 7. 1683.

IV. Col. Rumbald, at Edinburgh, June 26. 1685.

V. The Lady Lisle, at Winchester, in September 1685.

VI. Alderman Cornish, in Cheapside, October. 23. 1685.

VII. Capt. Walcot, at Tyburn, in July 20. 1683.

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1689.

TO THE READER.
THO some of these Speeches were Printed some Years since, and generally
received by all sorts of People with great Concern; but being in loose Sheets,
they are not so well preserved, therefore I have thought fit to Collect them
together, that so they may be often Reviewed, and that the Present and Future
may with Abhorrency behold the Iniquity of the late Violent Times, when so many
Excellent Persons were destroyed by Forms and Subtilties of Law; and Scribere
est agere was brought in for an Evidence (as in the Case of Col. Sydney) when
no other could be found.

And whereas the Business of the Ry-House Plot has been received by some as an
Article of Faith, and a smooth History of it has been imposed on the Nation,
therefore I thought good to add Colonel Rumbald's Speech to undeceive the
World, by which it is evident (if we may believe the Dying words of a good Man)
that was a mere Sham-Contrivance, to bring an Odium on Protestants.

It has been always the Practice of the Papists to make Sham-Plots, to render
Protestants odious, and to hide the foulness of their own Real Plots, of which
this Nation has had sufficient Experience; especially in their late Damnable
Plot. For when it was clearly proved on them, that they Conspired against the
Life of the late King, and our Government, they presently Contrived to cast
that Wickedness on Protestants; and too many of our easy Churchmen were
imposed on to believeit. But through the Goodness of God, and the Auspicious
Arrival of the Prince of Orange, the Eyes of the Nation are opened, and now we
hope we have an Opportunity to be Delivered (if our Sins prevent not) from the
Plots and Tyranny of the Church of Rome; Which God in his Infinite Mercy grant.

Amen.
The Speech and Carriage of STEPHEN COLLEGE, at Oxford before the the Castle,
on Wednesday, August 31, 1681. Taken exactly from his own Mouth at the place of
Execution.
Mr. High Sheriff. MR. College, it is desired for the Satisfaction of the
World, because you have professed your self a Protestant, that you would tell
what Judgment you are of.


College. Dear People, dear Protestants, and dear Countrymen, I have been
accused and convicted for Treason; the Laws adjudg me to this Death, and I come
hither willingly to submit to it: I pray God forgive all those Persons that had
any hand in it. I do declare to you, whatever has been said of me, I was never
a Papist, or ever that way inclinusd; they have done me wrong, I was ever a
Protestant, I was born a Protestant, I have lived so, and so by the Grace of
God I will die, of the Church of England, according to the best Reformation of
the Church from all Idolatry, from all Superstition, or any thing that is
contrary to the Gospel of our Blessed Lord and Savior.

I do declare I was never in any Popish Service, Prayers or Devotions in my
Life, save one time about some 17 or 18 Years ago, as near as I remember, I
was, out of a Curiosity, one Afternoon at St. James's Chapel, the Queen's
Chapel at St. James's; except that one time I never did hear any Popish
Service, any thing of the Church of Rome, Mass or Prayers, or any thing else
private or public. I know you expect that I should say something as to what I
die for: It has been charged upon me, when I was apprehended and brought
before the Council, some of the Council, the Secretary, and my Lord
Killingworth, and Mr. Seymour, they told me there was Treason sworn against me:
truly, they surprised me when they said so. For of all things in the World, I
thought my self as free from that as any Man. I asked them, if any Man living
had the confidence to swear Treason against me? They said several, three or
four, as I remember: Then they told me, It was sworn against me, That I had a
Design to pull the King out of White Hall, and to serve him as his Father was
served, or to that purpose, the Logger-head his Father, or that kind of
Language: I did deny it then, and do now deny it upon my Death. I never was in
any manner of Plot in my days, neither one way nor another, never knew any such
Persons, nor ever had such Communication with any Man hitherto: I know of no
Plot in the World but the Popish Plot, and that every Man may know as much as
I: if I had had such a Design, as these Men have sworn against me, to have
seized his Majesty, either at London, or this place at Oxford, I take God to
Witness, as I am a dying Man, and upon the Terms of my Salvation, I know not
any one Man upon the Face of the Earth that would have stood by me; and how
likely it was that I should do such a thing my self, let the whole World judge.

Dugdale swears, That I spoke Treason to him, Treasonable words in the
Coffee-house, and in the Barbers-shop by the Angel; He could not pretend to see
me any where else; but it is false, and a very unlikely thing that I should
speak Treason to him. I must confess I was in his company at the Coffee-house,
and that Barbers-shop before I went out of Town: but there could be no
communication between us, for he was writing at one end of the Room, and eating
a piece of Bread, and I lighted a Pipe of Tobacco at the other end and took it,
till Sir Tho. Player and Sir Rob. Clayton came to me, and we went to my Lord
Lovelace's out of Town that night: So when they came, we took Horse, and went
out of Town with the rest: For my part, I cannot sum up my Witnesses, I was
under most strange Circumstances as ever any Man was; I was kept Prisoner so
close in the Tower, that I could have no conversation with any, though I was
certain the Popish Lords had it every day there, but I could have none: I could
not tell the Witnesses that were to swear against me: I could not tell what it
was they swore against me, for I could have no Copy of the Indictment, nor no
way possible to make any preparation to make my defense, as I ought to have
done, and might have done by Law.

I had no liberty to do any thing, as I am as dying Man. And as to what
Dugdale, Smith, Turbervill and Heins swore against me, they did swear such
Treason, that nothing but a mad Man would ever have trusted any Body with: and
least of all to Papists, every one of them that had been concerned with Plots
and Treasons among their own Party: and under the greatest Ties and Obligations
of Damnation; and to be Sainted if they kept it secret, and to be damned if
they did reveal it. If these Men will not keep Things private for their own
Party, how could I trust them? I take God to Witness, and do freely acknowledge,
I have sought my God with Tears several times to inform me, if so be I had with
any Word transgrest at any time. I knew not of any part of what they swore
against me, till such time as I heard it sworn against me at the Bar.

This is very hard, Gentlemen, but this is the Truth: and there be a great many
other strange Reports that I have heard since I have been a Prisoner: That I
should be a means to convert the Countess of Rochester, by bringing one
Thompson a Priest to her. Truly all that I was concerned in, was some 15 or 16
Years ago. I lodged at Colonel Vernon's, that married the Lady Brooks, the
Family were Papists: The Brookses were Papists, and there was this Thomson, and
I did suppose him a Priest, in the House, though I never saw him at Popish
Service or Worship, though I was there half a Year; but coming afterward to My
Lord Rochester's about some Business, I had to do for him, and several other
Persons of Quality; he sent for me one Afternoon from the Parsonage in
Adderbury to his House, and his Lady and he stood together: He sent to me, and
asked me, if my Horse were at Home, said he, I would have you carry this Letter
to Mr. Thompson, if you are at lessure this Afternoon: My Lord, I am at leisure
to serve you; so I took a Letter from his Hand, and his Ladies too, as I
remember (he made an offer that way) sealed with his own Seal, and I carried it
to Thompson, and delivered it to him: and he old me, that he would wait upon my
Lord, for it was for some Lands my Lord did offer to raise Money for some
Occasion: this is the Truth of that Scandal.

It is said, that I had a Priest several Years in my House, viz. Sergeant, that
came over from Holland to discover. About some Ten years ago, that very same
Man came to me, but was a stranger to me, and he came to me by the Name of
Doctor Smith a Physician: and there was an Apothecary in the Old Bailey, and a
Linnen-Draper within Ludgate, that came with him, they brought him thither, and
took a Chamber, and lay about half a Year, or three quarters at times, by the
Name of Doctor Smith, and as a Physician: this is the Truth of that, and no
otherwise. This is the entertainment of Sergeant.

So the occasion of my coming to Oxford I do say was voluntary, the
Parliament Men, last Parliament at Westminester, and several Lords, dined
together the day before they sat; the last Sessions of Parliament at
Westminister they sent for me to the Sun Tavern behind the Exchange, and when I
came, the Duke of Monmouth, and several Lords were together, and I believe
above 100 Parliament Men of the Commons: The Duke of Monmouth called me to him,
and told me, he had heard a good Report of me, and that I was an honest Man and
one that may be trusted; and they did not know but their Enemies, the Papists,
might have some Design to serve them as they did in King James' time by
Gunpowder, or any other way: And the Duke, with several Lords and Commons, did
desire me to use my utmost skill in searching all places suspected by them,
which I did perform: and from thence I had, as I think, the Popular name of the
Protestant Joiner, because they had entrusted me before any Man in England to
do that Office.

This same Heines, one of them that Swore against me, had discovered to me, and
several others, as to Macknamarra and his brother, and this Ivey, who are now
all of another stamp, that the Parliament was to be destroyed at Oxford, and
that there was a design to murder my L. Shaftsbury, by Fitzgerald and his
Party; and that they did endeavor to bring Macknamarra over to him, and said,
then it would be well with him: and they would not be long before they had
Shaftsbury's Life: and he made Depositions of this to Sir George Treby, as I
heard afterward, for I was not with him when it was Sworn. I wish the Commons
of England, as well as I wish my own Heart; and I did not understand, but when
I served the Parliament, I served his Majesty too, and let them be miserable
that make the difference between them, for my part I never did. I came to
Oxford with my Lord Howard, whom I look upon to be a very honest worthy
Gentlemen, my L. Clare, my L. Paget, and my L. Huntington, and this Captain
Brown and Don Lewis were in my Company, and came along with us, as they were my
Lord Howard's Friends; Brown I have known I believe two or three Months; but
Lewis I never saw before that day: They said, they came with my Lord Howard. I
take God to Witness, I never had one 6 d. or any thing else, to carry on any
Design; and if it were to save my Life now, I cannot charge any Man in the
World with any Design against the Government, as God is my Witness, or against
his Majesty, or any other Person.

As for what Arms I had, and what Arms others had, they were for our own
Defense, in case the Papists should make any attempt upon us by way of
Massacre, or any Invasion or Rebellion, that we should be ready to defend our
selves; God is my Witness, this is all I know. If this be a Plot, this I was
in, but in no other, but never knew of any Numbers or Times appointed for
meeting: but we have said, one to another, that the Papists had a Design
against the Protestants, when we did meet, as I was a Man of general
Conversation; and in case they should rise, we were ready, but then they should
begin the Attempt upon us: This was my Business, and is the Business of every
good Subject that loves the Laws of his Country and his King. For England can
never hope to be happy under those Blood-thirsty Men, whose Religion is Blood
and Murder, which I do, with all my Soul, and did, ever since I knew what
Religion was, abhor and detest, viz. the Church of Rome as pernicious and
destructive to humane Societies, and all Government.

I beseech God that every Man of you may unite together as Protestants against
this common Foe. Gentlemen, it is my sense, and I do in that believe, I am as
certainly murdered by the Hands of the Papists, as Sir Edm. Bury Godfrey
himself was, though the Thing is not seen. These Witnesses certainly are
mercenary Men, and I beseech God Almighty to have Mercy upon their Souls, and
forgive them; and either by his Judgments or Mercies reclaim them, that they
shed no more innocent Blood: There is not a Man of them that I know of, that
ever heard me say or do any bit of Treason in my Life. This is (the first I may
not say it is) but almost the Twentieth Sham-Plot that they have endeavored to
put upon the Nation, to delude the People, and put off their own Damnable Plot.
This is not the first, but I think the sixteenth or seventeenth; I pray God
that my Blood may be the last. I pray God defend every Man's Blood, and all
Protestants in England, from the Hands of these bloody Papists, by whose means
I die this Death: And if they shall go on in this Nature, I hope the Good God
will open every Man's Eyes to see it before he feels it. And, I beseech you, if
you have any love for your King, your Country, and the Protestants, unite
together if you are Protestants. I pray God those that deserve the Name, let
them be called how they will, either Dissenters or Church of England Men, that
they may unite together like Men, like Christians, against the Common Foe, who
will spare neither the one side nor the other, but beat you one against another
like two Pitchers; the last that stands, they will certainly destroy if they
can. This is my Sense, and God is my Witness, I speak my Conscience; I do not
know, Mr. Sheriff, whether there be any thing else I have to say, or no; we
have a good God, and I beseech every Man that hears me this day, (for we live
in a sinful Age, good People, and it behooves every one of you, it cannot be
long before all that look upon me in this Condition must lie down in the Dust,
and, God knows, must come into an Eternal State, either for Mercy or for
Judgment). I beseech you, in the Name of God, he is a God of Mercy, and a God
of Patience and Long-suffering, that you would break off your Sins by
Repentance, and serve a good God, who must be your Friend at last, or else you
are lost to Eternity.

O Lord, how ungrateful Wretches are we, that have a God of such infinite Mercy
and Goodness, that affords us our Life, our Health, and a thousand Mercies
every day; and we, like ungrateful People, not deserving the Name of Men or
Christians, live riotous Lives, in Debauchery and Swearing, in Malice, and the
Lord knows how many Evils. I beseech God that I may be this day a Means in the
Hand of God, to bring some of their Souls over to him: I beseech you remember
what I say; indeed I do not know, I have been so strangely used since I have
been a Prisoner, what to say, being brought from one Affliction to another,
that my Body is worn out, and my Memory and Intellects have failed me much to
what they were. I cannot remember what I have to say more, but that the Lord
Jesus Christ would bless my Country, and preserve it from Popery, and in mercy
bless his Majesty: Good God be merciful to him, make him an Instrument in thy
Hand to defend his Protestant Subjects; Lord in mercy defend him from his
Enemies. Good God bless this People; good Lord continue the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, thy Gospel in its purity to us and our Posterity, as long as the Sun
and Moon endure. O Lord save all that call upon thee; be merciful to all thy
Servants, all thy People that put their trust in thee; good Lord deliver them
from the Hand of their Enemies; good God, let their Lives, and Bodies, and
Souls, be all precious in thy sight. O merci-God, put a stop to these most
wicked Conspiracies of thy Enemies, and the Nation's Enemies, the Papists. Let
no more Protestant Blood be shed but this of mine, I beseech thee, O my God. O
Lord look upon me, O Lord bless me, O good God receive me into thy blessed
Presence, by Jesus Christ my alone Savior and Redeemer, in whom alone I put my
trust for Salvation: It is thee, O God, that I trust in, thou Righteous Judge of
Heaven and Earth: All Popery, all Pardons, all Popes and Priests, all
Dispensations I disown, and will not go out of the World with a Lie in my
Mouth. From the sincerity of my Heart I declare again, that what I have said to
you is the very Sentiments of my Soul, as God shall have Mercy* upon me, and to
the best of my knowledge.

I desire the Prayers of you, good People, while I am here; and once more I
beseech you to think upon Eternity, every one of you that hear me this day. The
Lord turn your Hearts and Souls, if you have been wicked Livers; if you do live
wicked Lives, the Lord in Mercy convert you, and show you your Danger; for I as
little thought to come to this as any Man that hears me this day; and, I bless
God, I have no more deserved it from the Hands of Men, than the Child that
sucks at his Mothers Breast: I bless my God for it, and do say, I have been a
Sinner against my God, and he has learned me Grace ever since I have been a
Prisoner. I bless my God for a Prison, I bless my God for Afflictions, I bless
my God that ever I was restrained, for I never knew my self till he had taken
me out of the World. Therefore you that have your Liberties, and Time, and
precious Opportunities, be up and be doing for God and for your Souls, every
one of you.


To his Son. Where is my dear Child? Mr. Sheriff. I made one Request to you,
and you gave me an imperfect Answer: You said you were of the best Reform ^d
Church in the World, the Church of England, according to the best Reformation
in the World: I desire you, for the Satisfaction of the World, to declare what
Church that is, Whether Presbyterian, or Independent, or the Church of England,
or what?


College. Good Mr. Sheriff, for your satisfaction: For twenty Years and above
I was under the Presbyterian Ministry till his Majesty's Restoration; then I
was conformable to the Church of England when that was restored, and so
continued till such time as I saw persecution upon the Dissenting People, and
very undue things done to their Meeting-places; then I went among them to know
what kind of People those were: And I do take God to Witness, since that time I
have used their Meetings, viz. the Presbyterians, others very seldom, and the
Church of England. I did hear Dr. Tillotson not above three weeks before I was
taken. I heard the Church of England as frequently as I heard the Dissenters,
and never had any Prejudice, God is my Witness, against either, but always
heartily desired that they might unite, and be Lovers and Friends, and had no
prejudice against any Man; and truly I am afraid that it is not for the
Nation's Good that there should be such Heart-burnings between them: That some
of the Church of England will preach that the Presbyterians are worse than the
Papists. God does know that what I say, I speak freely from my Heart, I have
found many among them truly serving God, and so I have of all the rest that
have come into my company; Men without any manner of design but to serve God,
serve his Majesty, and keep their Liberties and Properties; Men that I am
certain are not of vicious Lives; I found no Dammers, or those kind of People
among them, or at least few of them.

To his Son, Kissing him several times with great passion. Dear Child, Farewell,
the Lord have mercy upon thee. Good people, let me have your prayers to God
Almighty to receive my Soul.

And then he Prayed: And as soon as he had done, spoke as follows: The Lord
have Mercy upon my Enemies, and I beseech you good people who ever you are, and
the whole World that I have offended, to forgive me, whom ever I have offended
in word or deed, I ask every Man's pardon, and I forgive the World with all my
Soul, all the Injuries I have received, and I beseech God Almighty forgive
those poor Wretches who have cast away their Souls, or at least endangered them
to ruin this Body of mine: I beseech God that they may have a sight of their
Sins, and that they may find Mercy at his hands: Let my Blood speak the Justice
of my Cause.

I have done: And God have Mercy upon you all.

To Mr. Crosthwait. Pray Sir, my Service to Dr. Hall, and Dr. Reynall, and
thank them for all their Kindnesses to me; I thank you Sir for your Kindness:
The Lord bless you all. Mr. Sheriff, God be with you: God be with you all good
People.

The Executioner Ketch desired his pardon* And he said, I do forgive you. The
Lord have mercy on my Soul.


The SPEECH of the late Lord RUSSEL, to the Sheriffs: Together with the PAPER
delivered by him to them, at the Place of Execution, on July 21. 1683.
Mr. Sheriff,
I Expected the Noise would be such, that I could not be very well heard: I was
never fond of much Speaking, much less now; Therefore I have set down in this
Paper, all that I think fit to leave behind me. God knows how far I was always
from Designs against the King's Person, or of altering the Government; and I
still pray for the preservation of both, and of the Protestant Religion.

I am told, that Captain Walcot has said some things concerning my knowledge of
the Plot: I know not whether the Report is true, or not: I hope it is not: For
to my knowledge, I never saw him, or spoke with him in my whole Life; and in the
Words of a dying Man, I profess I know of no Plot, either against the King's
Life, or the Government. But I have now done with this World, and am going to a
better. I forgive all the World, and I thank God I die in Charity with all Men;
and I wish all sincere Protestants may love one another, and not make way for
Popery by their Animosities.

The PAPER delivered to the SHERIFFS.
I Thank God, I find my self so composed and prepared for Death, and my
Thoughts so fixed on another World, that I hope in God, I am now quite weaned
from setting my Heart on this. Yet I cannot forbear spending some time now, in
setting down in Writing a fuller Account of my Condition, to be left behind me,
than I Will venture to say at the place of Execution, in the Noise and Clutter
that is like to be there. I bless God heartily for those many Blessings, which
he in his infinite Mercy has bestowed upon me, through the whole Course of my
Life: That I was born of worthy good Parents, and had the Advantages of a
Religious Education, which I have often thanked God very heartily for, and
looked upon as an invaluable Blessing: For even when I minded it least, it
still hung about me, and gave me checks, and has now for many Years so
influenced and possessed me, that I feel the happy Effects of it in this my
Extremity, in which I have been so wonderfully (I thank God) supported, that
neither my Imprisonmenr, nor the Fear of Death, have been able to discompose me
to any degree; but on the contrary, I have found the Assurances of the Love and
Mercy of God, in and through my blessed Redeemer, in whom only I trust; and I
do not question, but that I am going to partake of that Fullness of Joy which is
in his presence, the hopes whereof does so wonderfully delight me, that I
reckon this as the happiest time of my Life, tho others may look upon it as the
saddest.

I have lived, and now die of the Reformed Religion, a true and sincere
Protestant, and in the Communion of the Church of England, tho I could never
yet comply with, or rise up to all the heights of many People. I wish with all
my Soul, all our unhappy Differences were removed, and that all sincere
Protestants would so far consider the Danger of Popery, as to lay aside their
Heats, and agree against the Common Enemy; and that the Churchmen would be less
severe, and the Dissenters less scrupulous: For I think Bitterness and
Persecution are at all times bad, but much more now.

For Popery, I look on it as an Idolatrous and Bloody Religion; and therefore
thought my self bound, in my Station, to do all I could against it. And by
that, I foresaw I should procure such great Enemies to my self, and so powerful
Ones, that I have been now for some time expecting the worst. And blessed be
God, I fall by the Ax, and not by the Fiery Trial. Yet, whatever Apprehensions
I had of Popery, and of my own severe and heavy share I was like to have under
it when it should prevail, I never had a Thought of doing any thing against it
basely, or inhumanly, but what could well consist with the Christian Religion,
and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. And I thank God, I have examined
all my actings in that Matter, with so great Care, that I can appeal to God
Almighty, who knows my Heart, that I went on Sincerely, without being moved,
either by Passion, By-End, or Ill-Design. I have always loved my Country much
more than my Life; and never had any Design of changing the Government, which I
value, and look upon as one of the best Governments in the World, and would
always have been ready to venture my Life for the preserving of it, and would
have suffered any Extremity, rather than have consented to any Design to take
away the King's Life: Neither ever-had Man the Impudence to propose so base and
barbarous a thing to me. And I look upon it as a very unhappy, and uneasy part
of my present Condition, That in my Indictment there should be so much as
mention of so vile a Fact; tho nothing in the least was said to prove any such
Matter; but the contrary, by the Lord Howard: Neither does any Body, I am
consident, believe the least of it. So that I need not, I think, say more.

For the King, I do sincerely pray for Him, and wish well to Him, and to the
Nation, That they may be happy in one another; that he may be indeed the
Defender of the Faith; That the Protestant Religion, and the Peace, and Safety
of the Kingdom may be preserved, and flourish under His Government; and that He
in His Person may be happy, both here and hereafter.

As for the share I had in the Prosecution of the Popish Plot, I take God to
witness, That I proceeded in it in the Sincerity of my Heart; being then really
convinced (as I am still) that there was a Conspiracy against the King, the
Nation, and the Protestant Religion: And I likewise profess, That I never knew
any thing, either directly or indirectly, of any Practice with the Witnesses;
which I look upon as so horrid a thing, that I could never have endured it.
For, I thank God, Falsehood and Cruelty were never in my Nature, but always the
farthest from it imaginable. I did believe, and do still, That Popery is
breaking in upon the Nation; and that those who advance it, will stop at
nothing, to carry on their Design: I am heartily sorry that so many Protestants
give their helping Hand to it. But I hope God will preserve the Protestant
Religion, and this Nation: though I am afraid it will fall under very great
Trials, and very sharp Sufferings. And indeed the Impiety and Profaneness that
abounds, and appears so scandalously barefaced everywhere, gives to just
reason to fear the worst things which can befall a People. I pray God prevent
it, and give those who have shown Concern for the Public Good, and who have
appeared Hearty for the true Interest of the Nation, and the Protestant
Religion, Grace to live so, that they may not cast a Reproach on that which
they endeavor to advance; which (God knows) has often given me many sad
Thoughts. And I hope such of my Friends as may think they are touched by this,
will not take what I say in ill part, but endeavor to amend their ways, and
live suitable to the Rules of the true Reformed Religion; which is the only
thing can administer true Comfort at the latter End, and revive a Man when he
comes to Die.

As for my present Condition, I bless God I have no repining in my heart at it.
I know for my Sins I have deserved much worse at the Hands of God; So that I
cheerfully submit to so small a Punishment, as the being taken off a few Years
sooner, and the being made a Spectacle to the World. I do freely forgive all
the World, particularly those concerned in taking away my Life; and I desire
and conjure my Friends to think of no Revenge, but to submit to the Holy Will
of God, into whose Hands I resign my self entirely.

But to look back a little, I cannot but give some touch about the Bill of
Exclusion, and show the Reasons of my appearing in that Business; which in
short is this: That I thought the Nation was in such danger of Popery, and that
the Expectation of a Popish Successor (as I have said in Parliament) put the
King's Life likewise in such danger, that I saw no way so effectual to secure
both, as such a Bill. As to the Limitations which were proposed, if they were
sincerely offered, and had passed into a Law, the Duke then would have been
excluded from the power of a King, and the Government quite altered, and little
more than the Name of a King left. So I could not see either Sin or Fault in
the one, when all People were willing to admit of the other; but thought it
better to have a King with his Prerogative, and the Nation easy and safe under
him, than a King without it, which must have bred perpetual Jealousies, and a
continual Struggle. All this I say only to justify my self, and not to inflame
others: Though I cannot but think my Earnestness in that Matter has had no
small Influence in my present Sufferings. But I have now done with this World,
and am going to a Kingdom which cannot be moved.

And as to the conspiring to seize the Guards, which is the Crime for which I
am condemned, and which was made a constructive Treason for taking away the
King's Life, to bring it within the Statute of Edward the 3d. I shall give this
true and clear Account. I never was at Mr. Shepheard's with that Company but
once, and there was no undertaking then of securing, or seizing the Guards; nor
none appointed to view or examine them: Some Discourse there was of the
Feasibleness of it; and several times by accident, in general Discourse
elsewhere, I have heard it mentioned, as a thing might easily be done, but
never consented to as fit to be done. And I remember particularly at my Lord
Shaftsbury's there being some general Discourse of this kind, I immediately
flew out and exclaimed against it, and asked, If the thing succeeded, what must
be done next but massacring the Guards, and killing them in cold blood? Which I
looked upon as so detestable a thing, and so like a Popish Practice, that I
could not but abhor it. And at the same time the Duke of Monmouth took me by
the hand, and told me very kindly, My Lord, I see you and I are of a Temper;
Did you ever hear so horrid a thing? And I must needs do him that Justice to
declare, That I never observed in him but an Abhorrence to all base things.

As to my going to Mr. Shepheard's, I went with an intent to taste Sherry; for
he had promised to reserve for me the next very good Piece he met with, when I
went out of Town; and if he recollects, he may remember I asked him about it,
and he went and fetched a Bottle; but when I tasted it, I said 'twas hot in the
Mouth; and desired that whenever he met with a choice Piece, he would keep it
for me: which he promised. I enlarge the more upon this, because Sir George
Gefferies insinuated to the Jury as if I had made a Story about going thither;
but I never said that was the only Reason. And I will now truly and plainly add
the rest.

I was the day before this Meeting, come to Town, for two or three days, as I
had done once or twice before; having a very near and dear Relation lying in a
very languishing and desperate Condition: And the Duke of Monmouth came to me,
and told me, He was extremely glad I was come to Town; for my Lord Shaftsbury,
and son e hot Men would undo us all: How so, my Lord, said I* Why (answered he)
they will certainly do some disorderly thing o ^ other, if great Care be not
taken, and therefore for God's sake use your Endeavors with your Friends to
prevent any thing of this kind. He told me, there would be Company at Mr.
Shepheard's that Night, and desired me to be at home in the Evening, and he
would call me; which he did: And when I came into the Room, I saw Mr. Rumsey by
the Chimney; though he swears he came in after; and there were things said by
some with much more Heat than Judgment, which I did sufficiently disapprove,
and yet for these things I stand condemned. But I thank God my part was
sincere, and well meant. It is, I know, inferred from hence, and was pressed to
me, that I was acquainted with these Heats and ill Designs, and did not
discover them. But this is but Misprision of Treason at most. So I die innocent
of the Crime I stand condemned for, and I hope no body will imagine that so
mean a Thought could enter into me, as to go about to save my self, by accusing
others. The part that some have acted lately of that kind, has not been such as
to invite me to love Life at such a rate.

As for the Sentence of Death passed upon me, I cannot but think it a very hard
one. For nothing was sworn against me (whether true or false I will not now
examine) but some Discourses about making some Stirs. And this is not levying
War against the King, which is Treason by the Statute of Edward the Third, and
not the Consulting and Discoursing about it, which was all that was witnessed
against me. But, by a a strange Fetch, the Design of Seizing the Guards was
construed a Design of Killing the King; and so I was in that cast.

And now I have truly and sincerely told what my part was in that, which cannot
be more than a bare Misprison; and yet I am condemned as guilty of a Design of
killing the King. I pray God lay not this to the charge, neither of the King's
Counsel, nor Judges, nor Sheriffs, nor Jury: And for the Witnesses, I pity
them, and with them well. I shall not reckon up the Particulars wherein they
did me wrong; I had rather their own Consciences should do that; to which, and
the Mercies of God, I leave them. Only I still averr, That what I said of my
not hearing Col. Rumsey deliver any Message from my Lord Shaftsbury, was true;
for I always detested Lying, though never so much to my advantage. And I hope
none will be so unjust and uncharitable, as to think I would venture on it in
these* my last Words, for which I am so soon to give an Account to the Great
God, the Searcher of Hearts, and Judge of all Things.

From the time of choosing Sheriffs, I concluded the Heat in that Matter would
produce something of this kind; and I am not much surprised to find it fall
upon me. And I wish what is done to me, may put a stop, and satiate some
Peoples Revenge, and that no more innocent Blood be shed; for I must, and do
still look upon mine as such, since I know I was guilty of no Treason; and
therefore I would not betray my Innocence by Flight, of which I do not (I thank
God) yet repent, (though much pressed to it) how fatal soever it may have
seemed to have proved to me; for I look upon my Death in this manner (I thank
God) with other eyes than the World does. I know I said but little at the
Trial, and I suppose it looks more like Innocence than Guilt. I was also
advised not to confess Matter of Fact plainly, since that must certainly have
brought me within the guilt of Misprision. And being thus restrained from
dealing franky and openly, I chose rather to say little, than to depart from
that Ingenuity, that (by the Grace of God) I had carried along with me in the
former part of my Life, and so could easier be silent, and leave the whole
Matter to the Conscience of the Jury, than to make the last and solemnest part
of my Life so different from the Course of it, as the using little Tricks and
Evasions must have been. Nor did I ever pretend to a great readiness in
Speaking: I wish those Gentlemen of the Law, who have it, would make more
Conscience in the use of it, and not run Men down, and by Strains and Fetches
impose on easy and willing Juries, to the ruin of innocent Men: For to kill
by Forms and Subtilties of Law, is the worst sort of Murder. But I wish the
Rage of hot Men, and the Partialities of Juries, may be stopped with my Blood,
which I would offer up with so much the more Joy, if I thought I should be the
last were to suffer in such a way.

Since my Sentence, I have had but few Thoughts, but Preparatory ones for
Death: Yet the Importunity of my Friends, and particularly of the Best and
Dearest Wife in the World, prevailed with me to Sign Petitions, and make an
Address for my Life: To which I was very averse. For (I thank God) though in
all respects I have lived one of the happiest and contented'st Men of the World
(for now very near fourteen years) yet I am so willing to leave all, that it
was not without Difficulty that I did any thing for the saving of my Life, that
was Begging. But I was willing to let my Friends see what Power they had over
me, and that I was not Obstinate nor Sullen, but would do any thing that an
honest Man could do, for their Satisfaction. Which was the only Motive that
swayed, or had any weight with me.

And now to sum up all: As I never had any Design against the King's Life, or
the Life of any Man whatsoever; so I never was in any Contrivance of altering
the Government. What the Heats, Wickedness, Passions and Vanities of other Men
have occasioned, I ought not to be answerable for; nor could I repress them,
though I now suffer for them. But the Will of the Lord be done; into whose
Hands I commend my Spirit; and trust that thou, O most Merciful Father, have
forgiven me all my Transgressions; the Sins of my Youth, and all the Errors of
my Life; and that Thou will not lay my secret Sins and Ignorances to my Charges
but wilt graciously support me during that small part of my Time now before me,
and assist me in my last Moments, and not leave me then to be disordered by
Fear, or any other Temptation; but make the Light of thy Countenance to shine
upon me, for Thou art my Sun and my Shield: And as Thou supportest me by thy
Grace, so I hope thou will hereafter Crown me with Glory, and receive me into
the Fellowship of Angels and Saints, in that blessed Inheritance purchased for
me by my most merciful Redeemer; who is, I trust, at thy Right Hand, preparing
a place for me, and is ready to receive me: into whose Hands I commend my
Spirit.

The very Copy of a Paper delivered to the Sheriffs, upon the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, on Friday December 7. 1683. By Algernon Sidney, Esquire before his
Execution there.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers; Friends, Countrymen, and Strangers;
IT may be expected that I should now say some Great Matters unto you, but the
Rigor of the Season, and the Infirmities of my Age, increased by a close
Imprisonment of above Five Months, does not permit me.

Moreover, we live in an Age that makes Truth pass for Treason: I dare not say
anything contrary unto it, and the Ears of those that are about me will
probably be found too tender to hear it. My Trial and Condemnation does
sufficiently evidence this.

West, Rumsey, and Keyling, who were brought to prove the Plot, said no more of
me, than that they knew me not; and some others equally known unto me, had used
my Name, and that of some others, to give a little Reputation unto their
Designs. The Lord Howard is too infamous by his Life, and the many Perjuries
not to be denied, or rather sworn by himself, to deserve mention; and being a
single Witness would be of no value, though he had been of unblemished Credit,
or had not seen and confessed that the Crimes committed by him would be
pardoned only for committing more; and even the Pardon promised could not be
obtained till the Drudgery of Swearing was over.

This being laid aside, the whole Matter is reduced to the Papers said to be
found in my Closet by the King's Officers, without any other Proof of their
being Written by me, than what is taken from the suppositions upon the
similitude of an Hand that is easily Counterfeited, and which has been lately
declared in the Lady Car's Case to be no Lawful Evidence in Criminal Causes.

But if I had been seen to write them, the matter would not be much altered.
They plainly appear to relate unto a large Treatise written long since in
answer to Filmer's Book, which by all Intelligent Men is thought to be grounded
upon wicked Principles, equally pernicious unto Magistrates and People.

If he might publish unto the World his Opinion, That all Men are born under a
necessity derived from the Laws of God and Nature, to submit unto an Absolute
Kingly Government, which could be restrained by no Law, or Oath; and that he
that has the Power, whether he came unto it by Creation, Election,
Inheritance, Usurpation, or any other way had the Right; and none must oppose
his Will, but the Persons and Estates of his Subjects must be indispensably
subject unto it. I know not why I might not have published my Opinion to the
contrary, without the breach of any Law I have yet known.

I might as freely as he, publicly have declared my Thoughts, and the Reasons
upon which they were grounded, and I persuaded to believe, That God had left
Nations unto the Liberty of setting up such Governments as best pleased
themselves.

That Magistrates were set up for the good of Nations, not Nations for the
honor or glory of Magistrates.

That the Right and Power of Magistrates in every Country, was that which the
Laws of that Country made it to be.

That those Laws were to be observed, and the Oaths taken by them, having the
force of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be Violated
without danger of dissolving the whole Fabric.

That Usurpation could give no Right, and the most dangerous of all Enemies
unto Kings were they, who raising their Power to an Exorbitant Height, allowed
unto Usurpers all the Rights belonging unto it.

That such Usurpations being seldom Compassed without the Slaughter of the
Reigning Person, or Family, the worst of all Villainies was thereby rewarded
with the most Glorious Privileges.

That if such Doctrines were received, they would stir up Men to the
Destruction of Princes with more Violence then all the Passions that have
hitherto raged in the Hearts of the most Unruly.

That none could be Safe, if such a Reward were proposed unto any that could
destroy them.

That few would be so gentle as to spare even the Best, if by their destruction
of a Wild Usurper could become God's Anointed; and by the most execrable
Wickedness invest himself with that Divine Character.

This is the Scope of the whole Treatise; the Writer gives such Reasons as at
present did occur unto him to prove it. This seems to agree with the Doctrines
of the most Reverenced Authors of all Times, Nations and Religions. The best
and wisest Kings have ever acknowledged it. The present King of France has
declared that Kings have that happy want of Power, that they can do nothing
contrary unto the Laws of their Country, and grounds his Quarrel with the King
of Spain, Anno 1667, upon that Principle. King James in his Speech to the
Parliament Anno 1603, does in the highest degree assert it: The Scripture seems
to declare it. If nevertheless the Writer was mistaken, he might have been
refuted by Law, Reason and Scripture; and no Man for such matters was ever
otherwise punished, than by being made to see his Error; and it has not (as I
think) been ever known that they had been referred to the Judgment of a Jury,
composed of Men utterly unable to comprehend them.

But there was little of this in my Case; the extravagance of my Prosecutors
goes higher: The abovementioned Treatise was never Finished, nor could be in
many Years, and most probably would never have been. So much as is of it was
written long since, never reviewed nor shown unto any Man; and the fiftieth
part of it was produced, and not the tenth of that afford to be read. That
which was never known unto those who are said to have Conspired with me, was
said to be intended to stir up the People in Prosecution of the Designs of
those Conspirators.

When nothing of particular Application unto Time, Place, or Person could be
found in it, (as has ever been done by those who endeavored to raise
Insurrections) all was supplied by Innuendo's.

Whatsoever is said of the Expulsion of Tarquin; the Insurrection against Nero;
The Slaughter of Caligula, or Domitian; The Translation of the Crown of France
from Merovins his Race unto Pepin; and from his Descendants unto Hugh Capet,
and the like applied by Innuendo unto the King.

They have not considered, that if such Acts of State be not good, there is not
a King in the World that has any Title to the Crown he bears; nor can have any,
unless he could deduce his Pedigree from the Eldest Son of Noah, and show that
the Succession had still continued in the Eldest of the Eldest Line, and been
so deduced to him.

Every one may see what advantage this would be to all the Kings of the World;
and whether that failing, it were not better for them to acknowledge they had
received their Crowns by the Consent of Willing Nations; or to have no better
Title unto them than Usurpation and Violence, which by the same ways may be
taken from them.

But I was long since told that I must Die, or the Plot must Die.

Lest the means of destroying the best Protestants in England should fail, the
Bench must be filled with such as had been Blemishes to the Bar.

None but such as these would have Advised with the King's Council, of the
means of bringing a Man to Death; Suffered a Jury to be packed by the King's
Solicitors, and the Undersheriff; Admit of Jurymen who are not Freeholders;
Receive such Evidence as is abovementioned; Refuse a Copy of an Indictment, or
to Suffer the Statute of 46. Ed. 3. to be read, that does expressly Enact, it
should in no Case be denied unto any Man upon any occasion whatsoever;
Overruled the most important Points of Law without hearing. And whereas the
Stat. 25. Ed. 3. upon which they said I should be Tried, does Reserve unto the
Parliament all Constructions to be made in Points of Treason. They could assume
unto themselves not only a Power to make Constructions, but such Constructions
as neither agree with Law, Reason, or Common Sense.

By these means I am brought to this Place. The Lord forgive these Practices,
and avert the Evils that threaten the Nation from them. The Lord sanctify these
my Sufferings unto me; and tho I fall as a Sacrifice unto Idols, suffer not
Idolatry to be Established in this Land. Bless thy People, and save them.
Defend thy own Cause, and defend those that defend it. Stir up such as are
Faint; Direct those that are willing; confirm those that Waver; Give Wisdom and
Integrity unto all. Order all things so as may most redound unto thine own
Glory. Grant that I may Die glorifying Thee for all thy Mercies; and that at
the last Thou have permitted me to be Singled out as a Witness of thy Truth;
and even by the Confession of my Opposers, for that OLD CAUSE in which I was
from my Youth engaged, and for which thou have Often and Wonderfully declared
thy Self.

The Last Speech of Col. Richard Rumbold, at the Market-Cross of Edinburgh,
with several things that passed at his Trial, 26 June, 1685.
ABout Eleven of the Clock he was brought from the Castle of Edinburgh, to the
Justices Court, in a great Chair, on Men's Shoulders; where at first he was
asked some Questions, most of which he answered with Silence; at last said, He
humbly conceived, It was not necessary for him to add to his own Accusation,
since he was not ignorant they had enough already to do his Business; and
therefore he did not design to fret his Conscience at that time with Answering
Questions. After which, his Libel being read, the Court proceeded in usual
manner; first asking him, If he had any thing to say for himself before the
Jury closed? His Answer was, He owned it all, saving that part, of having
Designed the King's Death; and desired all present, to believe the words of a
Dying Man; he never directly nor indirectly intended such a Villainy; that he
abhorred the very thoughts of it; and that he blessed God, he had that
Reputation in the World, that he knew none that had the Impudence to ask him
the Question; and he detested the thoughts of such an Action; and he hoped all
good People would believe him, which was the only way he had to clear himself;
and he was sure that this Truth should be one day made manifest to all Men. He
was again asked, If he had any Exception against the Jury? He answered No; but
wished them to do as God and their Consciences directed them. Then they
withdrew, and returned their Verdict in half an hour, and brought him in
Guilty. The Sentence followed; For him to be taken from that Place to the next
Room, and from thence to be Drawn on a Hurdle, betwixt Two and Four of the
Clock, to the Cross of Edinburgh, the Place of Execution, and there to be
Hanged, Drawn and Quartered. He received his Sentenc with an undaunted Courage
and Cheerfulness. Afterward he was delivered into the Town-Magistrates Hands;
they brought to him two of their Divines, and offered him their Assistance upon
the Scaffold; which he altogether refused, telling them, That if they had any
good Wishes for him, he desired they would spend them in their own Closets, and
leave him now to seek God in his own Way. He had several Offers of the same
kind by others, which he put off in like manner. He was most serious and
fervent in Prayers the few hours he lived (as the Sentinels observed, who were
present all the while.) The Hour being come, he was brought to the Place of
Execution, where he saluted the People on all sides of the Scaffold, and after
having refreshed himself with a Cordial out of his Pocket, he was supported by
two Men, while he spoke to the People in these words:

Gentlemen and Brethren, It is for all Men that come into the World once to
Die, and after Death to Judgment; and since Death is a Debt that all of us must
pay, it is but a matter of small moment what way it be done; and seeing the
Lord is pleased in this manner to take me to himself, I confess, something hard
to Flesh and Blood, yet, blessed be his Name, who has made me not only
Willing, but Thankful for his honoring me to lay down the Life he gave, for
his Name; in which, were every Hair in this Head and Beard of mine a Life, I
should joyfully sacrifice them for it, as I do this: And Providence having
brought me hither, I thick it most necessary to clear my self of some
Aspersions laid on my Name; and first, That I should have had so horrid an
Intention of Destroying the King and his Brother.

[Here he repeated what he had said before to the Justices on this Subject.]

It was also laid to my Charge, That I was Antimonarchical.

It was ever my Thoughts, That Kingly Government was the best of all, Justly
Executed: I mean, such as by our ancient Laws; that is, a King, and a Legal
Free Chosen Parliament. The King having, as I conceive, Power enough to make
him Great, the People also as much Property as to make them Happy; they being
as it were contracted to one another. And who will deny me, that this was not
the Just Constituted Government of our Nation? How absurd is it then for Men of
Sense to maintain, That though the one Party of this Contract breaks all
Conditions, the other should be obliged to perform their Part? No; this Error
is contrary to the Law of God, the Law of Nations, and the Law of Reason. But
as Pride has been the Bait the Devil has catched most by, ever since the
Creation, so it continues to this day with us. Pride caused our first Parents
to fall from the blessed Estate wherein they were created; they aiming to be
Higher and Wiser than God allowed, which brought an everlasting Curse on them
and their Posterity. It was Pride caused God to Drown the Old World. And it was
Nimrod's Pride in building Babel, that caused that heavy Curse of Division of
Tongues to be spread among us, as it is at this day. One of the greatest
Afflictions the Church of God groaneth under, That there should be so many
Divisions during their Pilgrimage here; but this is their Comfort, that the Day
draws near, whereas there is but One Shepherd, there shall be but One
Sheepfold. It was therefore in the Defense of this Party, in their Just Rights
and Liberties, against Popery and Slavery --

[At which words they Beat the Drums:] To which he said;

They need not trouble themselves; for he should say no more of his Mind on
that Subject, since they were so disingenuous, as to interrupt a Dying Man,
only to assure the People, he adhered to the True Protestant Religion,
detesting the erroneous Opinions of many that called themselves so; and I Die
this day in the Defense of the ancient Laws and Liberties of these Nations: And
though God, for Reasons best known to himself, has not seen it sit to honor
Us, as to make Us the Instruments for the Deliverance of his People; yet as I
have Lived, so I Die in the Faith, that he will speedily arise for the
Deliverance of his Church and People. And I desire all of you to prepare for
this with speed. I may say, This is a deluded Generation, veiled with
Ignorance, that though Popery and Slavery be riding in upon them, do not
perceive it; though I am sure there was no Man born marked of God above
another; for none comes into the world with a Saddle on his Back, neither any
Booted and Spurred to Ride to him; not but that I am well satisfied, that God
hate wisely ordered different Stations for Men in the World, as I have already
said: Kings having as much Power as to make them Great, and the People as much
Property as to make them Happy. And to conclude; I shall only add my Wishes for
the Salvation of all Men, who were created for that end.

After ending these words, he prayed most fervently near three quarters of an
hour, freely forgiving all Men, even his greatest Enemies, begging most
earnestly for the Deliverance of Sion from all her Persecutors, particularly
praying for London, Edinburgh, and Dublin, from which the Streams run that Rule
God's People in these three Nations.

Being asked some hours before his Execution, If he thought not his Sentence
Dreadful? He answered, He wished he had a Limb for every Town in Christendom.

The Last Speech of Madam LISLE, Beheaded at Winchester, in September, 1685.
Gentlemen, Friends and Neighbors;
IT may be expected, that I should say something at my Death, my Birth and
Education being near this place. My Parents instructed me in the Fear of God;
and I now Die of the Reformed Religion; always being instructed in that Belief,
that if Popery should return into this Nation, it would be a great Judgment. I
Die in Expectation of Pardon of my Sins, and Acceptance with the Father, by
the imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ; He being the End of the Law for
Righteousness to every one that believes. I thank God, through Christ Jesus, I
depart under the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of
Abel; God having made this Chastisement an Ordinance to my Soul. I did as
little expect to come to this place on ^his Occasion, as any Person in this
Nation; therefore let all learn not to be High-minded, but Fear. The Lord is a
Sovereign, and will take what way he sees best to Glorify himself by his poor
Creatures; therefore I humbly desire to submit to his Will, praying of him,
That in Patience I may possess my Soul.

The Crime was, my Entertaining a Nonconformist Minister, which is since sworn
to have been in the Duke of Monmouth's Army. I am told, if I had not denied
them, it would not have affected me: I have no Excuse, but Surprise and Fear;
which I believe my Jury must make use of to excuse their Verdict to the World.
I have been told, That the Court ought to be Counsel for the Prisoner: Instead
of Advice, there was Evidence given from thence, which (though it was but
Hearsay) might possibly affect my Jury. My Defense was such as might be
expected from a weak Woman; but such as it was, I never heard it repeated again
to the Jury.

But I forgive all Persons that have wronged me; and I desire that God will do
so likewise. I forgive Col. Penruddock, although he told me, He could have
taken those Men before they came to my House.

As to what may be expected for my Conviction, That I gave it under my Hand,
that I discoursed with Nelthrop: that could be no Evidence to the Court or
Jury, it being after my Conviction and Sentence.

I acknowledge His Majesty's Favor, in Revoking my Sentence; and I pray God he
may long Reign in Mercy as well as Justice, and that he may Reign in Peace, and
that the True Religion may Flourish under him.

Two things I have omitted to say, which is, That I forgive him that desired to
be taken from the Grand Jury, and put upon the Petty Jury, that he might be the
more nearly concerned in my Death. And return humble Thanks to God, and the
Reverend Clergy, that assisted me in my Imprisonment.

Sept. 85. Alicia Lisle.

Some Passages of Henry Cornish, Esquire before his Sufferings.
COming into the Press-yard, and seeing the Halter in the Officers Hand, he
said, Is this for me? The Officer answered, Yes; he replied, Blessed be God,
and Kissed it; and after said, O blessed be God for Newgate, I have enjoyed God
ever since I came within these Walls, and blessed be God who has made me fit
to die. I am now going to that God that will not be mocked, to that God that
will not be imposed upon, to that God that knows the Innocence of his poor
Creature. And a little after, he said, Never did any poor Creature come unto
God with greater Confidence in his Mercy, and Assurance of Acceptance with
him, through Jesus Christ, than I do: but it is through Jesus Christ, for there
is no other way of coming to God but by him, to find acceptance with him; there
is no other Name given under Heaven whereby we can be saved, but the Name of
Jesus. Then speaking to the Officers, he said, Labor every one of you to be
fit to die: I was not fit to Die my self till I came in hither; but O blessed
be God, he has made me fit to die, and has made we willing to die! In a few
moments I shall have the Fruition of the Blessed Jesus, and that not for a day,
but for ever: I am going to the Kingdom of God, where I shall enjoy the
presence of God the Father, and of God the Son, and of God the Holy Spirit, and
of all the Holy Angels; I am going to the general Assembly of the Firstborn,
and of the Spirits of just Men made perfect: O that God should ever do so much
for me! O that God should concern himself so much for the good of poor
Creatures, for their Salvation, blessed be his Name! For this was the design of
God from all Eternity, to give his only Son to die for poor miserable Sinners.
Then the Officers going to tie his Hands, he said, What, must I be tied then?
Well, a brown Thread might have served the turn; you need not tie me at all, I
shall not stir from you, for I thank God I am not afraid to die. As he was
going out, he said, Farewell Newgate, Farewell all my Fellow Prisoners here, the
Lord comfort you, the Lord be with you all.

The Substance of Alderman Cornish's Speech at the Place of Execution, October.
23. 1685. taken by one of his Servants.
I Am come here this day, Condemned to die; but God is my Witness, the Crimes
laid to my Charge were falsely and maliciously sworn against me by the
Witnesses; for I never was at any Consult, nor any Meeting where Matters
against the Government were discoursed of: I never heard nor read any
Declaration, nor ever acted wilfully any thing against the Government. I
confess, through the Justice of God, my private Sins have brought me to this
Infamous End; yea, it were just with God, not only to deprive me eternally of
his Presence, but to condemn me to Eternal Torments, but through Christ, I hope
to be eternally Blessed: Yet as to the Crimes for which I suffer, on the Words
of a dying Man, I am altogether Innocent. I bless God I was from my younger
Years brought up in, and have for some Years continued a Protestant, in the
Communion of the Church of England, in which Communion I now die: I have often
partaken in the Ordinances, the blessed Effects and Comfort thereof I now feel
in this my Agony. I bless God I was born under a Government, in the
Constitution of which I did ever acquiesce, and in which I was once a Member;
at which time I did, according to the best of my Understanding, -- [ Here be
was interrupted by the Sheriff.] -- I bless God I was born in a Land of Light,
where the Gospel has been Preached in Power and Purity; He might have brought
me forth in a Land of Darkness and Ignorance, but blessed be God for Jesus
Christ. -- Then he entreated the Sheriff to Intercede with his Majesty to be
kind to his poor Wife and Children: The Sheriff promised him to wait on his
Majesty the next day about it. He replied, Mr. Sheriff, I thank you, the Lord
reward you a thousand-fold; the Lord put it into the Hearts of you to be kind
to the Widows and Fatherless, it is your Duty: The Lord put it into the Hearts
of all good People to Pray for me.

More could not be taken, by reason of the Noise of the People, and
Interruption of one of the Sheriffs.

The SPEECH of Captain WALCOT, on Friday the 20th of July, 1683.
THIS great Concourse of People do not only come here to see me Die, but also
to hear what I shall say; and because I would not be Reproached, and thought to
be an Atheist when I am gone, I have two or three words to speak for my
Religion. I do believe in Three Persons, and one God, and I expect and hope to
be Saved by the Merits and Righteousness of his Son Christ Jesus, without the
hope of an advantage by any Merits or Righteousness of my own. And I believe
that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the Word of God; that They
were not written according to the will of Man, but holy Men of God writ them as
they were inspired by the Holy Ghost.

I believe that these Scriptures ought to be the Rule of our Faith, and the
method of our Worshipping of God: I believe that as Christ is the Head of his
Church, so he is their Lawgiver. That it is not in the power of any Council or
Conclave of Cardinals, or any Power upon Earth whatsoever, to set up the
Precepts and Traditions of Men, and to make them of equal validity with the
Word of God. I believe it was not because the Jews rejected and Crucified
Christ, that he rejected them, but because they rejected his Word; which
appears by the Three thousand that God by one Sermon of Peter's converted; they
being pricked in their hearts, and touched in their Consciences, cried out, Men
and Brethren, what shall we do? And they were that day added to the Church. It
was certainly because the Jews rejected the Word and Gospel of Christ, that the
things were hid from their Eyes which belonged to their peace. It is a dreadful
thing to reject the Word of God; and it is a dreadful thing to live in a sinful
course of Life, till God withdraws his Spirit from us; For it is said, It shall
not always strive with Man. Death is the wages of Sin. I believe had not Adam
sinned, he and we his Posterity had not died. Death is said to be the King of
Terrors, but it is only so to those that are terrified with a Terrifying
Conscience, that have the Arrows of the Almighty sticking in them, from
convictions of great Guilt, and see no hopes of Mercy, have no assurance of
Pardon; but those that are Christ's, he takes away the Terror, and Horror,
and Sting of Death; he enables them to say with Paul, To me to live is Christ,
and to die is Gain: He enables not only to get unto Christ, but into Christ;
and so they have Communion and Fellowship with the Father and the Son. It is no
hard matter to get the Notions of the Promises of the Gospel into our Heads;
but unless the Lord is pleased to apply them to our Hearts, we cannot believe:
Except we be in Christ as branches in the Vine, we are not Christians indeed.
It was the Case of poor Francis Spira; he was certainly a knowing Man, but
notwithstanding he had not Faith to apply the Promises. Christ has said, that
he that believes in him, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and he that
lives and believes in him, shall never die. So if we be able to apply the
Promises by the Spirit of God, we may have comfort through Faith: But then
Faith is the gift of God, and Faith comes by hearing the Word of God, and
receiving it in the love of God.

I shall not be tedious, Mr. Sheriff, I shall be very short.

Mr. Sheriff. Take your own time.


Walcot. As to the present occasion of my Death, I do neither blame the Judges,
nor the Jury, nor the King's Counsel: I only blame some Men that in reality and
in truth were deeper concerned, and more engaged than I, that came in as
Witnesses against me; who Swore me out of my Life to save their own, and who
for fear they should not do it effectually, contrived that, That I will appeal
to you all, whether there be a probability in it or not: For they said, I made
it a scruple of Conscience to have a hand in killing the King, or to imbrue my
hands in his Blood, but was so generous as to undertake the Charging his
Guards, whilst others did it, and to the end another might do it. Truly I will
appeal to all that know me, whether they believe me so much an Idiot, that I
should not understand it was the same thing to engage the King's Guards, whilst
another Killed him, as to Kill him with my own hands. But however, by their
Swearing against me, they have secured their own Lives and Estares, and made my
Blood the price of theirs. I confess I was so unfortunate and unhappy, as to be
invited by Colonel Rumsey, (one of the Witnesses against me) to some Meetings,
where some things were discoursed of, in order to the asserting our Liberties
and Properties, which we looked upon to be violated and invaded. But it was he,
and Mr. W. and some Gentlemen that are fled, who were the great promoters of
those Meetings. I was near a quarter of a Year ill of the Gout, and during that
time Mr. W. often visited me, and still his discourse would be, concerning
Lopping the Two Sparks; That was the word he used, meaning the King and the
Duke; and proposed it might be done at a Play: This was his frequent discourse:
For he said, Then they would die in their Calling: It was his very Expression.
He bought Arms to do it with, without any direction of mine; I never saw the
Arms, nor I never saw the Men that were to do it: though they said they had
Fifty employed to that end. I told several of them, That the Killing the King
would carry such a blemish and stain with it, as would descend to Posterity;
that I had Eight Children, that I was loath should be blemished with it: And
withal, I was confident the Duke of Monmouth would revenge his Fathers Blood,
if it were but to vindicate himself from having any hand in it.

And now I desire to forgive all the World from the very bottom of my Heart;
and I pray God of his Mercy from my Heart to forgive them, even Mr. Shepherd,
who delivered me up, who promised to carry me into Holland, but instead of
that, he brought me into the condition wherein I now am. I do desire with all
my Heart to forgive the Witnesses, and withal do earnestly beg that they may be
observed, that some Remarks may be set upon them, whether their End be Peace,
and that they die the common Death of all Men. Certainly, though it be the Law
of the Land I ought to Die, and the King may justly and reasonably put me to
Death for being in those Meetings where a War was debated; yet I think these
Men are guilty of my Blood, that were as deep in as I, and have betrayed me,
and taken it away. Then in the next place I beg leave, Mr. Sheriff, to speak
one short word of Advice to my Friends, that has been often given to me,
though I was not so fortunate and so happy as to take it, and that is, That
they would neither hear any Man speak, nor speak themselves, that which they
would not have repeated: For there is no such thing as Faith in Man to Man,
whatever there is in Man to God: Either the Tears of a Wife, or a Family of
little helpless Children, something or other will tempt and provoke Men to
betray one another. When God has a Work to do, he will not want Instruments,
for he can make them; nor will he want a way to do it, for he can contrive it
and bring it to pass. And I do most heartily desire, and my earnest Prayer to
the Almighty is, That this may be the last Blood spilt upon this account. I
know Acts of Indulgence and Mercy in the King would make him much easier in his
Government, and would make his People sit much easier under it; and that the
Lord may incline his Heart to mercy, ought to be the Prayer of every good Man.
What has happened, and what has been the present occasion of our Calamity, I
suppose every man knows; what Provocations have been on the one hand, Fears and
Necessities, Jealousies and Sufferings of the other, I will not intermeddle
with, resolving to use my utmost endeavor to make that Peace and
Reconciliation with my God, which is impossible for me to make with Man; and to
make it my hearty Prayer to the Great God before whom I am in a little time to
appear, That he would stench this Issue of Blood, and find out some other way
to preserve these Kingdoms in Unity and Peace; to the Honor and Glory of his
Great Name, and the eternal Comfort of his People.

One word, Mr. Sheriff, I desire to speak as to Ireland, because the King pressed
it hard upon me, and several People have been with me about Ireland, how far
Ireland was concerned in this matter. I do aver here, as in the presence of
God, before whom I am now going to appear, That I do not know an Englishman nor
Protestant in Ireland engaged in it. What I did know, was only of one Scottish
Gentleman in the North; and the King knows it, but he says he does not believe
it. For they that were concerned, I was never in any of their Councils: I never
saw any of those Lords, but the Duke of Monmouth, and that was I believe above
six Months ago. I never saw nor spoke with one Lord, only my Lord Howard.

I have not more to say, Mr. Sheriff: But truly you will do an act of a great
deal of Charity, if you will Prevail with the King for an Act of Indulgence and
Liberty to his People; I think so: And so the Lord have mercy upon me.


Captain Walcot's Prayer.
O Lord, our God, Thou art a God of present help in time of Trouble, a God,
that have promised to be with thy People in the Fire and in the Water. O Lord,
we pray Thee, that Thou will afford thy Presence to thy poor suffering Servants
at this time, that Thou will enable us to pray with Faith, to trust in Thee, to
be in expectation and hope of Mercy from Thee. O Lord, thy Servant that
speaks does confess, that the Iniquities at his Heels have justly overtaken
him, that Just and Righteous art thou in all thy Judgments; that he has reason
to bear thy Indignation, because he has sinned. O Lord, we beg, even for thy
Son Christ Jesus's sake, that our Sins may not be brought to our remembrance in
order to our despondency or discouragement, or our despairing in thy Mercy, but
rather, O Lord, in order to an assurance that our great God has pardoned and
forgiven them in the Blood of his Son. O do thou bathe each of our Souls in
that Fountain set open for Sin and for Uncleanness. Give us, O Lord, inward
spiritual strength from thy Self, and give us cause to bless thy Name for
inward supporting Graces, for inward assistances. O let us find an increase of
spiritual strength, let us be assured that our Sins are done away, and let us
also be assured that our Names are written in the Book of Life* and let it be
such an assurance as may be matter of joy and rejoicing to our Souls. O do thou
enable every one of us, from the inward evidence of thy Spirit, to say with thy
Servant Job, That we know and are assured that our Redeemer lives. O do thou
give us such an assurance of an Interest in Thee, that we may be enabled in
deed, in reality, and in truth, to say, that we have run our Race, and we have
finished our Course with Joy: O let us now receive the fruit of those many
Petitions that we have put up unto Thee. O let us now find the Spirit
influencing our Hearts to a yielding patience, and a through subjection to the
Will of God: Let us find thy Spirit assuring us that we are thine. O let us
have stronger Evidences of thy Love, stronger Testimonies of thy Affection: O
give us some inward Tastes of those Heavenly Joys that we hope through the
Mercy of Jesus Christ, in a little time to have a more full Fruition of. O
Lord, do thou speak Peace to every one of our Consciences; enable us to take
hold of thy Strength that thou may make Peace with us, and let us not be
discouraged, O Lord, since we have a High Priest that can be touched with our
Infirmities: Let us with Boldness have Access to the Threne of Grace, that we
may obtain Mercy and Grace to help in time of need. O take away the Sting and
Terror that is in Death in any one of us, by assuring us of our Interest in
Thee, by assuring us that our Names are Recorded in the Book of Life* though we
lie under a Sentence of Death from Man, we beg that we may have a Sentence of
Life Eternal from our God; and though we meet Thee, O Lord, in a Field of
Blood, we beg that Thou will come to meet with us in a Field of Mercy. O Lord,
extend thy Mercy, thou Lord, whose Compassions fail not, cause the Bowels of
thy tender Pity to yearn with Compassion toward us: Enable every one of us, O
Lord, to die believing in Jesus Christ, to die hoping in his Mercy, to die,
relying upon him for Justification, for Sanctification, and for Adoption. O
Lord, though we have been Prodigals, we desire to return unto our Fathrrs House
where there is Bread enough. O enable us to come unto Thee as Children to their
Parents. O let our Prayers be offered with so much Fervor in Christ Jesus,
that Thou may think it reasonable to assure us of thy Love. O let the
Intercession of Jesus Christ be accepted. O Lord, we beg that he may be our
Advocate; if our Advocate be our Judge, certainly we cannot miscarry. O let
Jesus Christ be the Hope of every one of our Souls; and, Lord, let not our Hope
be like that of the Hypocrite, but let our Faith be built upon the Rock of
Ages, and let us not fail from the apprehension of Affliction and Punishment
from Men. Yet, O Lord, do thou so order our Hearts and our Spirits aright, that
thou may be the Lot of our Inheritance, and our Portion for ever. O do thou
interest us in thy Self; Lord, carry on thy own Work. We desire to come unto
Thee that we may have Life. Lord help us, Lord put to thy helping Hand, Lord
teach us truly to leave no Sin unrepented of in any one of our Hearts. And O
Lord, we beg that with us thou will give us leave to recommend unto thy Care
our poor Wives and Children: Thou have promised to be the Father of the
Fatherless, and the Husband of the Widow; and thou have commanded us to cast
the Care of them upon Thee. O do thou make Provision for them, deal kindly with
them, imprint thy own Image upon them, and enable them to bear this severe
stroke with Patience. O Lord, stand by and support them; let their Ways be
found so pleasing and acceptable unto Thee, that thou may think it
reasonable to make all their Enemies at Peace. Lord. interest them in thy Love,
and do thou favor them with thy Mercies and lovingkindnesses. O Lord, we also
beseech Thee in the behalf of these poor Kingdoms wherein we are, that Thou will he merciful to them, prevent Divisions among them, heal all their
Breaches, compose their Differences, make all that are thine of one Heart and
Mind in the things of thee our God. And, Lord, if it be thy Will, do thou rule
in the Heart of the King, that he may Rule and Reign for Thee, and for the good
of thy Church and People. Lord, favor us with thy Mercy, assure us of thy
Love, stand by us in the difficult Hour, take us into thine own Care, cause thy
Angels to attend us, to convey our Souls as soon as they are divided from our
Bodies, into Abraham's Bosom, into the Paradise of our God. And, Lord, we beg
that thou will be with us, with thy extraordinary Presence, helping us to trust
in Thee, doing for us beyond what our narrow Hearts are able to ask or think.
All which we beg for the sake of thy Son Jesus Christ, in whom, O Lord, this
little time do thou give us Hearts to give thee all Glory, Honor, and Praise,
now and for evermore, Amen. Sweet Jesus,

Amen.
FINIS.

