line engraving portrait of William Dyer WILLIAM DYER Preacher of the Gospel
Aetat: 27: 1663


A CABINET OF JEWELS. OR, A GLIMPS OF SIONS GLORY. Written by WILLIAM DYER,
late Preacher of the Gospel at Chesham and Chouldsbury, in the County of Bucks.

Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and
keep those things that are written therein, for the time is at hand. Rev. 1.3.
Printed in the Year 1663.

TO Those of Chouldsbury Parish, Together with all others who did attend
constantly upon the Word of God there Preached.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied from God the Father, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.
DEarly Beloved, They that love God dearly are dearly beloved of God, dearly
beloved of Christ, dearly beloved of Angels, dearly beloved of Saints; they are
beloved of all, and have the love of all, whose love is worth the having.

O my dear Friends, I cannot think of you and your condition, but it fills my
eyes with water, and my heart with grief; and with Jeremy I wish, O that my
head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of Tears, that I might weep day and
night for the slain of the Daughter of my people, Jeremiah 9.1. Oh that I am
constrained to be from you, whom I could live and dye with, spend and be spent
for so dear a people as you are; I would choose to be doing the work to which I
was called, amongst you, rather then any where else, if I might. I should not
count my Life dear to me, so that I might have the liberty to preach Christ to
you for your edification and salvation. I hope your Consciences will bear me
witness, that whilst I was with you, I Labored as much as in me lay, to be a
helper of your joy, not to Lord it over your faith; and I bless God I can with
a good conscience safely say, I have coveted no man's Gold, nor Silver, as you
your selves know: I could do very much for you, but I dare not sin against God
and my own Conscience.

But my dear Brethren, Though they have separated us one from the other, they
cannot separate our hearts; I hope there will never be a separation of our
loves, but that will still continue; if we do not see one another, yet we may
love one another, and pray for one another: And now my desire is, that my pen
may reach you, though my voice cannot reach you.

That I may still approve the sincerity of my love to you, I shall give you
twenty Directions for the right ordering of your Lives and conversations in
these dangerous and sinful times; that you may live in Heaven whilst you are
on the Earth, and come to Heaven when you shall leave the Earth.

I. First, Loath sin, and leave sin.

He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever Confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13. If we confess our sins he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. There must be falling out with our sins, before
there be falling off from our sins; there must be a loathing of sin in our
affections, before there be a leaving of sin in our conversations. Oh is it not
a thousand times better to part with sin, though never so sweet? than to part
with God, and Christ, and Heaven? one of them you must do. One sin will damn a
Soul out of Christ, but no sin can damn a Soul in Christ: Sin is the evil of
evils, it is worse then the Devil for its that that made the Devil to be a
Devil. O the love of sin, and the lack of grace will ruin and destroy your
souls for ever: It is better not to be, than to be a sinner; better to be no
people, than not to be the Lords people: Oh therefore kill sin, that sin may
not kill you: mourn for sin, and fly from sin: do not commit new sins, but
repent of old sins, Ezekiel. 36.31. You shall loath your selves in your own sight
for your iniquities. O poor soul, have thou not served the flesh, and the Devil
long enough? Yea, have thou not had enough of sin? is it so good to thee, or so
profitable for thee? Oh what a place will you be shortly in of joy or torment!
Oh what a sight will you shortly see in Heaven or Hell! Oh what thoughts will
shortly fill your hearts with unspeakable delights or horror! what work will
you be employed in, to praise the Lord with Saints and Angels, or to cry out in
fire unquenchable with Devils? Oh therefore dye unto sin, confess it, mourn for
it, and be ashamed of it, hate it, and loath it, and fly from it, as from a
Serpent; and though your sins are more then you can number, yet they are not
more then God can pardon.

II. Secondly, Put off the old man, and put on the new.

Eye not one to another, seeing ye have put off the old man with his deeds, and
have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him
that created him, Col. 3.9, 10. And that ye put on the new man, which after God
is created in Righteousness and Holiness, Ephesians. 1.14. For in Christ Jesus
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature, Gal. 6.15. As new born Babes desire the sincere milk of the Word,
that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet 2.2. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is
a new creature; old things are past away; behold all things are become new, 2
Cor. 5.17. A new understanding, a new will, new desires, new love, new
delights, new thoughts, new words, new company, and a new conversation; he is
not what he was before. O dear friends, be new Creatures, that you may be
glorious Creatures: We can call nothing in Heaven ours, till Christ be ours.
Without regeneration there is no salvation; Verily I say unto you, except yea
be converted, and become as little children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdone
of Heaven, John 3.3. Verily, verily I say unto thee, except a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. You have heard much of God, Christ,
and Heaven with your ears, but this will not bring you to Heaven, unless you
have much of God, Christ, and Heaven in your hearts; you must be able to say, I
was once a slave, but now a son; once I was dead, but now I am alive; once I
was in darkness, but now I am light in the Lord; once I was a child of wrath,
an Heir of Hell, but now I am an Heir of Heaven; once I was under the spirit of
bondage, but now I am under the spirit of adoption. A true Believer lives in
the Lord, 1 These. 1.1. On the Lord, Romans 1.17. Luke. 20.38. From the Lord, Joh.
6.57. To the Lord, Romans 1^.8. With the Lord, 2 Corinthians. 13.4.

III. Thirdly, Make your peace, with the Prince of peace.

Isa. 9.6. Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son, least he be angry, and ye perish from the
way: when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put
their trust in him. O do not lift up your hand against the Son, but kiss the
Son.

Let his Will be your Rule; His Spirit your Guide; His precepts your practices;
His decrees your delights; His chosen ones, your choicest companions. Submit to
his Gospel and Government. Oh Sirs, make your peace with God.
There is a fourfold Peace.

First, There is a peace external: this peace is with men. Secondly, There is
peace supernal: that is peace with God. Thirdly, There is peace internal: that
is peace with Conscience. Fourthly, There is peace eternal: and this is peace
in Heaven, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the
end of that man is peace.
If you have peace with God, the world, and the Devil cannot hurt you: And upon
the glory shall be a defense, Isa. 4.5. Believers have God for their Guide and
Guard; he that meddles with the Saints of God, assaults God himself, Zech. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the Apple of mine eye. He that lifts up his hand
against them, lifts up his hand against God; though they have many enemies, yet
they have one friend that has more strength then all their enemies. A ragged
Saint is dearer to God, then a glittering Emperor that wants grace. O make
your peace with the Prince of peace; that in this life you may have assurance
of eternal life, that eternal death may not be your portion in the other life.

IV. Fourthly, Make Religion your main business, and not a by business.

Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 2 Peter 1.10.
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. But seek ye first
the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added
unto you, Math. 6.23. Oh, why is the glory of this world so much regarded, but
because the Glory of Heaven is so little minded. Oh, what is an Earthly
Kingdom in comparison of the Heavenly Kingdom? the Angels themselves, though
they are glorious Spirits, yet they are Ministering Spirits.

Do not most men in the world make light of God, and Christ, and the Spirit,
and Heaven, and their precious souls? And he sent forth his servants to call
them that were bidden to the wedding, and they would not come: Again he sent
forth other servants, saying, tell them that are bidden, Behold, I have
prepared my Dinner; my Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all things are
ready: Come unto the Marriage. But they made light of it, and went their way,
one to his Farm, another to his Merchandise, Math. 22.3, 4, 5.

Wretched Wordlings make Religion a by-business; they will hear, read, and pray
when they have nothing else to do: Oh that such men did but know what
everlasting Glory, and everlasting torments are: would they then do as they do?
Oh that they did but know the worth of their Souls, and the want of a Savior;
the shortness of their time, and the greatness of their work: would they then
neglect God and their own souls as they do?

Oh Friends, Let me beseech you to whom I write, to make Religion your main
business, hearing, reading, praying, believing and doing, your maine
business. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which
endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you; for
him has God the father sealed, Joh. 6.27.

V. Fifthly, Do nothing in this World, but what you can answer in another
World.

For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men
by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel, Romans 2.16. He has appointed a day in
which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained, Acts 17.31. For God shall bring every work to judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil, Eccles. 12.14. Oh for
the Lords sake, my Dear Brethren, Let nothing be done by you in this world, but
what may be answered in another world.

Many men do that in this world which they cannot in another world; Now they
contemn God, blaspheme God, rebel against God, go a whoring from God, and
persecute the Beloved of God: Instead of protecting the Saints, imprison the
Saints; and are more for crushing them, than comforting them: instead of
visiting them, vilify them; and instead of affecting them, afflict them, and
eat them up as they eat bread, Psalm. 14.4. And will not suffer them to worship
the true God in Spirit and in truth; but Mock them, Heb. 11:36. Threaten them,
Acts 4.29. Accuse them, Acts 24.5. Slander them, Math. 1.11. Curse them, Math.
5.44. Beat them, Acts 5.40. Imprison them, Acts 4.3. Plunder them, Heb. 10.34.
Banish them, Heb. 11. And Murder them, Romans 8.36.


All this the poor innocent suffer, whilst swearing, cursing, whoring robbing,
blaspheming, drunkenness; and gluttoning, and all manner of debauchery, yea,
murder it self walks unpunished in the streets; and only he that departs from
evil makes himself a prey. What wonder then if such as these shall one day
hide themselves in Dens and Holes, and cry to the Rocks and Mountains to fall
on them, and hide them from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.15.36. Oh what will Persecutors do, when Jesus
Christ shall appear in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that knew him
not, and obeyed not his Gospel, 2 These. 1:8. Will they not then be dumb and
speechless, and have never a word to say for themselves, as that man that had
not on his Wedding garment, Math. 22.12.

But Oh Beloved, Let that grace that has appeared to all men, teach us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, that we may live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present World, Tit. 2.11.12. following the Lamb, resisting Satan,
shuning sin, and separating from the world.

VI. Sixthly, Make the Word of God your Rule, and the Spirit of God your Guide.

To the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this Word, it
is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. We have also a more sure word
of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the daystarre arise in your
hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
righteousness, 2 Timothy: 3.16. Howbeit, when the spirit of truth is come, he will
guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he
shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you things to come, John
16.13. The Scripture is a Rule before us, to show us where we must go; the
Spirit is a word behind us, to enable us to go according to the Directions of
that word: The Word of God is a Compass, by which we are to Ship our Course;
the Spirit is the great Pilot that steers us in this course. We have no eyes to
see the Word, till the Spirit enlighten them; we have no ears to hear the Word,
till the Spirit open them, we have no hearts to obey the Word, till the Spirit
bow and incline them. By the Word of God we know the mind of the Spirit; and
and by the efficacy of the spirit we feel the efficacy of the Word: The Word of
God shows us the way; and the Spirit of God leads us in that way which the WOrd
points out. The Spirit of God is able to expound the Word of God, and to make
it plain to our understanding. The Holy Ghost is the Churches Interpreter; he
gives the Scripture, and he can reveal unto us the sense and meaning of the
Scripture. The word is Gods Counselor, to discover the path in which we are
to walk; the Spirit is the Counsel of God, that teaches us how to walk in that
path. The word is a Chrystall-Glass, which shows us our duty; the Spirit gives
us sight to see our duty; If God had not put his Spirit into our hearts, as
well as his word into our mouths, we should never have arrived at the fair
Haven of peace. Austin calls the Scriptures, The Epistle of God to the
Creatures; by which we understand the very heart of God. God Almighty has in
the secret Scriptures, as it were unbowelled himself, and unfolded all his
Counsel to the Creatures, as far as it is necessary to be known, for their
direction and guidance to everlasting life.

There be many that walk by false Rules.

First, Some by Opinions, Secondly, Some by Customs. Thirdly, Some by
Providence. Fourthly, Some by Conscience. Fifthly, Some by their own Reason.
Sixthly, Some by men's examples. Seventhly, Some by their Lusts.
But, O my dear friends, let me beseech you to walk by none of these false
Rules; but keep close to the word and spirit of God.

VII. Seventhly, Be faithful and fruitful.

Therefore, my beloved brethren, Be ye steadfast and unmoveble, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know, your labor is not in
vain, 1 Cor. 15.58. Every Tree that bears not good fruit, is hewn down, and
cast into the fire. Christians must be fruitful, and not slothful: See that
you bring forth good fruit, and much fruit.

First, Sincerity; which is not a single Grace, but the soul of all Graces:
Behold thou desire truth in the inward parts Psalm: 51:6.

Secondly, Humility; A Grace most prevailing with God for the obtaining of all
Graces. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in
heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

Thirdly, Prudence. The patient Christian is the best for waiting, but the
prudent Christian is the best for working: Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmless
as Doves, Mat. 10.16. We must have innocence with our wisdom, else our
wisdom is but craftiness; and we must have wisdom with our innocence, else
our innocence is but weakness; we must have the harmlesnesse of the Dove, that
we may not wrong others; and we must have the prudence of the Serpent, that
others may not abuse and circumvent us: Not to wrong the truth by silence, here
is the innocence of the Dove: not to betray our selves by rashness; here is
the wisdom of the Serpent.

Fourthly, Patience. Here is the Patience of the Saints, Rev. 13.10. Rev.
14.12. The way to bring the world under us, is for us to be patient under them.

Fifthly, Self-denial. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross and follow me, Math. 16.24.

Be faithful in your promises, and in your purposes; by faithful to the ways
of God, and cause of God; O do not begin with the Lamb, and end with the Beast;
but be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life, Rev.
2.20. Keep your Lights burning, your Lamps shining, your Loins girded, your
Consciences wakned, your Garments unstained, and your Spiritual Armor
constantly on, and closely girt:

VIII. Eighthly, Have a care of reporting and believing the worlds reports of
the people of God.

Those that have a good conscience, have not always a good name. The people of
God in this life are called the troublers of Israel, seditious, rebellious, and
what not? An old device of that old serpent, to persuade the troublers of
Israel upon Elijah, the Charret of Israel, 1 Kings 18.17. 2 Kings 2 12.
Jeremiah for speaking against their sins and wickednesses, and denouncing Gods
judgments against them, is judged worthy of death, Jerem. 26.8.9. So Jerem.
38.4. The wicked Nobles petition the King to murder him, under the pretense,
that he sought not the good of the people, but the hurt. So Amos for speaking
against the Abominations of the Kings Court, is charged with treason against
the Kings person, Amos 7.10.13. So Paul and Silas for preaching up the Kingly
power of Jesus Christ, are accused by the envious Jews and rude multitude, for
turning the world upside down, and breaking the decrees of Caesar. Yea, Christ
himself had this laid to his Charge: mark what the Jews say of him: And they
began to accuse him, saying, We found this Fellow perverting the Nation, and
forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ a
King, Luke 23.2. Math. 72.18. And for this have the servants of God in all Ages
been accused and persecuted, killed and stoned, Math. 27:37. Acts 7.52. Now if
they did so to the green Tree, no wonder if they do it to the dry. If the Lord
and Master was called an enemy to Caesar, no wonder if those of his household be
called so. Our integrity will not secure us from infamy. The choicest of
Professors have had black marks in the worlds Calendar. It is usual for those
who live in treason and rebellion against the King of Heaven, to slander his
servants with treason and rebellion against the Kings of the Earth.

But, my dear Brethren, take heed of this; for as the death of the Saints is
precious, so the names of the Saints are precious in Gods account. The world
will father a hundred Lies upon the Lords people. Men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
sake, Math. 5.11. 2 Timothy 2.9. Wicked men hate them most, that God loves most;
But God will roll away the reproaches of his people; he will cause their
innocence and righteousness to break forth as the Sun at noon day; and their
names shall be in everlasting remembrance: Yea, at that great day God will
clear their innocence before men and Angels, and all the world.

IX. Ninthly, Keep in with God, now men are out with you.

But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord God
that I may declare all thy works, Psalm. 73.28. He that dwells under the
shadow of the most High, no plague shall come nigh him: He will give his
Angels charge over thee, Psalm. 91.10. Though the Fig Tree should not blossom,
and there be no fruit in the Vine, though the labor of the Olive should fail,
and the fields should yield no meat, the flock should be cut off from the fold,
and the herd from the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will triumph in
the God of my salvation, Hab. 3.17.18. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower,
and the righteous runs into it, and are safe, James 4.8. Draw near to God,
and he will draw near to you. This is a great comfort to the people of God;
though they be as Lillies amongst Thorns, and as sheep amongst Wolves; that
they have a God to go to. Come my people, enter into thy Chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the
indignation be overpast, Isa. 26.20. Let the world frown, and friends forsake
you, God can sweeten all your enjoyments, keep in Gods way, and you will be
sure of Gods protection: do you keep Gods precepts, and God will keep your
persons: do what God commands, and avoid what God forbids, and then you need
not fear what men can do unto you. If you would have God to take care of you,
you must cast your care upon God: wait on him, and walk with him; obey his
precepts, and believe his promises.

Oh beloved, Let wicked men fall out with us, and hate us, and reproach us, and
punish us as much as they will, if we keep in with God: therefore, my beloved,
above all things get communion with God, and keep communion with God: Communion
with God will yield you two Heavens; a Heaven upon Earth, and a Heaven after
death; all Saints shall enjoy a Heaven when they leave the Earth; some Saints
enjoy a Heaven whilst they are on the Earth. He enjoyes nothing that wants
communion with God; he wants nonothing that enjoyes communion with God.

X. Tenthly, Live above the love of Life, and the fear of death.

For whosoever will save his Life, shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his
life for my sake shall find it, Matthew. 16.25. If any man come unto me, and hate
not his father and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters,
yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke, 14.16. He that
loves not Christ more than his life, will be sure to save and to keep both. He
that goes out of Gods way to avoid danger, shall certainly meet with danger, Ye
are not your own, for ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in
your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.

My dear friends, Let us live above suffering and fears, though we cannot live
without suffering: In the world you shall have tribulation; but be of good
cheer, I have overcome the world. I have overcome the world for you, and I have
overcome the world in you, John 16.33. He that loves Christ above his life,
will let life go rather then Christ.

Consider my beloved, Christ and the cloud of Witnesses and Martyrs that are
gone before, and are passed over and through all those floods, and safely
arived to shore, and are now in Heaven with God, and Christ, and holy Angels,
where there is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore. Thou will show me
the path of Life; in thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand
there are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Oh the joy, that they enjoy! Oh
the rivers of consolations, that flows from God! Therefore are they before the
throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sits
on the throne shall dwell amongst them. They shall hunger no more, neither
thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat; for the
Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them
into living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, Rev. 7.15, 16, 17. Who are they that have all this honor, and glory, and
joy, and blessedness in Heaven. For this see verse 14. These are they which
came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb. The sweetness of the Crown which Believers shall
receive, will make them amends for the bitterness of the Cross they carried.

XI. Eleventhly, Desire better hearts, more then better times.

O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved: how
long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4.14. For out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts,
falsewitness, blasphemies, Mat. 15.19: The heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9.

Oh Beloved, instead of reforming, we are complaining of wicked men, more then
of wickedness; of their cruelty, more than our Apostasy; of their injuries
against us, than our injuries against God. We pore too much upon second causes,
or complain of instruments, not of our selves. We have been a long time in
sinning, and we had need be a long time in repenting: the times had not been so
bad, had not we been so bad; and the times would soon be better, if we were but
better.

Alas, Beloved, we have sinned such sins as unrighteous men could not sin;
against the clearest Light, and dearest Love: the better God has been to us,
the worse we have been to him: he has loaded us with his mercies, and we have
wearied him with our sins: Oh let us blame our selves more, and the times
less: Let us turn unto the Lord, that he may turn to us in love and mercy:
Let our hearts go out to him, that his heart may come unto us. Oh beg and cry
for better hearts, that you may serve God better: for broken hearts, for
sincere hearts; for that is that God looks at, and calls for, Prove. 23.26. My
Son, give me thy heart; Our hearts are always out of tune to serve God; but
never out of tune to serve sin: for if we had never so good times, and not good
hearts, it would rather hurts us than bless us.

XII. Twelfthly, Grow downward in humility, and inward in sincerity.

Unto me, who am less then the least of all Saints, is this grace given that I
should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8.
And whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that shall humble
himself, shall be exalted, Mat, 23.12. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God
holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-fustering, Col. 3.12. Be clothed with humility; for God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble; Humble your selves therefore under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5.5, 6. Bring up
your will to God, that God may bring down his will to you. Be low in your own
eyes; keep a low esteem of your selves; abhor pride, and fly from it; be
inwardly sincere, as well as outwardly humble. Do not look Heavenward by your
profession, and Hellward by your conversation: He that lives in sin, is dead in
sin, Ephesians. 2.1. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24. Let your hearts be upright with God, and walk as those
that have God for their portion; Knowing there are many eyes upon you; the eye
of God, the eye of Christ, the eye of Angels, the eye of Saints, the eye of the
world, and the Devil eyes you too; therefore walk wisely and sincerely; be
like the Kings Daughter all glorious within, Psalm. 45.3. She is all glorious
within, though within is not all her glory, Her clothing is of wrought gold;
Do not think your selves good because others think so: Alas, the best men's
confidences of us are poor Evidences for Heaven: the best Testimony is that
within us, and above us. See therefore that ye grow in grace, and delight in
holiness; bring forth much fruit; live still as before the living God; take
heed of Hypocrisy and Apostasy; make it your daily business to walk with God;
be much in the exercise of humility: Humility will exceedingly adorn your
profession: Do not place Religion in a few good words, when the substance is
neglected; but live as you would die; live to day as if you were to dye to
morrow.

XIII. Thirteenthly, Do good to those that be good.

He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
Micah 6.8. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy 6.18. But do good, and to
communicate forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb.
13.16. Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to
visit the fatherless, and widows in their affliction, James 1.27. Forget not
to contribute to the necessities of the poor Saints, think that God has given
you your Estates, for such a time as this.

Oh Beloved, what an opportunity have you now to do good if Satan do not hinder
you? are there not many of Christ's Ministers now in want, and Members in want?
some in prison, and others out of prison: Remember those that are in bonds, as
bound with them; and them that suffer adversity, as being your selves also in
the body, Heb. 13.3. There be many men that have a great deal of this worlds
wealth, and riches, and goods in their hands, and in their houses; but they
have no grace in their hearts; and therefore they do no good with the goods of
this world: they live so unfruitful, that their lives are scarce worth a
prayer, not their deaths scarce worth a tear. Men may as well go to Hell for
not doing good, as for doing evil: he that bears not good fruit is as well fuel
for Hell, as he that bears bad. You may not be outwardly bad, and yet not
inwardly good; you may be as far from grace, as from vice: Men are not so much
sent to Hell for doing evil, as for not doing good: For I was an hungered, and
ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, Math. 25.42. The
rich glutton was in Hell torments, not for persecuting Lazarus, but not
relieving Lazarus. Merozzarus was cursed by the Angel, not because they fought
against the Lord, but because they came not to help the Lord against the
mighty, Judges 5.23. It is one of the greatest mercies in the world, for God to
give a man a heart to do good with that he has given him.

Oh Beloved, be always a doing good and hating evil: Look not only where you
may get good, but where you may do good: Labor to be helpful to the souls of
others, and to supply the wants of others.

XIV. Fourteenthly, Choose chastisement before defilement.

Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs
daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.24.25. For ye had compassion
of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods knowing in your
selves that ye have in Heaven a better, and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.
So the three Children chose burning in the fiery furnace, before bowing to the
Golden Image, Daniel 3.17.18. We are not careful to answer thee in this matter.
If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand O King. But if not, be it known
unto thee O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the Golden Image
that thou have set up. So Daniel chose suffering before sinning: And it is said
of those in Heb. 11.35. they accepted not of deliverance; and others were
tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection.

Oh Beloved, there is more evil in the least sin against Christ, than in the
greatest suffering for Christ.

First, Our sufferings for Christ are but light, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Secondly, But short, but for a moment.

Thirdly, Christ stands by us in out sufferings.

Fourthly, Our sufferings are ordered by the Father.

Fifthly, Our sufferings shall not hurt our souls:

Sixthly, God gives us the best of comforts in the worst of times: we have most
of consolations from God, when we have most of tribulations from men: as our
sufferings do abound, so our consolations do abound: When the burden is
heaviest upon the back, when the peace of conscience is sweetest and greatest
within. Therefore my dear brethren, keep your selves out of the puddle of this
world, and from the evil of this world; and if you must sin or suffer, choose
suffering before sinning.

XV. Fifteenthly, Think not the worse of godliness because it is frowned upon;
nor the better of ungodliness because it is smiled upon.

For bodily exercise profits little, but Godliness is profitable unto all
things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ,
Phil. 3.8. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift
of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23.

Oh Friends, think not the worse of holiness, because it is reproached and
scorned, and persecuted by wicked men and Devils; nor the better of
wickedness, because wicked men love it, and follow it, and say, It is in vain
to serve God; and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances, and that
we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts Mal. 3.14. But there is a
time coming, when ungodly men would be glad of some of that holiness that now
they despise; but they shall be as far then from obtaining it, as they are now
from desiring it. Let us therefore love holiness and hate wickedness; For
without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Holiness is the only
way to happiness. We must not dress our selves for another world, by the
Looking-glass of this world: Thou shall not follow a multititude to do evil,
Exodus 23.2. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even
weeping, that they are the enemies of the Gross of Christ; whose end is
destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who
mind earthly things, Phil. 3.18.19. The Children of God must be harmless in
their actings, and blameless in their walkings.

XVI. Sixteenthly, Prize the Word of God by the worth of it, that you may never
come to prize the Word of God by the want of it.

How sweet are thy words unto my taste! Yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth,
Psalm. 119:10. It is sweeter than the honey and the honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10. Oh
how do I Love thy Law! Psalm. 119.97. I love thy Commandments above Gold; yea,
above fine Gold. The Law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of Gold
and Silver, Verse 72. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word,
that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 1.2. Let the Word of God dwell richly in
you; not only with you, but in you, Col. 3.16. Oh let us with Job esteem the
Word of God above our necessary food, Job 23.12. and with David above our Gold
and Silver. The delight of a Saint in Gods Word, over-tops all his creature
delights. Wicked men can delight in the Creatures of God, but not in the Word
of God; they can delight in the gifts of God, but not in the God of gifts. Oh
let us love the word, and prize the word: it is the Sun of the Christian world.
As the Sun is the light of the natural world, and without it the world is but
a Chaos, and a dungeon full of darkness; so is the Word of God the light of the
Spiritual world, without which a Christian is an eternal night. Take away the
Scriptures, and there will be no certain rule to direct men what is to be done,
or what is to be believed: All false ways are here discovered, all sins are
here forbidden, all holiness is here commanded: Here you may see every action
and motion of your Lives, as a step to Life, or a step to Death; as a step
Heavenward, or a step Hell-ward; Oh therefore prize the word, and obey the
Word.

First, It is a plain Word.

Secondly, It is a perfect Word,

Thirdly, It is a sure Word.

Fourthly, It is an uniform Word.

Fifthly, It is a powerful Word; it is the savor of life unto life, unto them
that believe:

Oh Beloved, let us read the Word, and abide in the Word: If ye continue in my
Word, then are ye my Disciples, Joh. 8.31: The less now you hear, the more do
you read, that little Book of the Revelations and Daniel especially.

XVII. Seventeenthly, have a care of the Whore of Babylons golden Cup and sweet
Wine.

And the Woman was arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked with Gold
and precious stones, and pearls; having a golden Cup in her hand sull of
abominations, and filthiness of her fornication, Rev. 17.4. And the Serpent
cast out of his mouth water, as a flood after the Woman, that he might cause
her to be carried away of the flood, Rev. 12.15. Let me beseech you to have a
care of this, and keep your selves from this: Be like the Virgin Spouse of
Christ, which follows him wheresoever he goes.

My Dear Friends, keep your selves from four things.

First, From false Teachers. The Devil has his Ministers as well as Christ.
Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening Wolves, Math. 7.15. Yea, they are greedy Dogs, which can
never have enough, and they are Shepherds that cannot understand: they all look
to their own way, every own for his gain from his quarter, Isa. 56.11. Oh false
Teachers do not feed the Flock, but fleece the Flock; they do not convert; but
pervert; they do not season, but poison; they do not edify to salvation, but
edify to damnation; instead of curing souls, they kill souls; so they have but
the peoples goods, they care not though the Devil have their souls; they are
neither rightly called, nor rightly qualified, nor rightly ordained; Their
course is evil, and therefore is not right, Jer. 13.10. They are like Dogs and
Wolves combining together to macerate the Flock of Christ. Oh therefore keep
your selves from Babylons Merchants, that make Merchandise of the souls of men,
Rev. 18.13. Oh, the sins of the Teachers, are the Teachers of sins.

Secondly, From false Doctrine. But there were false Prophets also among the
people, even as there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall
bring in damrable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. Be not carried away with diverse
and strange Doctrines; for it is a good thing that the heart be established
with grace, not with meats; which have not profited them that have been
occupied therein, Hebrews 13.9.

I beseech you also in the Lord, my Dear Brethren, that you do not carnally
comply with, nor superstitiously conform to the Inventions of men: But stand
fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made you free, Gal. 5.1.

Thirdly, From false Worship. If any man Worship the Beast and his Image, and
receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the
Wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of
his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14.9, 10. Ye
Worship ye know not what. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in Spirit, and in Iruth, Joh. 4.23, 24. As there be some in the
World that worship false Gods, so there be others that Worship the true God
with false Worship. They that worship the Beast, worship the Devil, Rev. 13. Oh
meddle not with false worship, with vain worship, and will worship: worship God
as he teaches us to worship him. Our work is to depend on Christ's work: our
outward working depends on Gods inward working.

Fourthly, From false Opinions, from Error and Sedition: Let your hearts be
upright, your judgments sound, and your lives holy: Love the Truth, obey the
Truth, and hold fast the Truth.

Now Beloved, Let me beseech you for Gods sake, and for Christ's sake, and for
your Souls sake, keep your selves from false Teachers, from false Doctrine,
from false worship, from false Opinions. If you will be tasting and siping at
Babylons cup, you must resolve to receive more or less of Babylons plagues.

XVIII. Eighteenthly, Be one with every one that is one with Christ.

Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is
one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your Calling:
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all,
and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. Every one that loves him
that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. By this we know that we
love the Children of God, when we love God and keep his Commandments, 1 John
5.1, 2. He that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom he has not seen? 1 John 4.26.

Oh Consider what a dishonor it is to the Gospel, that those that profess
themselves Sons of the same God, Members of the same Christ, Temples of the
same Spirit, Heirs of the same Glory, should be at a jarring one with another.
It is strange and unnatural, that Lillies should prove thorns to one another!
that those who are Saints in profession, should be Devils in practice to one
another! that Gods Diamonds should cut one another! For Wolves to devour the
Lambs is no wonder, but for one Lamb to devour another is a wonder, and
monstrous! Oh, that Christians instead of loving one another, should hate one
another! Oh how unlike are we to that God whom we profess to be our God! He is
full of love, full of goodness, and full of mercy and patience: Oh but
Christians cannot bear, and forbear one with another. Oh do not wicked men
warm themselves at the sparks of our divisions, and say it is as we would have
it?

Oh Beloved, has not God made his wrath to smoke against us for the divisions
and heart-burnings that have been amongst us? Oh that you would lay this to
heart, and throw away all discord and divisions, and heart burnings, and labor
for a oneness in love and affection, with every one that is one with Christ.
Oh labor for a healing spirit. You cannot love God if you do not love the
people of God. If any man says he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a
liar. Let brotherly love continue, Heb. 13.1. They that feared the Lord, spoke
often one to another, Mal. 3.16. Christ's Doves should flock together. There be
many that cannot love a man, unless he be of their Opinion, or a Member of
their Church, though he be a Member of Christ. Every man has a good opinion of
his own opinion: But alas Beloved, it is not this opinion, or that opinion;
this way, or that way, will bring a man to Heaven without faith in Christ; and
he that has faith in Christ, has a right to all the Ordinances of Christ, and
Promises of Christ, and Privileges of Christ; therefore let me beseech you to
love every man that is a godly man, let him be of what way and form he will.
And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one soul,
Acts 4.38.

XIX. Nineteenthly, Love Christ with a Love stronger then life, who loved us
with a love stronger than death.

Therefore does my father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might
take it again: no man takes it from me, but I lay it down my self. I have
power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again, John 10.17, 18. This
is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. Christ's love to us was stronger
then death; he dyed for love; he laid down his life to save our lives; he loves
us as the Father loves him, John 15.9. As the Father has loved me, so have I
loved you: continue ye in my love. Oh the Scripture has exceeding high
expressions of his affection to us. Now Beloved, if he died for us, and
suffered for us, and set his heart upon us to love us, and delight in us; how
ought we then to love him again! Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, Math. 22.37, 38. Whom have
I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee,
Psalm. 73.25. Unto you therefore which believe he is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. Oh
let our hearts be full of love and affections to Christ. Love will breed
courage, and cast out fear, slavish fear before God, and carnal fear before
men: God can keep us from the torments of men, but men cannot keep us from the
torments of God. Whilst we stand by God, God has promised to stand by us:
Therefore be not afraid of any Authority that stands in opposition to the
Authority of Christ. None can promise us better than Christ can; none can
threaten us worse than Christ can? Can any man promise us with better then
Heaven? Can any man threaten us with worse than Hell? Heaven is promised to
those that love him; and Hell is to be the portion of those that hate him.

Oh my dear Brethren, Let us Love Christ with a love stronger then death: so
did Paul and the rest of the Apostles, Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? Romans 8.35. Love is stronger than Death; many
waters cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown it, Cant. ^.6, 7.

XX. Twentiethly, Be every day as serious in your preparation for death, as if
it were your last day.

All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come, Job 14.14.
This night thy soul shall be required of thee, Luke 12.20. For what is your
life? it is even a vapor that appears a little time, and then vanishes
away, Jam. 4.14. Behold, thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, and mine
age is as nothing before thee: Verily, every man at his best state is
altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5. As no Saint knows when that time and hour shall
be; so no wicked man knows when it shall not be. To live without fear of death,
is to dye living: To labor not to dye is labor in vain. Men are afraid to dye
in such and such sins, but not afraid to live in such and such sins. Oh the
Hell of horrors and terrors that attend those souls that have their greatest
work to do when they come to dye! therefore as you would be happy in death, and
everlastingly blessed after death, prepare and fit your selves for death. Did
Christ dye for us that we might live with him, and shall not we desire to dye
and be with him? A Believers dying day is his Crowning day. And I heard a voice
from Heaven, saying, unto me, write, blessed are the dead which dye in the
Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labors, and their works do follow them, Rev. 14.13.

Oh I beseech you my dear Brethren, every day spend some time in preparation
for, and meditation of Death, Judgment, Hell, Heaven, and Eternity. Eternity
is a sum that can never be numbered, a line that can never be measured: Eternity
is a condition of everlasting sorrow, or everlasting joy. Oh think of this, and
prepare for this every day before the night of death comes.

And thus my beloved, I have given you these Twenty precious directions for
your souls.

I shall leave this Book with you as a Legacy of my dearest Love: my desire in
all this, is your happiness here, and your blessedness hereafter. My earnest
and humble desire of you is, That you would mind this Book and my former
Treatise; not only read them, but reform your lives by them. O do your Duty,
love your Duty, and live your Duty, that you may be made meet to be partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints in light; Which is, and shall be the earnest
and constant Prayer of one that esteems it a most glorious privilege to be of
the number of those who follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

William Dyer.

REVEL. 14.6. These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.


THE Title of this Book tells us, it is The Revelation of John, and John tells
us Chap. 1.1. it is the Revelation of Jesus Christ: Christ's Revelation to John,
and John's Revelation to us.

The Comma of this Book is set forth Chap. 1.19. Write the things that are,
and the things that shall be hereafter, And into these two parts this book is
divided.

First, a Relation of the things that are, referring to the seven Churches of
Asia.

Secondly, A Revelation of the general state of the Church to come, and that
from John's time unto the second coming of the Lord.

The words of this Book are the true sayings of the true God, they are
therefore true and faithful, Chap. 22.6.

The matter of this Book so much concerns the good of the Church, that Jesus
Christ commands every one that has an ear to hear, to hearken what the
Spirit of God says unto the Church: and to show how earnest Christ Jesus is to
have all his Members and Servants acquainted with the things revealed in this
Book, this charge he repeated eight times over, as this Book shows, Chap. 2.7,
11, 17, 29. And Chap. 3.6, 13, 22. And Chap. 13.9.

A blessing is pronounced upon the Reader, Hearer, and Doer of the things
written in this Book Chap. 1.3. O what can be said more, or more effectually to
stir us up to hear and read, than blessedness? And blessed is he that keeps
the words of the Prophecy of this Book, Chap. 22.7. But how shall we keep
them, except we know them? and how shall we know them, except we read them?

The excellency of this Book is such, as neither Man nor Angel, none in Heaven
or Earth, or under the Earth, was found worthy so much as to look into it, till
Jesus Christ went and took out of his Fathers hand to open it unto us, Chap.
5.3.

The blessed St. John could not but weep for fear least this book should have
been kept close from him and the Church; so earnest was he to know those
things, which we neglect to know Chap. 5.4.

This book is a most precious Jewel, which Christ has bestowed upon his Church
in the latter days; and it is our great duty to look into it, and read it,
study it, open it, and expound it, that all the people may thoroughly be
acquainted with it, especially in these times; for now in this Age is and shall
be the very heat of the war and brunt of the battle betwixt God and Beliall,
betwixt Christ and Antichrist, betwixt the Lambs followers and the Beasts
followers. Now this book lies all open, and plainly tells us what shall be
the issue and success in the day of battle; which side shall have the victory,
and which side shall go down, Chap. 17.19. And certainly the sons of Belial
shall not long prevail; the date of their Reign is almost out, and the time
draws on apace wherein both they and their Beast shall be laid in the dust.

This book shows us the rising of the Beast, the declining of the Beast, and
the ruin of the Beast, Chap. 18:

Our Lord Jesus has showed us in this book the sorrows, and sufferings, and
afflictions, and tribulations, which the Church was to meet withal in the
latter times, Chap. 11.7. and Chap. 12.14, 15. and Chap. 13.7.

And her deadly and cruel Enemies; the Whore of Babylon, the Mother of Harlots,
the Beast, the false Prophet, and the great red Dragon which makes War against
her, and casts out floods after her, Chap. 12:17:

This book shows us likewise the true State of the true Church upon Earth;
what she is, where she is, how she is, and what she shall be hereafter; and
that before the slaying, under the slaying, and after the slaying.

1. Before the slaying time the true Church is in the Wilderness, where she
has a place prepared her of God, that they should feed her there a thousand
two hundred and threescore days, Chap. 12.2. Before the slaying of the
Witnesses the true Worshippers of God are in a low condition, in heaviness and
sadness, in sackcloth and ashes, in a mourning and suffering State; being
scattered and dispersed here and there, as Israel was of old. But though this
be the condition of the poor Woman in the Wilderness, yet she is not without
comfort; she may take comfort in three things.

1. That God prepared a place for her.

2. That God nourished her, and locked her up in his chamber of Providence.

3. That God numbered her days of suffering: The Tribulation of the Saints of
the Old Testament is reckoned up still by years; as the bondage of Egypt four
hundred and thirty years; and the Captivity of Babylon seventy years: But under
the New Testament by Days; Ye shall have tribulation ten days, Chap. 2.10.
And the two witnesses shall lie dead three days and a half, Chap: Chap. 11.9.
So the Woman was to be in the wilderness a thousand two hundred and threescore
days.

The Church is compared to a woman for four Reasons.

First, As as woman is weak and feeble, so is the Church, and can do nothing
without Christ, John 15.5.

Secondly, As a woman is useful and fruitful, so is the Church, John 15.2.

Thirdly, As a woman is fair and beautiful, so is the Church, Ezekiel. 16.13.

Fourthly, As a woman is full of love and affection, so is the Church, Cant.
2.5.

2: Under the slaying time the true worshippers of God and witnesses of Jesus
Christ lie dead in the Street of the great City, which is spiritually called
Sodom and Egypt, Chap. 11.8: That is, in Antichrists Kingdoms and Dominions.
The Woman which thou saw, is that great City, which reigns over the Kings
of the Earth, Chap. 17.18.

She is called Sodom for her filthiness and wickedness, and Egypt for her
cruelty and oppression, Chap. 17.4.

The true Servants of God and Members of Jesus Christ, that bear witness for
him against the evils of the Beast, and against the evils of the world, are
here called two witnesses.

1. Because of the fewness of them.

2. Because two is a number sufficient to bear a witness, John 8.17.

3. Because Antichrists Beasts are called two, Chap. 13.

4. They are called witnesses for Six Reasons:

First, Because their work is to bear witness for Christ and his truth, against
the world, the Flesh and the Devil. A true believer is to bear a threefold
testimony to and for Christ; a word-testimony to and for Christ; a
word-testimony, a life-testimony, and a blood testimony, Heb. 12. John 5.33.

Secondly, Christ's Members are called witnesses, because they stand up for
Christ, to maintain his name, his honor, his cause, his truth, his worship,
his Glory in the world, Dan. 3.16, 17, 18, and Chap. 6. And ye killed the
Prince of life, whom God has raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses,
Act. 3.15. Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by
the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from
the dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole, Acts 4.10, 11,
12.

Thirdly, The Lambs followers are called witnesses, because they keep the
testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev. 12.17: Chap. 6.9. a testimony to all the
Offices, works, and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, as King of Saints, and King of
Nations.

Fourthly, Gods chosen and precious ones are called witnesses, because they do
appear boldly and openly for his truth; they own it, they love it, they love
it, they publish it, they hold it fast, and suffer for it, who through the
teachings of the Spirit in the word, and by the power of the same spirit are
found in the practice of Christ's Appointments: they cannot deny the truth,
which is a Testimony to it, Acts 24.14.

Fifthly, The true Worshippers of God are called witnesses, because they do
bear witness against the beast, and all the whole mystery of iniquity; against
the whore of Babylon, who has committed fornication with the Kings of the
earth, and made her self drunk with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17.6.
Christ's, faithful witnesses bear an eminent Testimony against all her
abominations and filthiness and wickedness, against the Pope, his Government,
his clergy, his Doctrine, his worship, his Religion, and all his abominable
proceedings, Rev. 19.7.

Sixthly, Christ's redeemed ones are called witnesses, because in dying they
bear witness for him; for to dye for the truth is a living standing testimony
to it. He who for Christ's sake loves not his life unto the death, dies a most
glorious witness of Christ; Chap. 12.11. And they loved not their lives unto
the death. And the beast that came out of the bottomless pit made war against
him, and overcame them, and killed them, Chap. 11.7.9.

Antichrist rises in a double beast; In his civil power; and his
Ecclesiastical power.

First, In his civil power; so he makes up one beast with the ten Kings, Chap.
17.12. And this is that Beast that rise up out of the Sea, which has seven
heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten Crowns, and upon his heads the name
of blasphemy. And the beast which I saw was like unto a Leaper, and his feet
was as the feet of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion; and the Dragon
gave him his Power, and his Seat, and great Authority, Chap. 13.1, 2.

Secondly, In his Ecclesiastical power; so he makes up another beast with the
Clergy: and this is that beast that rise up out of the Earth; He has two horns
like a Lamb, and he speaks like a Dragon, verse. 11.

Now these two monstrous beasts (Antichrists Magistrates and Ministers) slay
the faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ, and rejoice over their dead bodies, and
make merry, and send gifts one to another, Chap. 11.10. Oh how do graceless,
faithless, Christless men rejoice at the afflictions and calamities of Gods
people! saying, where is now your God, and Christ your King? Psalm. 42.10.

As touching the nature of the VVitnesses death, we are not to conceive thereof
as though the same were to be a corporeal killing or slaying; but a civil
killing or slaying, not so much their bodies as their testimonies, deprive and
strip them of their Liberty, Worship, Ordinances, Religion, and the free
exercise of their Gifts, suffering not a Servant of Jesus Christ's to bear an
open testimony against the abominations of the beast, nor against their
National wickedness; but make Laws against them, and lie in wait for them,
stoping their mouths, and imprisoning their bodies, hating and hunting them up
and down, afflicting and tormenting them, and taking possession of their
possessions: Killing and slaying them all the day long, and account them as
sheep for the slaughter, Romans 8.33. This is to be broken in the place of
Dragons, and covered with the shadow of death, Psalm. 44.19. This is to be
killed all the day long: And upon this account, the witnesses are said to be
slain, And after three days and an half, the Spirit of life from God entered
into them; and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them that
saw them, Chap. 11.11. A spirit of boldness and courage, zeal and
undauntednesse and resolution to appear for Christ and his cause, against
Antichrist and the whole brood. Therefore rejoice all ye Saints, and be glad
all ye of upright heart; though the witnesses be dead, they will not always be
dead, but rise again.

3. After the slaying time the true Church is with the Lamb on Mount Sion,
Chap. 14.1. And I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on Mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty and four thousand, having his fathers name written in their
foreheads: which notes a fixed state: Those which trust in the Lord shall be as
Mount Sion, which cannot be moved, Psalm. 12.5. before the slaying time the
Church is very low, but under the slaying time lower, but after the slaying
time the Church is very high, she is rejoicing, shining, and triumphing on
Mount Sion: And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before
the four beasts, and the Elders, and no man could learn that song but the
hundred forty and four thousand which were redeemed from the Earth. The true
Church having gotten the glorious presence of the Lamb in the midst of her, and
having gotten some victory over the beast they do rejoice mightily. And I heard
a voice of Harpers, harping with their Harps: but this is not till after the
resurrection of the witnesses are risen, the Church is exceeding joyful.

This chapter out of which my Text is taken contains six principal things

First, A Lovely Description of Jesus Christ; and he is described by the
similitude of a Lamb: Lo, a Lamb stood upon Mount Sion, verse. 1. And behold the
Lamb of God, Joh. 1.19.

He is called a Lamb in a double respect.

First, In respect of his innocence, 1 Pet. 1.19.

Secondly, In respect of his meekness and patience, Acts 8.32.

Secondly, A Lively Description of the Church, the Lambs wife, and that from
verse. 1. to verse. 5.

Thirdly, A glorious Description of the Churches Ministers. As the Church is in
this book called Heaven, so her Ministers are called Angels: And I saw another
Angel flying in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel, ver. 6. And
there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, verse. 8. And the third
Angel followed him, saying with a loud voice, etc. Verse. 9.

Fourthly, Here is set down the Doctrine which these Angels preach and publish.

The first Angel published the free Grace of God in Jesus Christ openly
against all the inventions of men: Saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give
Glory to him, and worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea and the
Fountains of waters, verse. 7. Namely, That men should once fear God, and
worship him, and give all glory to him; none to Creatures, none to Images, none
to Antichrist; he that worshipeth the Beast, worshipeth the Dragon and the
Devil, Chap. 13.

The second Angel proclaimed the utter ruin of Babylon, and the destruction
thereof, over the world, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City,
because she has made all Nations drink of the wive of the wrath of her
fornication, verse. 8.

The third Angel does seriously and solemnly give warning to all those who
shall yet adhere to the Beast, showing the danger and misery of it. If any man
worship the heast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured
out without mixture into the Cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in the
presence of the Lamb, verse. 19.20.

Fifthly, A sweet word of heavenly consolation to the Saints and People of God;
And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, blessed are the dead
which dye in the Lord; from henceforth they rest from their labors, and their
works do follow them, verse. 13.

Sixthly, The Judgments and vengeance which shall be executed upon the false
Church: the Spirit does set it forth by a double similitude; the one by
rending, the other by gathering; and that from verse. 15. to the end. God will
as it were rain Hell out of Heaven upon Babylon; he has fire and brimstone for
this spiritual Sodom; judgment without mercy; and fury without compassion.

I shall now come to the words of my Text, These are they which follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes. This text is one of the Golden Characters of the
hundred forty and four thousand, which stood with the Lamb upon Mount Sion.

In these words are three things.

First, the Subjects, [these]

Secondly, the Act, [follow]

Thirdly, the Object, [The Lamb] whithersoever he goes.

I shall gather this Observation from the words,

That it is the sweet temper and frame of souls truly gracious, to follow the
Lamb whithersoever he goes. In the handling of this point, I shall show you
five things.

First, What it is to follow the Lamb:

Secondly, Why they follow the Lamb.

Thirdly, The Excellency of following the Lamb.

Fourthly, The Misery of them that follow not the Lamb.

Fifthly, How the Lambs followers may be known from the beasts followers

First, To follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, is to follow him in four
things.

First, In his Commandments. If you love me, keep my Commandments, John
14.15. Ye are my friends if you do whatsoever I command you, Chap. 15.14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree
of Life, Rev. 22.4. Oh Beloved, we cannot follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, unless we follow him in his commands. Then shall I not be ashamed, (says
David) when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. Christians
should take as much delight in those precepts that enjoyne holiness, as in
those promises that assure happiness.

Secondly, In his teachings. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and they
follow me, John 10.27. A stranger they will not follow, but will flee from him,
for they know not the voice of strangers, Verse. 5.

Thirdly, In his Providence, through all afflictions, all straits all
discouragements and sorrows whatsoever, though it be a way of blood. We must
forsake all to follow a crucified Christ, a condemned, in bloody paths of
sufferings, if he call us to it. Ye though I walk through the Valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me: Thy rod and thy
staff they comfort me, Psalm. 23.4. For (says Paul) I am ready not to be bound
only, but also to dye at Jerusalam for the name of the Lord Jesus. We must be
willing to venture the loss of all for him, Liberty, Estate, Relations, and
Life it self: We have forsaken all, and followed thee, Math. 19.27.

Fourthly, In his Example. For I have given you an example, that you should do
as I have done to you, Joh. 13.5. that Because Christ has suffered for us,
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. So that
to follow Christ's steps, is to take him for an example: We must walk in the
same spirit, in the same steps, and in the same obedience. We must not follow
wicked men's Examples, who walk in the broad way that leads to death, and are of
their father the Devil, and his work they do, John 8.11. But we must follow our
Head Christ, who went up and down doing good, Acts 10.38. Now this is to follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

In his Commands. In his Teachings. In his Providence. In his Example.
Secondly, To follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, is to follow him truly,
without hypocrisy; and constantly, without apostasy.

First, Truly, without hypocrisy: Many follow the Lord as Beggars follow a
man, only for an Alms; they prize the wages of Religion, above the work of
Religion. You seek me not because of the miracles, but because you did eat of
the loaves and were filled, John 6.26. Oh Beloved, God abhors an Hypocrite more
then a Sodomite; and Hell is provided on purpose for Hypocrites, Mat. 24.51. My
Beloved, following the Lamb fully, is to have the heart sixed and resolved for
God: My soul follows hard after thee, said David, Psalm 63.8. And as the Heart
pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee O God. All the
faculties of his soul are working after God: My soul, and all that is within
me praise the Lord, says holy David.

Secondly, Constantly, without Apostasy. A true Believer after he begins to
follow the Lamb, he never leaves following him, but follows him whithersoever
he goes. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or
Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? For I
am persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any
Creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Oh beloved, he does not follow the Lamb whither soever he
goes, that follows the Lord earnestly for a while, but afterward forsakes him
when a storm rises: Yet has he not root in himself, but dureth for a while;
when tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is
offended, Math. 13.21. Nor he that follows the Lamb in some things, and the
Beast in other things: They feared the Lord, and served their own gods, after
the manner of the Nations. Nor he that follows the Lord in a dull heavy
manner, and a lukewarm temper: I know thy works, that thou art neither cold
nor hot, I would thou were cold or hot, Chap. 3.15. Be astonished, O ye
Heavens, at this and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord;
for my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of
living waters, and hewed them out Gisterns, broken Cisterns, that can hold no
water, Jer. 2.12, 13. Oh this is not a following the Lamb: They that follow the
Lord fully abide in the Lord, and cleave to the Lord, and continue constantly
in Gods ways to the end of their days. The righteous holds on his way, Job
17.9. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. Hosea 6.3. The
righteous man holds on his way, he follows the Lamb whithersoever he goes:
First, Speedily. Secondly, Truly: Thirdly, Undividedly: Fourthly, Zealously.
Fifthly, Humbly. Sixthly, Cheerfully. Seaventhly, Diligently. Eighthly,
Constantly. Ninthly, Faithfully. Tenthly, Transcendently.


Now this is following the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

Now I shall show you why Believers follow the Lamb.

First, Because they are redeemed by the blood of the Lamb. For as much as ye
know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver, and Gold,
from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1
Pet. 1.18, 19. He paid a price for our redemption, that so he might discharge
the debt of our sins; And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take
the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and have redeemed
us to God by thy blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation, Rev. 5.9.

There are three things called precious in the Scriptures.

First, Faith is called precious, 2 Pet. 1.1. Secondly, The promises are called
precious, verse. 4. Thirdly, The blood of Christ is called precious, 1 Pet.
1.19.
O his blood has redeemed us from six Enemies.

First, From the World, Galathians 1.4. Rev. 14.4. Secondly, From the Curse,
Galathians 3.13. Thirdly, From Sin, Romans 6: 18, 22. Fourthly, From the Devil,
Heb. 2.18. Acts 26.17, 18. Fifthly, From the sting of Death, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56.
Sixthly, From Hell, 1 These. 1.10. Rev. 2.12. O his blood is precious blood; his
blood has slain our Enemies; he has purchased by his blood Reconciliation
with the Father, Union with the Son, and Communion with the Holy Ghost. Ye that
were sometimes afar off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2.13, 16.
Secondly, They follow the Lamb, because they are washed in the blood of the
Lamb. He has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, Rev. 1.5.
These are they which came out of great Tribulation, and have washed their
Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7.14. The blood of
Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Christ's blood washes away our
bloody sins. I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, Live, Ezekiel. 16. For
as soon as we are united with Christ, our sins are upon him, and his
righteousness upon us. It is Christ that gives us life, and puts excellent
Ornaments upon us to cover our nakedness, and decketh us with Jewels and Gems
of Gold: So we become beautiful in his sight, Isa. 6^.10. That he might present
it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, nor any such
thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.27.

Thirdly, Believers follow the Lamb, because they are risen with the Lamb. If
ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
siteth on the right hand of God, Coloss. 3.1. Therefore we are buried with him
by baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the father, even so we also should wark in newness of life, Romans 6.4.
Every man besides a Believer is a dead man, Dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians.
2.1. Therefore they are exhorted to rise from the dead Ephesians. 5.4. They must rise
from evil to good, from Earthly-mindednesse to Heavenly-mindedness; but now
Believers by faith are risen from darkness to light: For ye were sometimes
darkness, but new are ye light in the Lord: Walk as Children of light, Ephesians.
5.8. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee, Isa. 60.1. When the Lord shined forth upon his people in glorious
discoveries of himself, he calls them away from their former condition. When
the Lord discovered himself in a Gospel dispensation, his people were no longer
to sit under dark clouds of legal Ceremonies, but to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes.

Fourthly, They follow the Lamb, because they are enlightened by the Lamb. God
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give us the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may
win Christ, Phil. 3.8. Divine and Heavenly knowledge brings a man near to God,
it gives a man the clearest and the fullest sight of God; and the nearer any
man comes to God, the clearer vision he has of God, and the more communion
with God.

The reason why others do not follow the Lamb, is because they see not the
worth and want of the Lamb: Having the understanding darkened, being alienated
from the living God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
blindness of their hearts, Ephesians. 4.18. Where there is a Veil cast before the
eyes of knowledge, there is a Bar set before the hands of practice. An
ignorant person neither knows what he is a doing, nor does he know whether he
is a going; he does nothing but undo himself by doing. Carnal men see no
preciousness and loveliness in Christ; Oh what is thy beloved more then another
beloved? Cant. 5,9. If thou know the gift of God, and who it is that asks;
thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water,
John 4.10.

Christ goes undesired in the world, because he goes undiscerned by the world:
But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned 1 Cor. 2.14. But now believers being enlightened by the Spirit of God,
and by the Word of God, they see themselves what they were before faith, and
what they are by faith, and what they shall be at the end of faith; they see
Christ to be all precious, precious in his Ordinances, precious in his
Discoveries, precious in his Graces, precious in his Gifts, precious in his
Promises, precious in his Members, precious in his Ministers, and precious in
himself, 1 Pet. 2.7. Therefore believers cannot but love him and follow him.

Fifthly, They follow the Lamb because they love the Lamb. Grace be with all
them that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24. They love him
with a superlative love. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. The Spouse of Christ looks upon
what she is, as not great enough for his remembrance, and what she does, as not
good enough for his acceptance. Look not upon me because I am black, because
the Sun has looked upon me; My Mothers Children were angry with me, they made
me the keeper of their Vineyard, but mine one Vineyard have I not kept, Cant.
1.6. The Church is never more fair, than when she judges her self to be most
deformed; never more happy, than when she accounts her self most miserable;
never more holy, than when she reckons her self most polluted; she is never
richer, than when she sees her self to be poorest of all. The soul that loves
much, is a soul that works much; the Commands of the Gospel are not grievous to
him, but precious to him. Tell me (oh thou whom my soul loves) where thou
feedest, Cant. 1.7. A soul that loves Christ has has his eye upon Christ, and
his desire is after Christ. The desire of our souls is to thy name, and to the
remembrance of thee: With my Soul have I desired thee in the Night, yea, with
my Spirit will I seek thee early, Isa. 26.8, 9. True believers love Christ more
then they love themselves, They loved not their lives unto the death, Rev.
13:11. Christ is dearer to them than their lives: they slighted, contemned,
yea, despised their very lives, when they stood in competition with Christ, and
his Glory, and chose rather to suffer the greatest misery, than he should lose
the least dram of his honor. The love of Christ has made his Saints and
VVitnesses yield all the parts and members of their bodies, to the cruel and
merciless instruments of bloody persecutors; their backs to be whipped, their
eyes to be boared, and their tongues to be cut out of their mouths, Heb. 11.37.
Oh how strongly did these love! the measure of loving Christ, is to love him
without measure. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Tribulation
shall not, Persecution shall not, Famine and Nakedness shall not, Peril and
Sword shall not: for I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.35, 38, 39.

Sixthly, They follow the Lamb, because they are married to the Lamb: Jer.
3.14. I am married unto you, Rev. 21.9. I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs
Wife, Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his.

Here I will show you two things.

First, How Christ's comes to be ours.

2ly. How we come to be Christ's.

First, Christ is ours by the free donation and gift of the Father: God so
loved the word, that he gave his only begotten Son, John 3.16.

Secondly, Christ freely gave himself unto us; so that Christ is ours by his
own consent: he has as it were passed over himself unto us; Christ loved me,
and gave himself for me, said the Apostle, Gal. 2.20.

Thirdly, Christ has passed himself over unto his Church by marriage; and
therefore she is called his Queen, his Spouse, his Bride, and his Wife, Psalm.
45.9. Although we had nothing to bring to him but poverty, shame, forrow, and
misery, yet he took us, and loved us, and married us.

Fourthly, Christ is ours by communicating his own Spirit to us.

2. The Saints are Christ's four ways.

First, By the Donation of the Father: God has made him both Lord and Christ,
Acts 2.36. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head
over all things in the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. And now, says Christ, Behold I and
the Children whom thou gave me; thine they were, and thou gave them me,
John Seventeen Six. God the Father gave us to God the Son, that he might redeem
us; and God the Son gave us to God the Father, that he might sanctify us, and
keep us from the evil of the World, verse 17.

Secondly, We are Christ's by choice: I have chosen you out of the World: And
the Saints are said to be Chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. And they are called A
chosen Generation, 1 Pet. 2.9. And chosen and faithful, Rev. 17.14.

Thirdly, The Saints are Christ's by purchase. We were in our Enemies hands, and
under their power, and could not free our selves from the bondage of the Law,
Sin, Satan, Death, and Hell; therefore says the Apostle, We are bought with a
price, 1 Cor. 6.20. For in respect of Gods Justice we are bought by Christ.

Fourthly, We are Christ's by combination and Covenant. I entered into Covenant
with thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16.8. That is, I did make a Solemn
Covenant or Stipulation with thee, that I would take thee to be my people. So
that it is no wonder Pelievers follow the Lamb whethersoever he goes; they are
married to him, he is their Head and Husband.

Seventhly, They follow the Lamb, because they have the Spirit of the Lamb: We
have not the spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may
know the things that are of God: And we have the mind of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
2.11, 12, 16. And we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us: Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. This
Spirit that the Lord Jesus gives to believers is a sealing Spirit, a lively
Spirit, and an enlightening Spirit, and a leading Spirit; it leads us from all
evil to all good. And all the Lambs followers are in the Spirit of the Lamb;
and therefore they pray in the Spirit, and with the Spirit, and by the Spirit,
and for more of the Spirit: They that have this Spirit need not a Book to pray
by. Now all true Believers have the Spirit of the Lamb, therefore they follow
the Lamb whethersoever he goes,

Fifthly, Believers follow the Lamb, because all their Privileges come from
the Lamb: They are all Kings and Priests: Rev. 1.6. Rev. 5.10. And Sons, and
Heirs, 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us!
Romans 8.17. If Children, then Heirs, Heirs with God, and joint Heirs with
Christ. Though Believers have not a Crown in life, yet they are Heirs to a
Crown of life: God puts the greatest honor upon his own people, Prove. 12.26.
All the honor that other men have, is not worth the having: that which makes a
man great in the eye of the world, makes a man nothing in the eye of God. Men
are never the better for their greatness, if they are not made better by their
greatness. But now believers greatness and honor comes by Christ, the faithful
and true witness, the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings
of the Earth: He has made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall
reign on the Earth, Rev. 5.10. All the light, and life, and hope, and joy, and
peace, and beauty, and honor, and riches, Believers have, they have it all by
Christ, and from Christ; he gives them rich Grace, and rich Glory, and all
things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17.

Take a man that is out of Christ, and he has none of all this, Ephesians. 2.12.
That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, and
without God in the World. They are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked, Revel. 3.17.

O this is the condition of every graceless, Faithless, and Christless person.
But now a Believer though he be never so poor in the worlds eye, he is rich in
Gods eye; for all things are his, and he shall inherit all things, 1 Cor. 3.22.
Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes, shall inherit all things. But how comes it to
pass that the Believer has so much, and all others so little? He has it all
from Christ. Of his fullness have all we received Grace for Grace.

Therefore Believers do glory in Christ, because they have all their glory by
and from Christ, 1 Cor. 1.31. He has enough to glory in, that has a Christ to
glory in: Now Believers cannot but cleave to him, and follow him, because all
their good things comes by him.

Ninthly, They follow the Lamb, because their names are written in the Lambs
Book, Revel. 13.8. And all that dwell upon the Earth shall worship him, whose
names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie: but they which are
written in the Lambs book of life, Rev. 21.27. All the rest, all the
Worshippers of the Beast, and all Unbelievers shall be cast into that Lake of
fire which burns and flames for ever, Rev. 19.20. There be a great many that
follow the Beast, worship the Beast, receive the mark of the Beast, and admire
the Beast, Chap. 13.3, 4. But what are they? Are they any that have their names
written in the Lambs Book of Life? No, no; for this see Rev. 17.8. The Beast
that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit,
and shall go into perdition, and they that dwell on the Earth shall wonder,
whose names were not written in the Book of Life. So that you see what that
cursed crew are that follow Babylon, they are such whose names are not written
in the Book of Life. But they that have their Fathers name written in their
forehead, and their names written in the Lambs Book, they follow the Lamb
whethersoever he goes: And they that are with him are called and chosen, and
faithful, Rev. 17.14.

Tenthly, and lastly, Precious ones follow the Lamb, because they shall be for
ever with the Lamb. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we
ever be with the Lamb: Wherefore comfort one another with these words, 1 These.
4.17, 18. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and
night in his Temple; and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them:
They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light
on them, nor any heat; for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall
feed them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains of waters, and God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes, Re. 7.15, 16, 17. How troublesome soever a
Saints beginning is, his ending is joyful. When Believers change Earth for
Heaven, they do not lose their happiness, but complete their happiness, Joh.
12.17, 24. Eather, I will that they also whom thou gave me, be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me; for thou lovedst
me before the foundation of the world: Not only with me for ever, but with my
Saints, with my Angels, and with my Father, and with all that are with me.

To be with God and Christ for ever, implies these seven things.

First, The presence of God.

Secondly, The happy union with God.

Thirdly, The blessed vision of God.

Fourthly, The glorious communion with God.

Fifthly, The fruition of God.

Sixthly, The rest that the Saints shall have in God.

Seventhly, The enjoyments of themselves in God.

Oh how unspeakable is the glory of Heaven! Oh how infinitely glorious is the
Lamb! Now true Believers follow the Lamb whethersoever he goes, because they
shall be for ever with the Lamb in fullness of glory, and endless felicity, Romans
8.17.

Thus have I showed you why Believers follow the Lamb.

Now I shall show you the Excellencies of following the Lamb.

The first Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb have the presence of the
Lamb with them.

The hundred forty and four thousand that stood upon Mount Sion, had the Lamb
with them. Psalm. 46.5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved; God
shall help her, and that right early. The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of
Jacob is our refuge, Verse 7. God is in the midst of his Church, not only to
behold her, but to uphold her. Though the Churches Enemies may be waves to toss
her, yet they shall never be Rocks to split her, because God is in the midst of
her. This is that which comforted and strengthened David; Yea, though I walk
through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil, for thou art
with me, Psalm 23.4. When thou passest through the Waters I will be with thee;
and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through
the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee,
Isa. 43.2. Oh they that follow the Lamb, shall stand for the Lamb, have the
presence of the Lamb; his glorious presence, his gracious presence, his
comforting presence, his protecting presence, his quickening and sanctifying
presence.

The second Excellency is, That they that follow the Lamb, shall know the mind
of the Lamb.

It is given unto you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to
them it is not given: And blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears
for they hear, Mat. 13.11, 16. Henceforth I call you not servants, for the
servant knows not what his Lord does; but I have called you friends; for all
things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you, John 17.6,
7, 8. Jesus Christ that lies in the bosom of his Father, he unbosomes and
unbowels the heart of the Father to Believers; they know his Secrets, his Mind,
his Counsel, and his WIll; and none knows it but them: I thank thee O Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes, Matthew. 11.25. But they that walk
with God, know much of the mind of God, and the Mysteries of the Gospel.

The Third Excellency of following the Lamb, is, They that follow the Lamb, may
come boldly to the Lamb. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace,
that we may obtain mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. A
soul that has an interest in Christ, may come boldly to Christ, and speak
boldly to him, and to his Father, for any mercy he needs; he may go to the
Throne of Grace for Grace, and open his heart to God, as one friend to another.
Oh what a liberty have Believers! Oh what a privilege have they, that they May
go to God with a holy boldness! The wicked proud ones of the Earth are so high
that the poor Saints cannot come boldly and freely to them; but they may come
boldly and freely to the Lord their God: Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

The fourth Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb shall have all their wants
supplied by the Lamb. Phil. 4.19. But my God shall supply all your need,
according to his riches in glory, by Jesus Christ. They that follow the Lamb
shall want no good thing: Oh fear the Lord all ye his Saints, for there is no
want to them that fear him. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they
that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34.9.10. The Lord is my
shepherd, I shall not want, Psalm. 23.1. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he
shall give thee the desire of thy heart; thou shall have whatsoever thou
desire to have. He that has the chiefest good, shall want no good. Whosoever
shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst: And he that
comes to me shall never hunger, Joh. 6.35. Oh who would not follow and believe
in the Lamb; Oh happy are all they that follow the Lamb.

The fifth Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb shall share with the Lamb,

First, In his Divine Nature. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of the Divine Nature,
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4.
That is, of those Divine Qualities, whereby we are made like unto God in
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.

Secondly, In his Conquests, The poor Saints share with Christ in all his noble
and honorable conquests (1 Cor. ^5.55.) over the World, Death, and Hell, and
over sufferings: In all these things we are more then Conquerours through him
that loved us, Romans 8.37.

Thirdly, They share with Christ in his Graces.

Of his fullness have all we received grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. As a Child
receives Member for Member; as the Paper from the Press receives Letter for
Letter; as the Wax from the Seal receives Print for Print; or as the Glass from
the Image receives Face for Face; so do Believers receive from Christ Grace for
Grace; that is, for every grace that is in the Lamb, there is the same grace in
us in some measure.

Fourthly, Believers share with Christ in his Glorious Titles.

He is called a Son, so are they; a King, so are they; a Priest, so are they;
an Heir, so are they, Romans 8.17. Rev. 5.10. Rev. 1.5, 6.

Fifthly, They share with Christ in his Glory.

I go to prepare a place for you: I will come again and receive you unto my
self, that where I am, there ye may be also, Joh. 14.23. And the glory which
thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, as we are one, Joh.
17.22. My sheep hear my voice, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal
life, Joh. 10.28. The Saints shall have the same Glory which Christ himself
has: The Saints in Heaven are not only glorified with Christ (which is a great
exaltation) but they do enjoy the very same Glory which Christ himself does;
the same for kind, though not for degree. The Head and Members are glorified
together with the same kind of glory: God has not one Heaven for his Son, and
another for his Saints; but one and the same heaven for both. Believers shall
be as truly glorious as Christ is, and eternally glorious as he is. Our vile
bodies shall be fashioned like unto his glorious body: And we shall be
glorified together with him, and appear with him in Glory, Romans 8. Col. 3. Oh
here is the excellency of following the Lamb; they that follow him share with
him.

The sixth Excellency of following the Lamb, is, They that follow the Lamb
shall be protected by the Lamb. He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea, he
reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, touch not mine Anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.14, 15. which are his Saints. Who is he that will
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? and if ye suffer for
righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be not afraid of their terror, neither
be troubled, 1 Pet. 3.13. Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed,
for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will
uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness, Isa. 41.10. Can a woman
forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her
womb? yea they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, Isa, 49.15. Who can harm
a man if God be with him and for him: He that has the love of God, need not
care for the anger of men: A true Believer has the love of God, the love of
Christ, the love of good Angels, the love of good men, and the love of all
whose love is worth the having: God protects men in his way, but not out of his
way: When men appear for God God appears for men; he is good to them in
affliction, and he does them good by affliction.

The seventh Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb shall not feel the wrath
of the Lamb. Rev. 2.11. He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second
death, 1 These. 1.10. And to wait for his Son from Heaven: whom he raised from
the dead, even Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come. There is
therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.1. Oh how sad is the condition of
those, who live and dye without Christ! they are sent to Hell, Psalm. 9.17. The
wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God: Who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power, 2 These. 2.9. They shall feel and suffer the
wrath of the Lamb, because they despised the truth of the Lamb. Because I have
called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but
ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear
comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind; when
distress and anguish comes upon you: then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, Pro. 1.24,
25, 26, 27, 28. Do you hear this sinners? if God will show you no mercy if you
live in your sins, and dye in your sins, be sure Hell will show you no mercy:
Now the Believer shall feel and suffer none of this, he is in a happy state and
condition.

The eighth Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb shall reign with the Lamb:
and this is another Excellency of following the Lamb. True Believers do reign
now over the Creatures, over the pomp and pride of the world, over all spirits,
over sin, over the consciences of wicked men, and over sufferings: but besides
all this, they shall reign with Christ, and over those that now reign over
them: Rev 5.10. And we shall reign on the Earth, Chap. 20.4. And they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years. And as the wicked tread down the Saints
under their feet, so shall the saints tread down the wicked under their feet,
Mal. 4.3 The Lord has promised that the meek shall inherit the Earth. Does not
the Scripture say, that In the last days the mountain of the Lords house shall
be lifted up above the hills, and shall be established in the top of the
Mountains? Isa. 2.2. And that the Kingdoms of this world, must become the
Kingdoms of our Lord Jesus, Rev. 11.15. And he that loves to see the face of
his Church beautiful, will ere long wipe away those bloody tears; it is not
long before you will triumph and say, ( Cant. 2.11.12.) Lo, the winter is past,
the rain is over and gone, the flowers appear on the Earth, the time of the
singing of Birds is come.

The ninth Excellency is, They that follow the Lamb, shall sit upon the Throne
with the Lamb, Rev. 3.20 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to fit with me
in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
throne. Ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel, Mat. 19.28. Oh what an honor is this! what a glory is this to sit upon
the Throne with Christ! Is it not honor and glory enough for us to be in
heaven with God, and Christ, and Angels? but must we sit upon a Throne there?
Oh what an honor is this! and yet this honor shall all the Lambs followers
have.

The tenth Excellency of following the Lamb, is, They that follow the Lamb
shall judge the world with the Lamb. If you consult sacred Record you shall
find that both God and Christ and the Saints are said to judge the world: The
Ordination is Gods, the Execution is Christ's, the Approbation is the Saints.
When the Apostle would stop the sinful suits among the Corinthian brethren,
that did not want men of Eminency to put a period unto Controversies, says, Do
ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be
judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? 1 Cor. 6.2. Enoch
the seventh from Adam Prophesied, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints to execute Judgment upon all, Jude 14.15. When the Son
of man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
Thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Matthew. 19.28. Now the world judge
the Saints, but then the Saints shall judge the world; now they judge and
condemn Christ in his Members, but then they shall be judged and condemned by
Christ and his Members; For as the World cannot endure God himself, so neither
can they endure God in the Saints: and the more God dwells in the Saints, the
more the world afflicts the Saints: but they that follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goes, shall sit upon those, that now sit upon them.

Thus have I showed you the Excellencies of following the Lamb.

Fourthly, The misery of those that follow not the Lamb, but the Beast: O their
misery is great in this life; but it will be greater in the other.

The first misery of them that follow the Beast, is, They that follow him,
shall share with him in all his plagues. And the third Angel followed them,
saying with a loud voice, if any man worship the Beast, and his Image, and
receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the
wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of
his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the Lemb, Rev. 14.9, 10. Oh the plagues, the terrible plagues, that
shall fall upon the Beast! Death, and mourning, and famine, and fire, Chap.
18.8. The judgments shall come upon all parties, and upon all degrees and
conditions of men, that join with the Beast: All those that do partake of his
sins, shall share of his plagues.

There is First, a Vial poured out upon the Earth; that is, upon the common
people, Chap. 16. verse. 2.

Secondly, Another Vial upon the Sea; that is, the Jurisdiction of Rome, Verse
3.

Thirdly, Another Vial upon the Rivers; that is, their Ministers, Verse. 4.

Fourthly, Another Vial is poured out upon the Sun, that is, Princes and
Magistrates, Verse. 8.

Fifthly, Another Vial also upon the Seat; that is, Rome it self, the throne of
the Beast, Verse. 10.

So that all that worship the Beast, and receive his Mark, and belong to him,
whether they be high or low, rich or poor, if they do not come off from him,
they shall share with him in all his plagues: Come out of her my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18.4.

The second misery of them that follow the Beast, is, they shall cry to the
Rocks and to the Mountains of the Earth. And the great men, and rich men, and
the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every Bondsman, and every Freeman
hid themselves in the Dens and in the Rocks of the Mountains, and said to the
Mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath
is come, and who shall be able to stand? Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. They that are here
clothed in Silk and Velvet, shall wish for the mountains to cover them; which
would be but a poor shelter, for the Mountains melt at the presence of the
Lord, and the Rocks rend asunder when he is angry. They that made others fly
away from them as innocent Lambs from devouring wolves, shall be afraid of the
wrath of the Lamb that sits on the throne. Oh how will those great men dare
to appear before his Tribunal, that have stained the Sword of Authority with
the blood of innocence, by turning its back against the vicious, and whetting
its edge against the righteous? Many an unjust Judge that now sits confidently
upon the Bench, shall then stand trembling at the Bar. Oh how will they be able
to lift up their heads before Christ, who have lifted up their hands against
Christ? The Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together
against the Lord, and against his Christ, Act. 4.26. Rev. 17.14. Instead of
helping the Lord against the Mighty, they help the Mighty against the Lord,
Psalm, 2.2. Oh how many great men are there, that make no other use of their
greatness, but to be great in wickedness? great Swearers, great Drunkards,
great Sabbath Breakers, great Persecutors, great Adulterers, great Atheists;
who instead of denying or forsaking the Devil and all his works, follow the
Devil and all his works; who sin with content, and are content with their sins.
Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of Thieves, Isa. 1.23. But the great
God against whom they sin, is greater than the greatest; before whom all the
Nations of the world are but as a drop of a Bucket, and as the small dust of
the Balance. Isa. 40.15. Who will not fear thee, O King of Nations? forasmuch
as there is none like unto thee O Lord: Thou art great, and thy name is great,
and thy power is great, Jer. 10.6. He touches the mountains, and they smoke;
before whom the Devils fear and tremble. Therefore woe, woe, be to them that
forsake him, and follow the Beast; they shall cry and call for help, but there
will be none to help them.

The third misery of those that follow the Beast, is. They shall be cast into a
Lake of fire with the Beast. And the Beast was taken, and with him the false
Prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had
received the mark of the Beast and them that worshipped his Image; these both
were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone, Rev. 19.20 The Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. Oh
what a dreadful thing is it to lie under the wrath of God! to lie in burning
flames! and for ever to be banished from the presence of God, and his holy
Angels! This will be the portion of the Beasts followers. Oh will they not wish
then that they had never been born? and that they might be turned into stocks
and stones? but alas all their wishes will do them no good; Christ will say to
them then, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, Mat. 25.41, 42, 43. O ye Rulers and great Ones of the Earth, It
will be no dishonor to your Honors, to lay your honor at his feet, in whose
presence the Angels vail their faces, and before whose Throne the Elders cast
their Crowns, Isa. 6. Rev. 4.10. O is it not better then with patience to
suffer with Sion, and the Churches party, a while, rather than join with the
Romish party, and be ruined with them in the end? Rev. 14.12. Here is the
patience of the Saints. Ye shall suffer a while, and be trodden down by them;
and you must stay for the full accomplishment of this promise for your
deliverance, But I will surely come, and will recompense all your patience: And
therefore be not discouraged and faint in your minds, let not your hearts turn
back unto Egypt, and hanker after Rome, those remnants of Baal, which God will
surely destroy.

Fifthly, I shall show you now how the Lambs Followers may be known from the
Beasts followers.

First, You may know them by their number: They are in number the fewest. Many
are called, but few are chosen, Mat. 20.16. Though all Israel be as the sand of
the Sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved, Romans 9.27. And Christ calls his
flock, a little flock, Luke 12.32. And truly Beloved, they are but a few that
follow the Lamb, and believe in him. The Heathens follow the Devil: the Turks
follow Mahomet; the Jews follow Moses; the Papists follow the Pope; and loose
Protestants and carnal Professors, they follow the world the flesh, and the
Devil; and false Teachers, false Doctrine, and false Worships; And all the
world wondered after the Beast, Rev. 13.3. The waters which thou saw, where
the Whore sits, are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues, Chap.
17.15. Believers though their natures are the sweetest, yet their number is the
smallest: In Heaven are the best, but in Hell are the most.

O dear Christians, there are but few upright Christians; there are many
Thorns, but few Lillies.

Secondly, By their Characters you may know them. You have nine lovely
Characters of them in this fourteenth Chapter.

First, they stand with the Lamb upon the Mount Sion.

Secondly, They have their Fathers name written in their foreheads.

Thirdly, They sing a new Song, which none can learn, but only the hundred
forty and four thousand.

Fourthly, They are such as are redeemed from the Earth.

Fifthly, They are Virgin-Saints, not defiled with women.

Sixthly, They follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

Seventhly, They are redeemed from amongst men.

Eighthly, They bring their first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb.

Ninthly, And in their mouths was found no guile; for they are without fault
before the Throne of God. O how holy, how heavenly, how gracious, how glorious,
how lovely and spiritual are these! they live in the Lord; on the Lord, to the
Lord, and with the Lord; They are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an
holy Nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9.

Thirdly, By their Spirit: They have another spirit, Number. 14.24. All the Lambs
followers are in the spirit of the Lamb, Romans 8.9, 16. And by that spirit they
are led and taught; a spirit of holiness, a spirit of meekness, a spirit of
love, a free spirit, and a true humble and faithful spirit to, and for the
Lord. Now as the Lambs followers are in the spirit of the Lamb; so the Beasts
followers are in the spirit of the Beast, which is no other then the spirit of
the Devil, (Ephesians. 2.2. According to the Prince of the power of the Air, the
spirit that now works in the children of disobedience:) a spirit of Lording
and domineering, a spirit of cunning and craftiness, a spirit of Deceit, a
spirit of Superstition, a spirit of persecution and cruelty; and in this spirit
are all the followers of the Beast. Now by this you may know the Lambs
followers from the Beasts followers.

Fourthly, By their name: They have another name, A new name, Rev. 3.12. God
gives his people honorable Titles, though the Beast gives them reproachful
Titles. God calls them The dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12.7. And The Apple
of his eye, Zech. 2.8. And His Jewels, Mal. 3.17. His Glory, his Portion, his
Bride, his Friends and Children: But the Beast calls them Seditious Heretics,
Deceivers and Deluders, Blasphemers, and Fools, and Madmen, as if they were
not worthy to have a being amongst men: But though they are Ravens in the
Worlds eye, yet they are Doves in Gods eye; yea, they are such Worthies Of whom
this world is not worthy, Heb. 11.38. Now dear Christians, by this you may know
the Lambs followers from others, by the Nicknames the world gives them, and
by the glorious names that God gives them.

Fifthly, by their Graces they may be known. Such as are the Lambs followers
are full of faith, full of love, full of grace and goodness, they are very
fruitful, and bring forth much fruit, John 15. They are called Heaven, because
of their heavenlinesse, Romans 8.1. And holy because of their holiness;
spiritual, because of their spiritualness; and faithful, because of their
faithfulness: There is much of God to be seen in them, in their words, works,
duties, and conversations, Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in Heaven. They
seek Heavenly things, and walk by a Heavenly Rule, they eye Heavenly objects,
and are lead by a Heavenly Spirit; they submit to a Heavenly Government, and
imitate Heavenly ones; there is much of Heaven in them, and much of them in
heaven: When I awake, I am still with thee, says David.

But now the Beasts followers they, are full too, but it is with blould and
swearing, cursing, stealing, lying, blaspheming, rebellion, and all manner of
abominations and filthiness, Hos. 4.2. Romans 3. Rev. 13. Now Beloved, by this
you may know Christ's precious ones, from the Beasts filthy ones.

Sixthly, The Lambs followers may be known from the Beasts followers, by their
keeping the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus Rev. 14.12. Here is the
patience of the Saints; here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and
the Faith of Jesus. So Rev. 12.17. The Dragon was wroth with the Woman, and
made war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and
having the Testimony of Jesus Christ. True Believers cleave to the Lord, and
follow him fully: But my servant Caleb has followed me fully, Numb. 14.24. And
Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5.24. And Noah walked with God, Genesis 6.9. Let us
also walk in the Spirit, Gal 5.25. And they follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, they hear his voice, they profess his worship, and obey his doctrine,
they obhor Antichrist, they follow not the Beast, nor receive his mark, but
keep their beautiful garments of Gospel innocence, and will not touch beastly
Babylon.

Seventhly, By their Company: The Lambs followers keep company together: Being
let go, they went to their own company, Acts 4.23. So they are said to stand
upon a Sea of Glass together: And I saw as it were a Sea of glass, mingled
with fire, and them that had gotten victory over the Beast, and over his image,
and over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the Sea of Glass,
having the harps of God, Rev. 15.2. So they that are with the Lamb upon Mount
Sion, are together, and keep together, and follow the Lamb together. Christ's
faithful Witnesses do not hear with Antichrists hearers, nor worship with them
which worship the Beast; for they are come out of Babylon, Chap. 18.4. Come out
of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not
of her plagues: Whereof come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, says the Lord, 2 Cor.
6.17. The Children of God will not keep company with the Children of wrath, for
they cannot agree; For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness?
and what communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with
Belial? or what part has he that believes, with an Infidel? and what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. there fore
believers keep together, walk together, and worship God together: And they that
believed were of one heart, and one soul, and continued in the Apostles Doctr.
and fellowship, Acts 4.32. Acts 2.42. By this the Lambs followers are known to
wit, by their company.

Eighthly, By their Language they are known: True Believers speak the Language
of Canaan; their Language is Scripture Language; you may know them by their
speech, as Peter was known by his speech: Surely thou art one of them for thy
speech bewrays thee, Mat. 26.73. Their words are holy and heavenly; they
speak of God, and to God, and for God, and He hears them, Mal. 3.16. But the
beasts followers speak wickedly, proudly, daringly, and blasphemously Chap.
13.4. And he opened his mouth blaspheming God, his Son, his Name, his Saints,
and they that dwell in Heaven, verse 6. Men are known who and what they are,
and to whom they do belong, by their Language; if they are of God, and in God,
they cannot but speak much of God.

Ninthly, The Lambs followers are known by this, They are more afflicted with
the Churches heaviness, than they are affected with their own happiness. The
King said why is thy countenance sad? this is nothing else but sorrow of heart,
seeing thou art not sick. Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City,
the place of my fathers, lies waste, and the Gates thereof are consumed with
fire? Nehem. 2.2, 3. How can Sions Sons be rejoicing, when their Mother is
mourning? Though they were the Jews Desolation, yet they were Jeremies
Lamentation. How can such rejoice in her standing, that do not mourn for her
falling: When the Churches Adversaries make long furrows upon her back, we
should cast in the seed of tears. Remember them that are in bonds, as being
bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves also in
the body, Heb. 13.3. Sympathising with others makes an estate that is joyful
more happy, and an estate that is doleful less heavy.

The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart, Isa. 5.7. We may draw up
that charge against many now. Amos 6.46. They lie upon beds of Ivory, and
stretch themselves upon Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the
Calves out of the midst of the stall; that drink wine in bowls, and anoint them
selves with the chief Ointments; but they are not grieved for the afflictions
of Joseph. O that there were not too many such now adays, that eat the fat, and
drink the sweet, and are not troubled for Sions troubles: Instead of
sympathising with them in their misery, they are censuring of them for their
misery. But the true Servants of God are tender and brokenhearted, they weep
and mourn, and wring their hands for Sions sins, for Sions Breaches for Sions
Calamities, for Sions Deliverance; and thus they do and will do, till they see
Sion on Mount Sion with the Lamb to be.

Tenthly, the Lambs followers are known by their love to Christ, and sufferings
for Christ; they choose the worst of sorrows, before they will commit the least
of sins: For thy sake are we killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for
the slaughter, Psa, 44. Romans 8.36. And ye shall be hated of all men for my
Names sake, Mat. 10 22. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, Mat.
5.10. Love can walk on the water without drowning, and lie in the fire without
burning. How shall we land at the Haven of rest, if we are not tossed upon the
Sea of trouble, A believer should live above the love of life and the fear of
death. Though we cannot live without afflictions, yet let us live above
afflictions: None are so welcome to that spiritual Canaan, as those that swim
to it through the Red Sea of their own blood. In suffering the offense is done
to us, in sinning the offense is done to God: In suffering we lose the favor
of men, in sinning we lose the favor of God: Therefore Daniel chose the Den of
the Lion, rather than he would forsake the Cause of the Lamb, Dan. 6. And the
three Chrildren chose rather to suffer sadly, than to sin foully, Dan. 3. And
Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.^5. It is better to be a Martyr than
a Monarch; it is better to be a prisoner for Christ, than to be a Prince
without Christ, or against Christ. O how precious, how glorious, how lovely,
and how sweet is Jesus Christ to believers? O they love him entirely uprightly,
they love his glorious person, and the beauty of his holiness, and his Name,
his Honor, his Cause, and his Members; they will suffer for him, and die for
him, because he suffered and died for them, Rev. 12.11. And they loved not
their lives unto the Death. Now by this all men may know the Lambs followers
from the Beasts followers, viz. by their sorrows and sufferings for Christ,
for Truth, for Righteousness, and for Conscience sake, Heb. 10.34. And they
took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 11.35.

Eleventhly, The Lambs followers are known by this, They seek the public good
of others above the private good of themselves. I have great heaviness, and
continual sorrow in my heart; for I could wish that my self were accursed from
Christ, for my brethren, my Kinsmen according to the flesh, Romans 9.2.3. And now
O Father, glorify thy son that thy son may glorify thee, Joh. 17.1. He prayed
for glory more for the Fathers sake that bestowed it, than for his own sake
that received it. A true Christian does not desire grace only for this end,
that God may glorify him; but he desires grace for this end, that he may
glorify God. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might
be rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. O, that the Lord Jesus should not only in pity save us,
but in love dye for us! And David, after he had served his own Generation by
the Will of God, fell on sleep Acts 13.36. His Generation did not serve him,
but he served his Generation; not the Generation that was before him, for they
were dead before he was living; nor the Generation that was behind him, for
they were living after he was dead: but his own Generation; and not by his own
will, but by the Will of God. Old Ely mourned more for the lose of his
Religion, than for the lose of his Relation, 1 Samuel 4.18, So Moses Exo. 32.10.
Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I
may consume them; and I will make of thee a great Nation. He was no self-seeker,
but a life preserver. Grace does not only make a man carry it like a man to
God, but to carry it like a God to man. Reason makes a man a man, but grace
makes a man a Christian. Every gracious spirit is public, though every public
spirit is not gracious. As we are not born by our selves, so we are not born
for our selves. But the Beasts followers and Babylons Merchants are for
themselves, and seek themselves: Yea they are greedy Dogs, which can never have
enough, and they are shepherds that cannot undorstand; they all look to their
own way every one for his gain from his Quarter Isa. 56.11. And teaching things
they ought not, for filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1.11. Woe to you Scribes and
Pharisees, for ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers:
therefore ye shall receive the great damnation, Mat. 23. These make not gain to
stoop to Godliness, but Godliness to stoop to gain.

Twelfthly, and Lastly, The Lambs followers may be known from the Beasts
followers by this, They are more for power, than form; for heart, than Art; for
matter, than method; for substance, than show, Having a form of Godliness, but
denying the power thereof; from such turn away, 2 Timothy, 3.5. As they who have
the power of Godliness, cannot deny the form; so they who have the form of
Godliness, should not deny the power. Alas, what is hearing without doing? and
praying without practicing? and preaching without reforming? God loves to see
the plants of righteousness, lodened with the fruits of righteousness: He
bears greater respect to our hearts, than he does to our works. I beseech you
therefore, Brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, Romans 12.1. The Formalist he is
all for outward action, and for nothing of inward sincerity; he is for a body
without a soul, and a show without a substance: but it is not a show of outward
piety, that will excuse inward hypocrisy. For he is not a Jew that is one
outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh: But he
is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the
spirit, and not in the letter whose praise is not of men, but of God, Romans
2.28, 29. I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not,
but are the Synagogue of Satan Rev. 2.9. They are better in their outsides,
than they are in their insides; but Believers are better in their insides, than
they are in their outsides: The Kings daughter is all glorious within, her
clothing is of wrought Gold, Psalm. 45.13. The one bows his knee at the name
of Jesus, the other bows his heart to the truth of Jesus; the one signs with
the Cross, the other carries the Cross. Oh what would not superstitious men do
for Heaven, if they might have Heaven for their doing? But they that sail in
this rotten Bottom, will surely sink in the Ocean. Who has required this at
your hands, to tread my Courts? To what purpose is your sacrifices unto me,
says the Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and the fat of fed
beasts and I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of
He-goates, Isa. 1, 11. It was not the Clay and Spittle that cured the blind
man, but Christ's anointing his eyes. It was not the troubling of the Waters in
the Pool of Bethesda, that made them whole, but the comeing down of the Angel.
Alas, the dish without the meat will not feed us. Man may spread the Net of
Duty, but its God must take the Draught of Mercy. Now by this Beloved you may
know the Lambs followers from the Beasts followers.

And thus I have briefly and clearly showed you these five things:

First, What following the Lamb is.

Secondly, Why gracious Souls follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

Thirdly, The Excellency of following the Lamb.

Fourthly The Misery of following the Beast.

Fifthly, How the Lambs followers may be known from the Beasts followers.

I shall make some Use of this:

First, For Examination, and Selfe-tryal. Oh friends; for the Lords sake, and
for your souls sake, examine your selves, and try your selves by this, that you
may know whose you are, and to whom you do belong. Know you not, that to whom
ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey;
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness, Romans 6.

O who do you follow? if men, verily you have your reward; if sin, you shall
have sins wages, which is eternal death; woe, and misery in this life, and Hell
and destruction in the other life: but if God, then you shall have eternal
life. Therefore be not deceived, mistake not your selves, God is not mocked,
for whatsoever a man sowes, that he shall reap. O beloved, Examine your selves,
and try your selves; what is it you mind? what is it you seek? what is it you
do? do you follow the Lamb in his Commands, in his teachings, in his
appointments, and in his Examples, and through sufferings and reproaches? have
you forsaken all and followed him? Matthew. 10.29. Have you taken up his Cross,
and denied your selves? Mat. 16.24. Have you learned of him to be meek and
lowly? Mat. 11.29. Have you visited, and clothed his Members? Mat. 25.35. Have
you kissed the Sun, and made your peace with him? O beloved, are you new
Creatures? are you in Christ? are you in faith? Know ye not, if Christ be not
in you, ye are reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5.

The second Use is for Exhortation.

O Beloved, Let me beseech you for your precious and immortal souls sake, to
come out of Babylon, from the Beasts Image, and from his Worship, and from his
Mark, that you may not be defiled: O come away to Jesus Christ. Arise my Love
and come away, Cant. 2.10. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. Oh sinners, he calls you to come to him;
will you not go? we must forsake sin, and embrace virtue; put off the Old man,
and put on the New man; we must have Repentance and Mortification, a dying unto
sin, and a living unto righteousness; from the love of earthly things, to the
desire of heavenly things. Our bodies and souls must come away unto Christ; our
souls, because they are the Spouse of Christ; our bodies, because they are the
Temples of the Holy Ghost: We must come away from the Eenticements of the
flesh, the allurements of the world, and suggestions of the Devil, and from the
Whore of Babylon, and from all the inventions and traditions of men, Rev. 18.4.
That ye may walk with God, before God, after God, in the Name of God, and in
the Spirit of God; And that we may live in Christ, as Christ lives in the
Father. O what more happy then to live for ever? and so to live for ever, as
Christ himself lives? Surely that is a blessed and glorious life. This is a
Believers life.

Secondly, Labor more and more to be like those that follow the Lamb fully:
they are very holy and pure; they are called Virgins,

First, For their Chastity: That I may present you as chaste Virgins unto
Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. These love Christ with a chaste, but not with an adulterous
love.

Secondly, For their purity: They are Virgin-Saints, they are not defiled with
the Whore of Babylon, but have kept themselves from her Idolatry and
Superstition, and from her sin and wickedness; And in their mouth was found no
guile.

Believers are styled and titled Heaven: Christ's Members are glorious Members;
they are called Heaven for two Reasons.

First, Because there is much of Heaven in them.

Secondly, Because there is much of them in Heaven.

First, There is much of Heaven in Believers, much of God, much of Christ, and
much of the Spirit: Of his fullness have all we received grace for grac, Joh.
1.16. The glory of God, the knowledge of God, the presence of God, the love of
God, the holiness of God, the joys of God; these are the things that make
Heaven to be Heaven: Now there is much of these in Believers, therefore they
are called Heaven. We are taken into Communion with Angels, and our Communion
with the Angels in a great measure does consist in bearing a part with them in
praising God; it is the action of Heaven. Believers are holy Ones, and they
have glorious Titles.

First, The Lords Portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9.

Secondly, His Pleasant Portion, Jer. 12.10.

Thirdly, His Inheritance, Isa, 19.25.

Fourthly, The Dearly beloved of my soul, Jer. 12.7.

Fifthly, Gods Treasure and peculiar Treasure, Exodus 19.5.

Sixthly, His Glory, Isa. 46.13.

Seventhly, The House of Gods glory, Isa. 60.7.

Eighthly, A Crown of Glory, Isa. 62.3.

Ninthly, A Royal Diadem; in the same place.

Tenthly, The Glory of God, Jer. 3.17.

Eleventhly, Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.12.

Twelfthly, Kings, Rev. 5.10. And in my Text, Heaven.

There is as much difference between the Church of God and other men, as there
is betwixt Gold and Dirt, as betwixt Diamonds and Pebbles, in the Lords esteem;
they are to God above all people: The righteous is more excellent than his
neighbor, Pro. 12.26. O how precious, how happy, how blessed and glorious are
Believers? they are called Heaven.

Secondly, Believers are called Heaven, because there is much of them in Heaven.

First, Their Thoughts are in Heaven, Psalm. 139.18.

Secondly, Their Desires are ie Heaven, Psalm. 73.25.

Thirdly, Their Affections are in Heaven, Col. 3 2.

Fourthly, Their Hopes are in Heaven, Tit. 2.13.

Fifthly, Their Conversations are in Heaven, Phil. 3.20.

Sixthly, Their Hearts are in Heaven, Mat. 6.21.

Seventhly, Their Aims are in Heaven, Luke 10.20.

O there is much of Believers in heaven; their souls are in heaven, when their
bodies are walking upon the Earth; they live in heaven whilst they are on the
earth, and they come to heaven when they leave the earth, Ephesians. 2.6. And has
raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus. The Saints are set in heavenly places, heavenly Dignities, heavenly
privileges, heavenly Prerogatives. The Saints of the High God, are set in high
places. The true Church is that Spouse that is fair and beautiful, Cant. 2.14.
O the Church of Christ is lovely and glorious: First, Glorious in her Head.
Secondly, Glorious in her Titles. Thirdly, Glorious in her Gifts and Graces.
Fourthly, Glorious in her Offices. Fifthly, Glorious in her Privileges.
Sixthly, Glorious in her Members.


O the Church of Christ is a holy Church, and a glorious Church: That he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinke, or any such
thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. They are
not defiled, they are Virgins, and in their mouths is found no guile. Now he
that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

I shall exhort you that are members of this heavenly Church,

First, To seek Heavenly things before, and above all things else; Let your
hearts be filled with Heavenly knowledge, and heavenly riches.

Secondly, Delight in heavenly things, let it be your heaven upon Earth, to
serve the God of heaven.

Thirdly, Act by Heavenly Principles.

Fourthly, Have a holy dependence upon God, For Direction, For Protection, For
Assistance, For a blessing.


Fifthly, Eye Heavenly objects, God, Christ, and the Spirit.

Sixthly, Imitate Heavenly Ones; follow them that follow Christ.

Seventhly, Walk by a Heavenly Rule; walk according to the Laws of heaven.

Eighthly, and lastly, Live much in heaven. Your Father is in heaven, Your Head
is in Heaven, Your Husband is in heaven, Your King is in heaven, Your Treasure
is in heaven, Your Crown is in heaven, Your Wages are in heaven.
And where should you be but in heaven; Knowing in your selves that ye have in
heaven a better and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. For we know, that if our
Earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, and
a house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1.

Oh these are blessed and holy ones: And they that are with him, are called,
and chosen, and faithful, Rev. 17.14. Oh labor to be like these in purity, and
piety, in holiness and humbleness, in meekness, and patience, in faithfulness
and uprightness, in spiritualness and in all Godliness.

Thirdly, Follow the Lamb out of Babylon. And they cried with a loud voice,
saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Revel. 6.10. And another Angel came out
of the Temple, crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the Cloud, Thrust in
thy Sicle and reap, for the time is come for thee to reap, for the harvest of
the Earth is ripe. And he that sat on the Cloud thrust in his Sicle on the
earth, and the earth was reaped. And another Angel came out of the Temple which
is in heaven, he also having a sharp Sicle, Rev. 14.15, 16, 17. The Whore of
Babylon shall be destroyed with a double destruction: Her walls shall fall
down: Her wall of Power; Her wall of Policy; Her wall of Superstition; Her wall
of Maintenance:


And that for these Reasons.

First, Because she has corrupted Religion, and that both in Doctrine and
Worship. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City, because she made all
Nations drink of the Wine of the wrath of her fornication, Rev. 14.8. Chap.
18.3.

Secondly, Because she has poisoned the Kings of the Earth. The Whore of
Babylon has been the great corrupter of Kings. And I saw three unclean spirits
like Frogs, come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the
Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet; for they are the spirits of
Devils working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the
whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty,
Rev. 16.13.14. Chap. 17.2.

Thirdly, For her cruelty: In her was found the blood of the Prophets, and all
the Saints that were slain upon the Earth, Chap. 18.24. And I saw the woman
drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus; and when I saw her I wondered with great admiration, Chap. 17.6.

Fourthly, Because her ruin and destruction is published and proclaimed over
the world. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great
is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils, Chap. 18.2. Chap.
14.8.

Fifthly, It is the great design that Christ has in the latter days of the
world to destroy Antichrist. The Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, Cha. 17.14. His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on
his head were many Crowns, and he was cleathed with a Vesture dipped in blood,
and his name is called, The Word of God: And out of his mouth goes a sharp
sword, that with it he should smite the Nations, Chap. 19.12, 13, 15.

Sixthly, Because she has greatly insulted and triumphed over the Lords people
in their miseries and calamities. And they that dwell upon the Earth shall
rejoice over them, and make merry, and send gifts one to another, Rev. 11.10.

Seventhly, Because of all the Churches enemies that ever were, this is the
cruellest enemy. The fourth Beast is worse than any of the former Beasts: And
behold, a fourth Beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly, and it
had great Iron teeth, and it was diverse from all the Beasts that were before
it, Dan. 7.7. Rev. 18.24.

Eighthly, It is the expectation of all the Saints that Babylon should be
destroyed, and thrown like a Mil-stone, Chap. 18.21. Now God that has raised
this expectation in the hearts of his people, he will not frustrate their
expectation, he will fulfill their Petions.

Ninthly, God has promised to destroy the scarlet Whore, because she has
destroyed his Saints, and she is to be rewarded as she has rewarded others,
Chap. 15.5, 6. Chap. 18.8.

Tenthly, The Whore of Babylon shall be destroyed, because she trusts in the
arm of flesh, and glories in her strength, and riches. How much she has
glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her;
for she says in her heart, I sit a Queen, I am no Widow, and shall see no
sorrow: therefore shall her plagues come, Chap. 18.7. Now Beloved, consider of
this, and think of this, and keep your selves from Babylon, that ye do not
partake of her sins, least ye receive of her plagues, O poor sinners, if you
have any love to your Souls, if you have any mind to be saved, follow the Lamb,
that you may be saved by the Lamb.

He leads poor souls from darkness to light, From death to life, From vice to
virtue, From Satan to God, From poverty to plenty, From sorrow to joy, From
misery to glory, From an earthly Kingdom, to a heavenly Kingdom:


Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom, Mat. 25.34.

O the Kingdom which Christ leads poor souls to, is, First; A Rich Kingdom.
Secondly, A peaceable Kingdom. Thirdly, A Righteous Kingdom. Fourdily, A
blessed Kingdom. Fifthly, A Glorious Kingdom. Sixthly, A satisfying Kingdom.
Seventhly, A Universal Kingdom. Eighthly, An Everlasting Kingdom.


Oh follow the Lamb, follow the Lamb, that you may be for ever glorified with
the Lamb, and by the Lamb.

FINIS.

