The Duty of Subjects REINFORC'T, Especially in the Choice of Their
Representatives To Sit in PARLIAMENT, IN A LETTER to a FRIEND. Occasioned by
His MAJESTY's Most Gracious Declaration in Council.
SIR,
I Have sent you a Present here enclosed; it is of small Bulk, but of great
Importance: Had such a one been sent you some Years since, when the Peoples
Ears were filled with nothing else but Popery and Exclusion; and could you have
had it well attested for Genuine and Authentic; you would have entertained it
with a hearty Welcome.

It Is a Copy of His Majesty's most Gracious Declaration; a Declaration so
Mature and Seasonable, so Full and Well-advis'd, that we must not look upon it
as the Crafty Artifice of a Politic Usurper; nor as the violent Extortion of
the Passionate and Mistaken Faction that opposed him; but as the Natural
Emanation of His Princely Mind and Heroic Generosity, condescending to obviate
the affected Weakness of some, and to cure that which was really so in others.

Herein his Majesty has done us the Honor to own our Affection to the
Monarchy, and our Zeal in contending for the Government as now established in
Church and State: and he is pleased to remind us, That in his own Practice, to
the utmost hazard of Life and Fortune, he made himself our Grand Exemplar, when
he was in the Station of a Subject. So that his Title to the Crown by
Succession, has been rarely embellished by his Merits. And This the Gratitude
of the Nation did once acknowledge.

But what is more eminently remarkable, even since the highest Providence has
clothed him with the Sovereign Power, he has prevented our Expectation, and
gone before us in protesting his Pious Resolutions, to maintain those Interests
of Religion and Property which we account the dearest to us.

Observe his own Words; where, after a most endearing Promise to follow his
late Majesty's Example in Clemency and Tenderness to His People, he goes on: I
have been reported to be a Man for Arbitrary Power; but that is not the only
Story has been made of me: And I shall make it my Endeavors to preserve this
Government both in Church and State, as it is now by Law Established. I know
the Principles of the Church of England are for Monarchy, and the Members of it
have showed themselves Good and Loyal Subjects; therefore I shall always take
Care to Defend and Support it. I know too, That the Laws of England are
sufficient to make the King as Great a Monarch as I can wish: And as I shall
never depart from the Just Rights and Prerogative of the Crown, so I shall
never invade any Man's Property; I have often heretofore ventured my Life in
Defense of this Nation, and I shall still go as far as any Man in preserving it
in all its Just Rights and Liberties.

His inflexible Justice, with the rare Complexion of his other Princely
Virtues, have worthily been admired with equal Love and Reverence; and these
have hitherto been the Support of our Just Confidence: But now he has
vouchsafed to give us his Royal Word, which flowing from a Voluntary
Inclination to be Gracious, has hitherto had the Honor to be esteemed
Inviolable and Sacred. We find that the most plausible Pretenses of Jealousy,
in Men of honest Minds, do vanish into Dream and mere Delusion; and we cannot
but in reason acquiesce in such Assurance, with the Joy of a full and hearty
Satisfaction.

We know the Suggestions of Designers had raised a Prejudice so strong in some
Credulous and Well-meaning Persons, that they grew too obstinate to be driven
to their Duty; but we doubt not such Encouragements as have been freely heaped
upon them, will in a little time melt the most Obdurate, and make them grow so
tractable, as to be won, and easily led by the Attractive of such Great and
Wise Examples.

In short, We see, Sir, that the God of Peace and Order has been pleased to
decide the great Point of Succession by his own good Providence, according to
his own standing Law and Ordinance: Herein, he never called upon his Royal
Highness to enter a Caution for his Good Behavior, which seems to be a
sufficient Baffle to the Wit and Malice of all fierce Excluders.

His Royal Highness has not been very forward to declare himself in the matter
of this Debate, and his Reservedness has been made a Riddle, and subject to as
many Readings and Descants, as Men's Fancy or Humor can invent.

I shall only observe this in the Case. Some Men have their private Sentiments,
which they will not generally be obliged to account for: tho such Men be
singular in their Carriage, yet their Design may be very innocent, and free
from mischief.

That the Protestant Party is of some moment in swaying the Balance of
Christendom, is no Secret; and if the Church of England be of any advantage to
His Majesty herein, as no doubt it is (when Matters are duly weighed) we may
be confident, he will not part with an Interest of that Importance for Nothing:
Besides, his great Experience tells him, that the Gates of Hell stand in the
way to Rome, as well as to Churches of another Denomination; and it is not a
blind Fate that can secure us from the Danger that threatens us from thence,
but our own Diligence, and a prudent Conduct in the Duties of a Christian
Conversation. And we may take it for an infallible Maxim, That his Magnanimity,
and the sense of his own Greatness, will never suffer him to sink so low, as to
become a Vassal to his Holiness, as their Canon Law does make him.

What Measures the Dissenters intend to take, we shall understand more
certainly by their ensuing Election of Representatives; for in such voluntary
and equivocal Generations, Men commonly follow the Fancy of their own Likeness,
and we may say of such, as the Psalmist says of Idols, They that make them are
like unto them, and so are all such as put their trust in them.

We are sure, such as are well affected to the King and Church, will not choose
their Enemies to vote in their Concerns; they will not be guilty of such a
Soloecism in their Practice: And is it probable, on the other side, that such
as have been in actual Rebellion against the Crown, and have made a Spoil of
all Sacred Establishments in the Church, and embroiled their Native Country in
a brutish Confusion; is it probable that such Men should be fit Instruments to
settle us in that Splendor and Tranquillity which so Ancient and Renowned a
Monarchy may justly challenge? He that reflects upon the Havoc such Men have
lately made amongst us, if he be well in his Wits, can never believe it.

I must not be understood of such as have seen their Error, and retracted it;
but of the hardy, and unrelenting: and you may assure your self, such whose
Fingers are still itching at Church Lands, and the Revenue of the Crown; such
as can serve God by none but a Model of their own conceiving, and have Worldly
Ends to serve by such Means; they will still Sail as the Wind serves, by the same
Compass.

Indeed the Scheme of their Principles is so legible in the Commentaries which
they have put upon them by their Practice; and their Hypocrisy is so grossly
betrayed by their Contradictions; and their Persons so exposed to the shame and
scorn of all Loyal and Honest Men; that in very Modesty, at least for one whole
Age, they ought to retire behind the Curtain to furnish themselves with new
habits of Disguise, and dress up their Scenes of Sedition with fresh Pretenses,
before they venture to act the same Part over a second time.

But if their Zeal does so far outrun their Wit and Policy, that they must
needs bring their old Actors upon the Stage, to rehearse the Bloody Tragedy, and
keep it still in memory; or if they will be wheadling a fresh Set of Proselytes
to espouse their Good Old Cause, and set on their young Cubs to take the Scent
of the late Rebellion, and hunt upon it dry-foot; there is little to be said to
it: it is an evident Sign that the Republican Wheel is still in motion, and
their Mystery of Iniquity very earnest at work amongst us; and our prudent and
watchful Governors are highly concerned to have an Eye open to observe it.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1685.


