A DISCOURSE UPON COINS,

By Signor Bernardo Davanzati, A Gentleman of Florence; Being publicly spoken
in the Academy there, Anno 1588.

Translated out of Italian, By JOHN TOLAND.

LONDON; Printed by J. D. for Awnsham and John Churchil, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row. 1696.

THE TRANSLATOR TO HIS FRIEND.
SIR,
I Have twice read over the Book you were so kind to lend me last Week; but I
found that part of it, which treats of Money, deserving a more particular
Consideration; for all the Discourse of late has been almost only of Coin. Many
of those who pretend to understand this nice Affair, have printed their
Sentiments about it; and such as are Strangers to it, are, or should be very
desirous of better Information. I must reckon my self, and so must you, Sir, in
the number of the latter; for neither my Years, nor Employment at the Schools.
(which I left but the other day) will allow me to be Master enough of a thing,
whereof the Knowledge depends so much upon Business, and more acquaintance with
the World than I can boast of. And indeed I benefited little (tho most willing
to learn) by all the Pieces written upon this Subject, till Mr. Lock was
pleased to favor the Public with his Thoughts upon it. It seems as impossible
for that great Man to write obscurely, as to publish any thing he does not
thoroughly understand. He has by this, and his other Treatise concerning Lowering
the Interest of Money, given a convincing Demonstration that Business and
Observation are not incompatible with the speculative part of Philosophy: but
if you compare his Book too, with what others have said of Coin, you have there
a Demonstration how ridiculous it is to write from abstracted or Closet-Notions
of what must be only learned by Experience and Conversation.

What he has printed therefore gave me entire Content; but I Am infinitely
pleased with my good fortune in meeting with the Discourse I borrowed from you:
for it is not only very methodically digested, as Mr. Lock's is, but also both
these learned Gentlemen (notwithstanding one of 'em wrote above an Age ago) are
of the same mind, and sometimes make use of the same Terms about the intrinsic
Value and debasing of Coins. So all those who reason exactly concerning any
thing, must be necessarily of the same Opinion, and often agree too in their
Expressions. What pleased me further, was to find so ample and satisfactory an
account, within so narrow a Compass, of the Origin of Money; of its Essence,
Names and Importance; of the Persons who first invented it, with the Place and
Time; likewise an Account of the evil Consequences of debasing or raising of
Money, and their proper Remedies: add to this the Origin of Fairs, fo Markets,
and, in one word, of all Commerce or Traffic in general.

Signor Davanzati was every way qualified to perform his Undertaking, being
famous for natural and acquired Parts, not only conversant in Trade, and one of
the best Arithmeticians of his time; but likewise an able Politician, as
appears by his admired Translation of Tacitus, and his own original
Compositions. He compiled a compendious Treatise concerning the Nature and
Knowledge of Exchange, reducing (according to the Writer of his Life) a most
obscure and intricate Matter to great Clearness and Facility. He did in like
manner, at the request of the Consul M. Baccio Valori, (continues the same
Author) read a public Lecture upon Coins, full of Political Instructions, and
containing all that can be desired on so vast a Subject.

That Lecture was the following Discourse, which I have been at the pains to
translate; and my only design now in the Publication of it, is to share with
others the Benefits, I think, may be received by it. I never imagined the end
of my Creation was to be serviceable only to my self; I could not learn, I Am
sure, any thing so unworthy from your Familiarity or Example: and I could give
but an ill account of my time, if, having sometimes the Happiness of keeping
good Men company, I should not entertain more exalted and generous Notions.
Truly I Am so far from desiring to live merely to my self, and from preferring a
solitary Life, that I set no value upon all the Books and Leisure in the World,
further than they contribute to render me fit for Business and Society,
especially the Service of God and my Country. Those Creatures, who perhaps are
not to be blamed for shutting themselves up all their days, I judge as useless
and contemptible as the Worms that help 'em to consume their Papers.

My design then being to do what good I could, I shall not think it lost, if
young Persons, at least, get any Advantage by it; which, in this (or in any
other respect) they cannot fail of, if avoiding Idleness as some dangerous
Precipice, they seriously apply themselves to Business and Virtue: Otherwise
(as the Writer of our Author's Life says extremely well) they are sure to be
despised in their inglorious Lives, and their Names shall be forgotten when
they are dead.

This Piece, I confess, appears a little too late, however it is not my fault;
for it was by pure accident, as you can witness, that I came to know of it, and
almost as soon I send it abroad in this new Dress. Besides, if all things be
well considered, that part of it which concerns base Coin, is now as useful as
ever; and the Knowledge of the rest cannot be unseasonable at any time. But I
have no Apology to make, except to you, Sir, for presuming to inscribe such a
Trifle, and that too but a Translation, to one who so well deserves from the
World and me. I shall only offer, that I am not willing to lose any opportunity
of showing my Gratitude and Respect; for if herein I have committed any fault,
my Intentions being sincere, I know you will grant an easy Pardon to,

Honored Sir, Your true, and most respectful Servant, J. TOLAND.
Middle Temple, March the 1st, 1695/6.
A DISCOVRSE upon Coins, by Signor Bernardo Davanzati, a Gentleman of Florence;
being publicly spoken in the Academy there, Anno 1588.
1. THE Sun and Internal Heat do separate, as it were by Distillation, the best
Juices and Substances in the Bowels of the Earth; which being percolated into
proper Veins and Mines, and there congealed, grown solid, and ripened, they are
in time made Metals: whereof the most rare and perfect are Gold and Silver,
resembling the two great Luminaries of the World in Splendour and Color. Fire
nor Rust will not consume them; they are not subject to be destroyed by Moths,
Worms, or Rottenness; nor do they waste much by use. They may in Wire or Leaves
be extended to an incredible Fineness, and have something in 'em that is
Divine; at least certain Indian People think so, who fast when they are digging
for Gold, and forbid themselves the Company of Women, with all other Pleasures,
out of an old Superstition.

2. Now, Gold and Silver contribute very little in their own nature to our
Lives, for which all Earthly Things seem to have been created. Yet Men, as if
they would make Nature ashamed of this, have agreed to make those Metals of
equal value to all other things, to make 'em the Price and Measure of all, and
the Instruments of changing and exchanging whatever can be found good in this
World. We may therefore call 'em the second Causes of a happy Life, seeing that
by their means we enjoy all those Benefits which render it so. This is likewise
the Reason why many have made 'em their Gods, seeing 'em perform almost
Impossibilities. There is not a Rock so hard, said a wise and warlike King, but
an Ass loadn'd with Gold may force it. The known Fable of Jupiter's descending
into Danae's Lap in a shower of Gold signifies nothing else, but the Miracles
which Gold can work. We may conclude as much of the Story of Gyges a Lydian
Shepherd, who walking in a Cave is said to have taken a Gold Ring from the
Finger of a dead Man he found there, and, putting it upon one of his own, he
presently becomes invisible, goes into the King's Bedchamber, enjoys the
Queen, by whose Assistance he next murders her Husband, and seizes the Kingdom
to himself.

3. Considering therefore the mighty Power and Importance of Gold in Human
Affairs; and since Socrates, leaving Divine and Natural Things to the Care of
the Gods, taught that Morality and Matters of Practice did only belong to us, I
esteem it not a mean Subject, nor unseasonable, nor out of my Province (most
courteous Academicks) to discourse now before you of Gold, of Silver, and other
Coins. But it shall be with much brevity after our Florentine manner,
especially because I come hither to day under a great Infirmity, my old and
hereditary Distemper, which has not only rendered me feeble and uneasy, but
likewise for many Years a Stranger to Books and Study. I must therefore beg
your Attention, because I naturally am, and shall this day be purposely sparing
of my words.

4. Our Mortal Body being designed a Habitation for the Divine and Immortal
Soul, was framed, as became the Servant of so great a Lady, of a most noble,
delicate, and tender Constitution; but withal naked and exposed to the Injuries
of Seasons, and Animals. It could not therefore but stand in need of several
things, which no body can procure by himself alone; and this is the reason why
we live together in Cities, to help one another by various Occupations,
Offices, and Degrees. But no Person is born fit for all sorts of Business, some
having a Genius for one thing, and some for another; nor can any Climate
indifferently produce all the Fruits of Earth, being in very different
Situations with respect to the Sun and Stars. Hence it is that one Man labors
and toils not for himself alone, but also for others, and they reciprocally for
him. So one City helps another, and one Country parts with its Superfluities to
another, in lieu whereof it is from thence again supplied with what it wants.
And thus all the good things of Nature and Art are communicated and enjoyed by
the means of Human Commerce or Traffic, which at first was but simple Barter,
or changing of one Commodity for another, as it still continues in the
unciviliz'd parts of the World.

5. Now it was a difficult thing to know who stood in need of what you could
spare, or who had an overplus of what you wanted; and so to transport,
preserve, or divide them, as that both Parties might be accommodated. But
Necessity, the Mother of Inventions, taught Men to pitch upon a certain place,
where many meeting from different Parts with their Commodities, might the more
easily supply one another; and this was the Origin of Fairs and Markets. Their
Eyes were opened by this Convenience to discover a greater, that as they had
chosen a particular place, so they might appoint some one thing that should
bear an equivalent value to all others; and that every thing might be given or
received for a certain quantity thereof, as if it had been the Medium or
Fountain of the universal Value of things, their separate Substance, or Idea.

6. The first Money that the Ancients wrought was Copper, and was by common
Consent preferred to this high Office. So whatever superabounded to any Person,
he gave it for as much Copper as was compared with, or judged equal to it; this
Copper he afterward gave for other things wanting to him, or otherwise he kept
it by him in his Coffer, as a Security for the Supply of his future
Necessities. And this was the Original of selling and buying, which we Tuscans
still call comparing, in our Language comperare. Afterward the greater
Excellency of Gold and Silver did set them off, and occasioned them to be made
Money. They were at the beginning used in unwrought Pieces as they came to
hand; but, as Additions are easily made to Inventions, they were next weighed,
then stamped, and so became Money.

7. When, where, or by whom Money was first coined is not agreed upon by
Writers. Herodotus says in Lydia, others in Naxos, Strabo in Aegina; some in
Lycia by King Erichthonius; Lucan says in Thessaly by King Jonus. I cannot
learn that there was any Money in use before the Flood: but the Scriptures
speak plainly of it afterward. Abraham purchased a Field from Ephron the
Hittite for four hundred Shekels of Silver, current Money with the Merchant.
Joseph was sold by his Brethren for twenty pieces of Silver. And Moses laid
upon the Israelites by Poll half a Shekel, that is, four Drachms of Silver.
Theseus, who reigned in Attica about the time of the Judges in Israel, coined
Silver-Money with the Stamp of an Ox upon it, to invite those to manure and
till the Ground, who till then lived at random in the Woods. When Janus King of
Latium received Saturn fled by Sea from his Son Jupiter, who drove him from his
Throne, (that was in the so well governed, and so much celebrated Golden Age)
Janus, I say, did in the Memory of this Favor coin Copper Money, which had
stamped upon it the Prow of a Ship. The first Money among the Romans was a
piece of Copper, without any coining, of a Pound Weight, called by them Aes
gravis, As Assis, and Pondo. Servius Tullius stamped a Sheep upon it, as one of
his Domestic Animals; the Riches of the Ancients consisting then in their
Flocks, by them called Peculium or Pecunia, whence Money was so named. In the
Year of Rome 383, Silver was there coined, and Gold sixty two Years after. When
the Florentines defeated the Forces of Siena at Mount Alcino in the Year 1252,
they coined a Dram of fine Gold into a Florin, which was so well received in
the World, that all People would coin such Pieces, and call them Florins too.

8. The Latin Names of Money are Moneta, Pecunia, Nummus: The Greek Names are
(...): And ours Pecunia, Danari, Danaio. It Is called Moneta, because the Stamp
of it does admonish us of its Name, Value, and Fineness. The Denomination of
Money is generally derived from the Stamp, as some old Coins were called
Bigati, from the Figure of a Cart drawn by two Horses; Philippi, from the Head
of King Philip; Sagittarii, from an Archer; and Armati, from the Impress of an
armed Man. A Judge having received a thousand of the latter for passing an
unjust Sentence, did in his own excuse roguishly play upon the words, saying,
that he could not resist a thousand armed Men. The Mark or Letter X gave a
Denomination to the Roman Denarius, which was worth ten Asses. Our Florin was
so called from the Flower-de-Luce, which by Allusion shows it to be Florentine,
as a Rose does Rhodian Money. The Stamp denotes oftentimes some Matters of
Fact, as the Prow of a Ship the abovementioned Humanity of Janus: and a Yacht
sunk, with this Motto Quare dubit asti, declared the vanquished Fortunes of
Clement the VIIth. Pecunia is derived, as we said before, from Pecus; and
Nummus from the Greek word (...), which signifies a Statute, or somewhat
appointed by Law, such as Money is, being made the Queen of all things. It was
called (...) for its Usefulness and Goodness, seeing that by it we receive all
that is good and beneficial, called in Greek (...). Lastly, it was called
(...), which betokens the small Money that runs amongst the common People. We
of Florence make use of the Latin words; and from Denarius, which amongst the
Romans was a particular Piece, we call Money in general Danari or Danaio.

9. Thus far have we discoursed of the Time, Place, Invention, Authors, Names,
and Advantages of Money. It Is now time to give its Essential Definition. Money
therefore is Gold, Silver, or Copper coined by public Authority at pleasure,
and by the Consent of Nations made the Price and Measure of things, to contract
them the more easily. I said Gold, Silver or Copper, because People have chosen
those three Metals to make Money of. If the Prince (by which word is
understood whoever governs and protects the State, be it one or many, few or
all:) I say, if the Prince makes Money of Iron, Lead, Wood, Cork, Leather,
Paper, Salt, or the like, (as it has sometimes happened) it will not be
received out of his Dominions, as not being coined of the Matter generally
agreed upon. It could not then be universal Money, but a particular Tally,
Countermark, Note or Bill from the Prince, obliging him to pay so much good
Money when he is able. And this has been frequently practiced for want of
Money, when the Publ^ck Good required it. The Romans called the Masters of
their Mint the Triumvirs, appointed to oversee the fining and coining of
Copper, Silver, and Gold. Vlpianus, Pomponius, and others learned in the Civil
Law, expressly affirm that no Money is good, but what is of Gold, of Silver, or
Copper: wherefore Mark Antony was reproached, amongst his other Crimes, for
coining of base Silver mixed with Iron.

10. I said in the Definition coined by public Authority, because few Metals
are found altogether pure. To make Money therefore of equal Value, it is
necessary to reduce the Metal to a certain degree of Fineness, to cut it into
pieces of equal Weight, and to put a known Stamp upon it as a Mark of its being
good Money, that every one may not be obliged upon all occasions to try or
essay it. This notwithstanding must not be done by private Men, who may be
suspected of Fraud, but by the Prince, who is the Father of all. Wherefore no
Person may coin his own Metal, be it never so good, without incurring the
Penalty due to Counterfeiters and Forgers. But he is to carry it to the public
Mint, where it is received, weighed, essayed, marked, melted, allayed, beaten,
made into equal Pieces, adjusted, coined, and rendered every way according to
Law.

11. It was likewise said in the Definition at Pleasure: For tho the Law
requires Money to be coined, yet whether this or that way, that is, round or
square, broad or narrow, more or less pure, with this or that Stamp, under one
Denomination or another, these are all Accidents, and left entirely to the
Magistrate's Discretion. It suffices that he touch not the Substance of it,
which he has no Power to do: that is, he may coin no Money but of the three
known Metals, nor set a false Price upon the Pieces, as it must needs happen,
if, after trying of 'em, they should be found not to consist of fine Metal
enough answerable to their Names. Should the People be thus cheated under the
public Faith that ought to protect them, they might say as the Wolf did once
to the Shepherd who devoured the Sheep, If I had done this, good Mr. Shepherd,
you would cry, help, help, and raise the Country to pursue me.

12. It was said in the Definition, By the Consent of Nations made the Price
and Measure of things; because Men have agreed to fix that Value upon those
Metals, for they have no such Privileges from Nature. A Natural Calf is far
more noble than a Golden one, yet how much inferior in Price? An Egg that was
bought for half a Grain of Gold, kept Count Vgolino alive in the Castle for ten
days, which all the Treasure in the Universe could not do. What does more
nearly concern our Lives than Corn? nevertheless ten thousand Grains thereof
are sold for one of Gold.

13. But how comes it that things so valuable in themselves are worth so little
Gold? From what Root springs it, that one thing is worth just so much of
another, rather than so much; worth this rather than that quantity of Gold? Let
us examine whether this be the Effect of Chance or not. All Men labor to
become happy, and they think to find this Happiness in the Satisfaction of all
their Wants and Desires, to answer which all Earthly Things were created very
good. Now all these by the Consent of Nations are worth all the Gold
(comprehending also the Silver and Copper) that is wrought in the World. All
Men then do passionately covet all the Gold, to buy up all things for the
Satisfaction of all their Wants and Desires, and so to become happy. The Parts
follow the nature of the whole. How much therefore of the Happiness of a Man,
City, or Country, is caused or occasioned by any thing, just so much it is
worth of their Gold or Labor: But it causes as much Happiness as it answers of
their Desires or Wants, as Drink is pleasing proportionable to the degree of
Thirst. The Will takes its measure from the Appetites and Pleasure; and Want
takes its measure from the Nature, Season, Climate, and Place; from the
excellency, rarity, or abundance of any thing, with perpetual Variation.

14. To be always acquainted with the Rule and Arithmetical Proportion which
things bear among themselves and with Gold, it were necessary to look down from
Heaven, or some exalted Prospect upon all the things that exist, or are done
upon the Earth; or rather to count their Images reflected in the Heavens as in
a true Mirror. Then we might cast up the Sum and say, There is on Earth just so
much Gold, so many Things, so many Men, so many Desires: As many of those
Desires as any thing can satisfy, so much it is worth of another thing, so much
Gold it is worth. But here below we can scarce discover those few things that
are round about us, and we prize 'em according as we see 'em more or less
desired at any time, or in any place; whereof the Merchants do carefully inform
themselves, and for that reason they know the Prices of things better than all
others.

15. It will not be amiss to illustrate what we have here said by some
Examples. Water is excellent, said Pindar, and we could not well live without
it: But because every one may have enough of it for nothing, Jeremy had reason
to lament that it could not be procured without Price. A Mole is a vile and
despicable Animal, but in the Siege of Cassilino the Famine was so great, that
one was sold for 200 Florins; and yet it was not dear, for he that parted with
it died of Hunger, and he that bought it outlived the Siege. So Esau threw
away his Birthright, and Esop's Cock contemned the Jewel. On the contrary,
Apitius, whom Pliny calls a bottomless Gulf, spent two Millions and a half of
Gold upon his Gut; and, finding but the fourth part of a Million in his
Coffers, he poisoned himself for fear, as he said, of starving: And that, says
Martial, was the daintiest bit that ever he swallowed. Aristotle knew how to
spend his Money better; for he gave for some few Books of Speusippus the
Philosopher, a little after he was dead, 20250 Ducats of the Sun: So I reduce
the ancient Talents, after Budaeus, to our modern Money, that I may be the
better understood. Alexander the Great gave Aristotle himself forty eight
thousand for writing the History of Animals. And Virgil received ten Sesterces
a piece for the twenty Lines in the sixth of his Aeneids, wherein he laments
the Death of Marcellus; this makes of our Money 4250 Florins. The Vanity of
Mankind has set excessive Rates upon Vessels, precious Stones, Statues,
Pictures, and other trifling Curiosities; because they find as much
Satisfaction in these, as in the quantity of Gold they give for them. Thus the
Inhabitants of Peru did at first barter Ingots of Gold for Looking-glasses,
Needles, little Bells, and the like; because they put a high Esteem upon those
things then new to them, and drew more Satisfaction from 'em, than from the
Gold and Silver wherewith they abounded. And when all the Gold in those
Countries shall be transported into ours, (which must quickly happen, if we
continue those rich Navigations begun Anno 1534, and then returning with less
than a Million of Gold, the Spoils of Cucco and K. Atabalipa, but now bring
from 16 to 18 Millions at a time, which has raised the Price of things one
third, a sign that we have more Gold) I say, that when all the Gold in the
Indies is brought into Europe, because then it will become a Drug, we must
either find out something more rare to make Money of, or else return to the old
way of bartering. And let so much suffice concerning the Essence of Money.

16. Some maintain that Money was a very ill Invention, for this reason, viz.
That the Desire of other things could not be so great, nor the cause of so many
Evils as is the Thirst of Gold; because so much of those could not be laid up
and preserved, as there may be treasured of this. I answer with Epictetus, that
every thing has two Handles, and may be well or ill taken and used; as Reason,
Physic, and Law are often abused to the Destruction of Mankind; but are they
for all this prohibited in the Commonwealth? Have all the Philosophers plucked
out their Eyes like Democritus, because the sight of many things takes off the
Mind from Contemplation? All Steel, as they say, makes its own Rust, and we
must learn how to scour it. Money was an excellent Invention, and an Instrument
of doing infinite good; if any makes an ill use of it, it is not the Thing but
the Person that is to be blamed and punished.

17. Some grave and famous Authors have called Money the Sinews of War and
Government; but, in my Opinion, it may be more properly styled the second Blood
thereof. For as Blood, which is the Juice and Substance of Meat in the natural
Body, does, by circulating out of the greater into the lesser Vessels, moisten
all the Flesh, which drinks it up as parched Ground soaks Rain Water; so it
nourishes and restores as much of it as was dried up and evaporated by the
natural Heat: In like manner, Money, which we said before was the best Juice
and Substance of the Earth, does, by circulating out of the richer Purses into
the poorer, furnish all the Nation, being laid out upon those things whereof
there is a continual Consumption for the Necessities of Life. From the poorer
it returns again into the richer Purses; and thus circulating without
Intermission, it preserves alive the Civil Body of the Commonwealth. Hence it
may be easily conceived that every State must have a quantity of Money, as
every Body a quantity of Blood to circulate therein. But as the Blood stopping
in the Head or the larger Vessels puts the Body naturally into a Consumption,
Dropsy, or Apoplexy, etc. so should all the Money be only in a few Hands, as in
those of the rich for Example, the State falls unavoidably into Convulsions,
and other dangerous Distempers. Thus it was very near happening at Rome, when
by reason of the multitude of accused Persons, of Condemnations, Slaughters and
Confiscations, all the Money was like to come into the Exchequer, had not
Tiberius distributed two Millions and a half of Gold into the Banks, whence it
was to be lent to Debtors upon double Security for three Years, without any
Expense or Interest. We ought therefore to set a high Value upon this living
Member of the Commonwealth, and to preserve it from those Mischiefs which
usually befall it, when not carefully looked after; such as Counterfeiting,
Monopolizing, Simony, Usury, and the like, already decri'd, and known
everywhere. But, passing by these, I shall now confine my Discourse only to
one, not so much taken notice of, and indeed neglected from the beginning; I
mean debasing of Coin, which increases more and more every day. I design to
show the Causes, the Damage, the Scandal, the Remedy of this Evil, and so to
conclude.

18. The Root of this, as of all other Evils, is Covetousness, which has found
out many occasions and pretenses for debasing of Money. But this is the chief,
that Money, being once out of the Mint, does in time, by too much handling, and
frequent counting, grow lighter; or that a Grain, for Example, is taken off it
by some illegal Practice; the People in the mean while either take no notice of
so small a matter, or care not, and so the Money passes: Hereupon the dishonest
Coiner says to his Lord, Since your Money, Sir, is one Grain lighter, it is
fitter you should get by it, than that others clip it; and so a Grain is taken
off it. The neighboring States seeing this, diminish theirs likewise. Some
time after they fall to it again, and take off another Grain, and then another,
and so on. Thus for sixty Years past this Worm has consumed above the third
part of the Silver in Europe; and it must at last (if this Practice continue)
be brought to nothing, or to those Nail-heads, which, perhaps, was the
Iron-Money that Lycurgus gave the Spartans.

19. The Damage is manifest, because by how much Money is debased whether in
Allay or Weight, by so much are lessened the public Revenues, and the Credit
and Estates of private Men, who so far receive less Gold or Silver. And he that
has but little Money, can buy but few things, which are the only true Riches:
for no sooner is Money debased but all things grow dear: And there is Reason
for it, because (as Carafulla, who was no Fool, delivers the Etymology of the
word) vendo to sell comes from venio to come, and do to give; for things are
given in sale, because you expect there should come to you in Exchange so much
Metal as is wont, or is believed to be in the Money; and not so many Stamps, or
Denominations, or Pieces. If that same quantity of Silver be at present in one
hundred and nine pieces, which used before to be in a hundred only, must not
one hundred and nine be now paid for that which formerly cost but a hundred?

20. Threescore Years ago our Florin was worth seven Livres, now it is exchanged
for ten; And why? because there was at that time as much good Silver in those
seven Livers, as there is now in ten: So that at present seven Livers cannot
purchase a whole Florin, but only seven parts in ten. The other three parts are
vanished, and by so much are lessened the public Revenues, with the Estates of
private Men. Now here may be perceived how great an Injury Princes do to
themselves; for tho they gain once by robbing the poor People of what is taken
from the Money, yet they lose by it ever after, being forced to receive their
Revenues in the same Coin. Hence spring Disorders, and Confusions; because the
People do, by the Novelty of the Coins and Prices which measure things, become,
in a manner, Strangers in their own Country; and not less confounded than if
the Weights and public Measures were altered, with which they were wont to
contract for Corn, Liquor, Cloth, etc. But what worse thing can be done to the
Commonwealth than every day to change the Laws, Coins, Offices, Customs, and,
as it were, to renew the Members of it? To make muddy, or rather to poison the
common Fountain of the City?

21. More Confusions still follow upon debasing of Money; for when Silver is
debased, the Price of Gold must consequently rise, as it was said before of our
Florin raised from seven to ten Livers: Otherwise the common Proportion between
Silver and Gold, which at this time is that of one to twelve or thirteen, could
not hold; for all the Gold would be bought up, and carried where it was worth
more Silver. Great Difficulties therefore, and Quarrels would happen about the
payment of Legacies, Taxes, Rents, Profits, and of all Debts contracted when
the Money was good. A Debtor of a Gold Florin of seven Livres would say to his
Creditor, Sir, here are seven Livres which I owed you. The Creditor answers,
You must pay me ten Livres; for a Gold Florin, which you promised to pay me, is
now worth so much: and if this pleases you not, pay me a Gold Florin,
flowerdeluc'd, and stamped, as when we bargained. The Debtor replies, If I give
you a Florin of seven Livers, as the Proclamation sings, I do enough: If the
Prince has debased the Money, it is a common Storm, and we are all in the same
Ship: Complain not of me, but of the Prince. And truly the People have reason
to complain of him, being involved in such cruel Difficulties and Tumults, as
even the wise know not how to be delivered from: for some of 'em are for
maintaining the Law in this case, others the Intention of it; some are for the
Rigor, and others for the Equity of it.

22. But how shall the Prince help debasing the Money? Suppose it be made bad
by his Neighbors, by Time, or evil Practices; that all the good be spirited or
exported, and after vanishing a while, it appears again made worse; must the
City be filled with foreign, base, and clipped Money, and the People be plagued
with it, as if they were to feed upon moldy Bread? I answer, that no such
Money is to be suffered by any means: That every one may be secure from being
cheated, let it be quickly removed, but by just and discreet Methods. Let there
be certain Persons appointed to receive it, and to pay the just value thereof,
without making any Gain or Profit by it. So every one will bring it to be
changed, and obey most readily, when they perceive they are to suffer none, or
a very inconsiderable Loss. Thus a great Master in Politics ordained in the 5
th Book of his Laws, that the Government should not take the bad Money from
those who brought it from Abroad, but might justly pay it after the manner of
the Country.

23. There can be no danger, that your Money, for being too good, should be
exported and recoin'd: for I presume it is not bestowed upon him that carries
it Abroad; but paying for it after the rate of good Money, he leaves (as we
say) his Skin behind him; and if it be made bad, it passes and is exchanged
only for bad Money. A hundred Livres of Florence go for a hundred and six of
those of Lucca: he that takes by Exchange an hundred Livres in Florence, does
but labor in vain. We don't find therefore that Lucca, nor any other City are
emptying Florence of its Money to re-coin it, since the Exchange has every way
levelled and made it equal.

28. It is not fit then, that because others debase their Money, you do so too.
Rather let what has been once received, always pass, because so the People are
in no danger of losing, of being cheated, or offended. The Egyptians cut off
both their Hands who falsified the public Weights and Measures. But what
greater falsifying can there be than diminishing the Money, that is, basely to
pilfer People of their Goods? Rome being straitn'd by Hannibal, and drained of
Money, they coined their Assis of one Ounce, that weighed twelve before. But
this was done by public Advice in that Extremity, which being over, all
matters were settled as formerly. However, had it continued, does it not
follow, that as Money was brought down from twelve to one, so the Prices of
things would be raised from one to twelve? The old Countrywoman that used to
sell her dozen of Eggs for an Assis of twelve Ounces, seeing it look now so
deformed, and reduced to one Ounce, would have said, Gentlemen, either give me
an Assis of twelve Ounces, or twelve of those paultry ones that weigh but one
Ounce; or I Will give you an Egg apiece for your Asses; choose which you will.

25. Remove then all the thoughts of debasing the Coin, and pluck up the Seeds
of this Mischief. Let not the Mint gain by any means; for truly it is a most
scandalous business to lessen other Peoples Metal that is sent thither to be
coined. Greediness is a Crime that was punished by God with the Death of Eli
the Priest in Shilo, and with that of his two Sons Hophni and Phineas his
Ministers, who cut off, for their own Tables, the best of every Offering
brought them to sacrifice. The Gentiles did better, who eat all the Victim
except the Fat that run out of it, as if the Gods would have the Soul only for
their share, so Strabo and Catullus say: Gnarus ut accepto veneretur carmine
Divos;
Omentum in Flamma pingue liquefaciens.


26. Now to take away all Temptation of Gain, to wash off all the Marks of it,
and to make this Matter creditable, plain, and safe, command that Money pass
according to its intrinsic Value, that is, for as much Gold or Silver as there
is in it; and that Money of the same Allay be worth as much in Bar, as when it
is coined: so that the Metal, like an amphibious Animal, may without any
Expense indifferently pass from Bullion into Coin, and from Coin into Bullion.
In a word, let the Mint deliver out the same Metal in Money that it received in
to coin. Would you have then, some will say, the Mint to bear all the Expense?
Yes certainly; many eminent Civil Lawyers contend that the Public must be at
the Charge of maintaining this Blood in the Commonwealth, as they pay the
Soldiers, and the Salaries of Magistrates for the Preservation of Liberty and
Justice. Others think it equitable that Money should pay its own Minting, by
being made somewhat worse, and yet of more Value than so much Bullion, like
Vessels, Furniture, or other things whereupon any Labor is bestowed. So, very
often the Workmanship is of greater Value than the Materials, as those two
Beakers of Silver wrought by Mentor, which Lucius Crassus the Orator bought for
2500 Florins of Gold, yet never drunk out of them afterward. And the Husbands
of our time can tell whether the Embroideries and other little Trangums of the
Women, cost 'em more than the Clothes they are to set off.

26. After all, the old Custom of Money's paying its own Coinage, (the People
looking on and suffering it) pleads Prescription, and the Prince is in
Possession of it. I shall not dispute with my Masters; but I may say that if
the Mint ought not to bear this Charge, yet it should be made as easy as
possible, and the Stamps be rather less beautiful. But why should not we return
(as some desire it) to the old way of casting Money? for it has all the
Advantages that can be wished. Two Stamps of Steel can mark both sides of a
Piece in two Molds of Copper, so that two Men without any more Expenses than
Waste, Boiling, and Coals, may in one day coin any great Sum in pieces of equal
Weight and Fineness, and for that reason more apt to discover clipping or
counterfeiting. For Money that is made of false Metal, if it be of any ordinary
Body, cannot escape being found out by its Weight in the Scales; and if it be
broader or narrower, thicker or thinner than it should be, it cannot ^mpose
upon the Eyes. Nor had it been more than Justice, if Officers were appointed to
see it melted, allayed, and cast before the People within those Iron Grates,
ordained for that purpose by our good and wise old Citizens, after the Example
of the Romans, who religiously performed all this nice business of Money in the
Temple of Juno, the Doors being set wide open, that the People might freely see
what so nearly concerned them.

27. Who does not perceive that by such means as these we might eradicate those
pernicious Weeds of Expense, Fraud, and Gain; which being only lopt, never fail
to grow again, and to debase the Coin? Lastly, I shall add as a Corollary, that
Traffic has so much trouble and difficulty in it upon the account of this
blessed Money, that it would be better perhaps to do without it, and to pass
our Gold and Silver by Weight and Size, as they did in the Primitive Times, and
is still used in China, where they always carry about them their Shears and
Scales, and have nothing to fear but the Allay, which by Use and the Touchstone
is easily discovered.

Concerning the Generation of Metals; the Excellency of Gold and Silver; the
Origin of buying and selling, with that of Money; when, why, and by whom Money
was first invented and used; of the Names, of the Essence, and the Importance
thereof; of its debasing, and the Causes of it, with the Damages and Scandals
that are the Consequences of it, and their proper Remedies; let it suffice,
most patient Auditors, to have discoursed those few things, by me thought
convenient for this time and place; not for your Instruction, Gentlemen, but
for your Entertainment.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by A. and J. Churchill at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row.
A View of Universal History, from the Creation, to the Year of Christ 1695. By
Francis Tallents, sometime Fellow of Magdalen College Cambridg. The whole
graven in 16 Copper Plates, each 15 Inches deep, and 12 broad; bound up into
Books, the Sheets, lined. Price 16 s.

Cambden's Britannia newly translated into English with large Additions and
Improvements. By Edmond Gibson, of Queen's-College in Oxford.

The General History of the Air. By R. Boil, Esquire; 4o.

A complete Journal of the Votes, Speeches, and Debates, both of the House of
Lords and Commons, throughout the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Collected by
Sir Simond Dewes, Baronet, and published by Paul Bows, of the Middle Temple,
Esquire 2 d Edit. Fol.

The Works of the famous Nich. Machiavel, Citizen and Secretary of Florence.
Written originally in Italian, and from thence faithfully translated into
English. Fol.

Mr. Lock's Essay concerning Human Understanding. The third Edition with large
Additions. Fol.

-- His Thoughts of Education. Octavo.

The Fables of Aesop and other Mythologists; made English by Sir Roger L'
Estrange, Knight. Fol.

Two Treatises of Government: The first an Answer to Filmer's Patriarcha. The
latter an Essay concerning the true Original, Extent, and End of Civil
Government. Octavo.

Notitia Monastica: Or, A short History of the Religious Houses in England and
Wales, etc. By Thomas Tanner, A. B. Octavo.

The Resurrection of the (same) Body asserted from the Tradition of the
Heathens, the Ancient Jews, and the Primitive Church: With an Answer to the
Objections brought against it. By Humphry Hody, D. D.

Bishop Wilkins of Prayer and Preaching: Enlarged by the Bishop of Norwich, and
Dr. Williams. Octavo.

Considerations about lowering the Interest, and raising the Value of Money.
Octavo.

Short Observations on a printed Paper, Entitled, For encouraging the coining
of Silver Money in England, and after for keeping it here. 8 o.

Sir W. Temple's History of the Netherlands. Octavo.

-- Miscellanea. Octavo.

Dr. Gibson's Anatomy of Human Bodies, with Figures. Octavo.

Dr. Patrick's new Version of all the Psalms of David in Meter. 12o.

Two Treatises of Natural Religion. Octavo.

Gentleman's Religion, with the Grounds and Reasons of it.

The Novels and Tales of the Renowned John Boccacio, the first Refiner of
Italian Prose; containing an hundred curious Novels: By seven Honorable
Ladies, and three noble Gentlemen, framed in ten days. The fifth Edition much
corrected and amended.

Logica: sive, Ars Rationandi. Ontilogia; sive, De Ente in genere.
Pneumatologia, seu de spiritihu. Autore Joanne Clerico. 12 o.

The Lives of the Popes, from the time of our Savior Jesus Christ, to the
Reign of Sixtus IV. By Sir Paul Rycaut, Knight. The Second Edition corrected.

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antonimus, the Roman Emperor, concerning
himself. To which is added the Life of Antoninus, with some Remarks upon the
whole: By Monsieur and Mad. Dacier. Never before in English. 8o.

Sermons preached by Dr. R. Leighton, late Archbishop of Glasgow. The Second
Edition. 8o.

The Roman History, written in Latin by Titus Livius, with the Supplements of
the Learned John Freinshemius, and John Dujatius: Faithfully done into English.
Folio.

Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius, of the Consolation of Philosophy. In five
Books. Made English by the Right Honorable Richard Lord Viscount Preston. 8o.

Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England, continued down to this
Time.

The Reasonableness of Christianity, as delivered in the Scriptures. 8o.

Prince Arthur; an Heroic Poem. In ten Books. By R. Blackmore, M. D. Fellow of
the College of Physicians, London. Folio.

The Christians Defense against the fear of Death, with seasonable Directions
how to prepare themselves to die well. Written originally in French, by Char.
Drelincourt of Paris, translated into English by M. D. Assigny, B. D. Third
Edition.

The Royal Grammar, containing a new and easy Method for the speedy attaining
the Latin Tongue.


