AN ESSAY ON THE East-India-Trade.

BY THE AUTHOR OF The Essay upon Ways and Means.

LONDON, Printed Anno, M DC XC VI.

To the Most Honorable, JOHN, Lord Marquis of Normanby, etc.
AN ESSAY ON THE East India TRADE.
My LORD,
YOUR Lordship was pleased, the other Day, to intimate, That You would
willingly know my Opinion in General of the East India Trade; Whether it is
Hurtful, or Beneficial to this Nation? And my Thoughts, concerning the Bill,
for Prohibiting the Wearing all East India and Persia Wrought Silks, Bengalls,
and Died, Printed, or Stained Callicoes. What has occurred to my Observation in
these Two Points, I shall Offer with great Sincerity, having no Interest, or
Engagement, to sway me, in the Questions, one way, or other.

But, before I begin, I must beg leave to say, I am very glad to see Your
Lordship bend Your Excellent Wit, and Right Understanding, to Inquiries of this
Nature.

For nothing can be more Important to a Noble Man, than A True Knowledge of the
Manufactures, Trade, Wealth, and Strength of his Country: Nor, can Your
Eloquence be any way more Usefully employed, than in Discoursing Skilfully upon
this Subject, in that Great Assembly of which You are so much an Ornament.

Richlieu has left behind Him an Evidence how much He made these Matters His
Care and Study: Which, however Neglected by the Ministers of the Present Age,
are notwithstanding the only Foundation of a Solid and Lasting Greatness.

For who can give a Prince sound Advice, and under Him steer the People Rightly
and Well, either in Peace, or in War, that is Ignorant of the Posture,
Condition, and Interest of the Country where he lives? Is there any thing in
the World, that should be more thought a Matter of State than Trade, especially
in an Island, and should not that which is the Common Concern of All, be the
Principal Care of such as Govern?

Can a Nation be Safe without Strength? And is Power to be Compassed and
Secured but by Riches? And can a Country become Rich any way, but by the Help
of a well Managed and Extended Traffic?

What has enabled England to Support this Expensive War so long, but the great
Wealth which for Thirty Years, has been flowing into us from Our Commerce
Abroad?

The Soil of no Country is Rich enough to attain a great Mass of Wealth, merely
by the Exchange and Exportation of its Own Natural Product.

The Staple Commodities that England Exports, are the Woollen Manufactures,
Tin, Lead, Hides, and sometimes Corn.

But, considering Our Luxury, and our great Expense of Foreign Wares here at
Home, we could not have grown Rich, without Other Dealings in the World.

For set our Own Exported Product in the Balance with the Imported Product
from France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Germany, and the two Northern Kingdoms; At
the Foot of the Account it will be found, that, but a fourth part of Our
Riches, arises from the vent of Our own Commodities.

Whoever looks Strictly and Nicely into Our Affairs, will find, that the Wealth
England had once, did arise chiefly from Two Articles: First, Our Plantation
Trade. Secondly, Our East India Traffic.

The Plantation Trade gives Employment to many Thousand Artificers here at
home, and takes off a great quantity of our Inferior Manufactures, The Returns
of all which are made in Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, Sugars, Indico, etc. by which
we were not only supplied for Our Own Consumption, but we had formerly
wherewithal to send to France, Flanders, Hamborough, the East-Countrey and
Holland for 500,000 l. per Annum, besides what we Shipped for Spain and the
Streights, etc.

Since we were Supplanted in the Spice Trade by the Dutch, and since great part
of the Pepper Trade is gone by the Loss of Bantam, Our Chief Investments, or
Importations from the East Indies, have been in Callicoes, Wrought Silks,
Drugs, Saltpeter, Raw Silk, Cottons, and Cotton Yarn, Goats Wool, or Carmania
Wool, and other Products of those Countries. Part of which Commodities are for
our own Use, but a much greater part in times of Peace were bought up here for
the Consumption of France, Germany, Holland, Spain, Italy and Our Plantations.

So that by the Means of our East and West India Trade, though we might lose by
our dealings to some Parts, yet We were Gainers by the whole, and in the
General Balance.

The Woollen Manufacture, Tin, Lead, etc. are indeed the Basis of all Our
Traffic, and the first Spring of our dealings Abroad, But if by Carelessness or
False Measures, we should come to be confined only to deal in Our own Product,
we must think no longer to preserve the Dominion of the Sea.

As Bread is called the Staff of Life, so the Woollen Manufacture is truly the
Principal Nourishment of Our Body Politic* And as a Man might possibly live
only upon Bread, yet his Life would be ill Sustained, Feeble, and Unpleasant;
So though England could probably subsist barely upon the Exportation of its own
Product, yet to enjoy a more florid Health, to be Rich, Powerful, and Strong,
we must have a more extended Traffic than Our Native Commodities can afford us.

The Woollen Manufacture is undoubtedly by Laws, and all possible Care, to be
Encouraged; but it is its Exportation Abroad, and not the Consumption of it at
Home, that must bring Profit to the Kingdom.

Some of Our Gentry have been for many Years of Opinion, That the Entire
Welfare of England depends upon the High Price of Wool, as thinking thereby to
Advance their Rents, but this proceeds from the Narrow Mind, and Short View of
such, who have all along more regarded the Private Interest of Land, than the
Concerns of Trade, which are full as Important, and without which, Land will
soon be of little Value.

Men in their Private Capacities may be allowed to prefer their Single Profit,
but should Consult only the General Good in Public Councils.

In a Trading Nation, the Bent of all the Laws should tend to the Encouragement
of Commerce, and all Measures should be there taken, with a due regard to its
Interest and Advancement.

Instead of this, in many Particulars, our former Laws bring Encumbrance and
Difficulties to it, and some seem Calculated for its utter Ruin; so little has
it been of late Years the Common Care.

And yet 'twill be found at last, when all Things come to be Rightly
Considered, that no Plenty at Home, Victory Abroad* Affection of the People,
nor no Conduct, or Wisdom, in other things, can give the Public effectual help,
till we can mend the Condition and Posture of Trade.

In Our Great Assemblies, it has never been sufficiently thought a Matter of
State, but Managed, rather as a Convenience, or an Accidental Ornament, than
the chief Strength and Support of the Kingdom.

And as it has never been greatly the Care of Our Ministers of State, so it has
not been enough the Study of Our Nobility and Gentry, Who, (give me leave to
say) for want of a Right Knowledge in the General Notions of it, have been
frequently Imposed upon, by Particular Merchants, and other Interested Persons,
to Enact Laws so much to the Prejudice of Trade in General.

My Lord, I shall be very free to Communicate the few Lights I have gathered
from Observation, and Inquiry into these Matters, and shall be very glad if my
Endeavors can give Your Lordship any hints, which I am certain will be
improved, by Your deep Judgment, and Understanding.

First, I am clearly convinced in General, that the East India Trade is greatly
Beneficial to England.

Secondly, I am of Opinion (with Submission to better Judgments) that the Bill
now proposed to Prohibit the wearing East India and Persia Wrought Silks,
Bengals, etc. will be absolutely distructive to the Trade, and very prejudicial
to the Kingdom. Which two Points shall be impartially handled in the Sequel of
this Discourse.

As to the East India Trade in General; If all Europe by common Consent would
agree to have no further dealings to those Parts, This side of the World, by
such a Resolution, would certainly save a great and Continual Expense of
Treasure.

For Europe draws from thence nothing of Solid Use; Materials to supply Luxury,
and only, perishable Commodities, and sends thither, Gold, and Silver, which
is there buried and never returns.

I have good Grounds to think That the Silver and Gold brought from America,
the Gold Dust brought from Africa, and the Silver produced from the European
Mines, in the Two Hundred Years last past, has not amounted to less, in the
whole, than Eight Hundred Millions.

There is no appearance of this immense Sum in any Country of Europe. It Is true
indeed, there is Yearly a great Consumption of these Metals, By the wear of
Gold and Silver Coin, waste in Coinage, waste in working Plate, The wear of
wrought Plate, The wear of things made of Gold and Silver Thread, and Wire (a
high Article), Leaf and Shell Gold and Silver, Liquid Gold and Silver. There is
also much lost in Casualties by Sea, Fires, and Inundations, and by being
privately buried and never found.

But, having computed what may be allowed for the Yearly Consumption of Gold
and Silver, on all the foregoing Heads, and what quantity of those Metals may
be now remaining in Europe, I cannot find what is become of the Eight Hundred
Millions dug out of the Earth, unless a Hundred and Fifty Millions of it, be
carried away and Sunk in the East Indies.

From whence I have reason to conclude, That the European Nations in General,
had been Richer by a full Third, than they now are, if that Trade had never
been discovered and undertaken.

But since Europe has tasted of this Luxury, Since the Custom of a Hundred
Years, has made their Spices necessary to the Constitutions of all Degrees of
People, Since their Silks are pleasing every where to the better Sort, And
since their Callicoes are a useful wear at Home, and in our own Plantations,
and for the Spaniards in America, It can never be advisable for England to
quit this Trade, and leave it to any other Nation.

The Burden which this Commerce lays upon the Collective Body of Europe, does
bear hard only upon those Countries which Consume the Indian Commodities,
without having any Share of the Traffic, and therefore France did about Twelve
Years ago very wisely prohibit the wearing Callicoes, that were not of their
own Importation.

The English and Dutch, which together are not a Tenth part of Europe, enjoy
this Traffic almost without any Rivalship; and if it be a Burden, it lies not
upon the one, but on the other Nine parts, So that if the East India Trade
carry out the Gold and Silver from this side of the World, it is truly, and
properly, at the Cost, and Expense, of France, Germany, Spain, and the Northern
Kingdoms, who have little, or no Opportunities of Trading thither.

To imagine all Europe will come to an Agreement of Dealing no more to those
Parts, is an absurd and wild Notion; Since therefore the Western Nations are
contented to be deceived, and for a Hundred Years have been accustomed to bear
this deceit, 'twould be Egregious Folly in us, to quit this Advantage, and
leave it entirely to the Hollanders.

By the best account I can have, and from Impartial Hands, England before the
War for some time, one Year with another has Exported for this Traffic, either
in Bullion, or our Manufactures (of which the Manufactures might be near an
Eighth part) about per Annum -- 400,000 l.

Suppose we Consume at home the Returns of -- 200,000

But, by the way, I must take Notice here, that the Company, of late Years,
have carried out the value of 100,000 l. per Annum in our home Manufactures.

If the Company Export to other Nations the Returns of the other Two Hundred
Thousand Pounds (which I may safely affirm they did, and will do in time of
Peace) England must certainly be a great Gainer by this Traffic.

For no one versed in Merchandise will deny, but that the Returns from India of
200,000 l. when Exported to other Countries must Increase the first Sum at
least Fourfold, and produce 800,000.

So that the Account of England with the Indies, and the European Nations, may
be thus Balanced.

The Returns Exported yield per Annum -- 800,000 l. The Returns Consumed at
home are to the Nation -- 200,000 Total -- 1,000,000

Deduct for the prime Cost of Bullion or Manufactures Exported -- 400,000
England Net Gainer by this Traffic -- 600,000

Nothing can be a Clearer Gain to the Kingdom than the Returns of the 200,000
l. consumed at home; because treble that Sum, would otherwise be carried out
for Foreign Silks and Linen, which is hindered by the Importation of East India
Commodities.

The Inspection I have made upon other Occasions, into the general State and
Condition of this Kingdom, has led me upon very good Grounds to think, that the
East India Trade did annually add to the gross Stock of England at least
600,000 l. per Annum in times of Peace.

For I have many Cogent* Reasons inducing Me to believe, That from about Anno
1656. to Anno 1688. this Nation has every Year gradually increased in Riches;
By what degrees, is needless here to incert, but upon mature Consideration, I
may safely state, that about Anno 1688. the Increase or Addition to the Wealth
and General Stock of England, arising from Foreign Trade, and home
Manufactures, was at least Two Millions yearly.

And after much Thought, and Study on this Subject, and by consulting Others
versed in Speculations of the like Nature, I find that this Increase to the
Nations General Stock, did probably arise from the Three following Articles,
Viz.

l. From Our Manufactures and Home Product, sent to the Plantations, and from
the Returns thereof, Exported to Foreign Parts 900,000 From our Woollen
Manufacture, Lead, Tin, Leather, and Our other Native Product, sent to France,
Spain, Italy, Germany, etc. -- 500,000 From the Net Profit accruing by the
East India Trade -- 600,000 Total -- 2,000,000

If the East India Trade did in Peaceful Times, bring so great an Increase to
the Annual Income of the Kingdom (and I think the contrary is capable of no
clear Demonstration) the Legislative Power ought to proceed with much Caution,
in any matter relating to it.

Whatever Country can be in the full and undisputed Possession of it, will give
Law to all the Commercial World.

Should we quit the Hold we have in India, and abandon the Traffic, Our
Neighbors the Dutch will undoubtedly engross the whole: And if to their Naval
Strength in Europe, such a Foreign Strength and Wealth be added, England must
hereafter be contented to Trade by their Protection, and under their Banners.

As War does vary all the Circumstances of Trade, alter its Channel, give it to
one People, and take it from another, So in seasons of War, it is by no means
proper, nor advisable, to embrace New Councils in relation to it: Nor can we
then take any True Measures, or make any Right, and Sound Judgment about it.

The Scarcity of Money in a long War, makes any Exportation of Bullion thought
a great Gr^evance; of which, in Quiet Times, we should not be sensible.

In the same manner, the Interruption of any Manufacture, though never so
Prejudicial to the Kingdom, is grievous in a Time of War, when Business is
scarce, and Trading dull, But in a Time of Peace, and full Employment, these
Hands can shift from one Work, to another, without any great Prejudice to
themselves, or the Public.

There having been for Three Years last past, a great want of East India Goods,
and there happening of late a great Call for the Woollen Manufactures, and
indeed for all the Product of England, some unthinking Persons, grew presently
to imagine that the want of East India Goods (and no other Reason) had brought
the Woollen Manufacture into Request, and increased its Consumption, from
whence very many have began to argue, and infer, That the East India Trade is,
and always was, prejudicial to the Kingdom.

But the sudden Call which was then for all kind of English Commodities, as
well as the Woollen Manufacture, viz. Lead, Tin, Leather, Butter, Cheese,
Tallow, etc. did not proceed from the want of East India Goods, but indeed from
the Posture of the Exchange Abroad, the Ill Condition of our Silver Coin, and
the High Price Guineas were brought to: For we plainly see this great Demand,
both Abroad, and at Home, for our Goods does cease, now Guineas are lowered,
and the Coin is altered.

My Lord, It has been too often the Fault of English Councils, to determine
Rashly of the most Important Matters*

And (with Submission to better Judgments) I doubt it may be of very dangerous
Consequence at this Time, to meddle with, or give any Disturbance to a Settled
Traffic.

The Concern of Wool is, without doubt, to be taken care of, but not so as
upon that account to slight all our Foreign Interest.

The East India Company has been for a long time looked upon with an Evil Eye,
by some People, because there has formerly been Ill Management in their
Affairs; and for that some of their Goods were thought to hinder the
Consumption of our own Manufactures; and because it was seen what Silver they
really carried out, and not enough Considered what Bullion their Effects
brought hither in Return.

Some Persons (without Doors) either Bribed by the Dutch, or to flatter that
Interest, profess themselves Open Enemies to the Traffic in General; Others
through Inadvertency, and for want of Examining the bottom of Things, give into
their Notions; and others join with them out of Immoderate Zeal to promote the
Woollen Manufacture: So that any discerning Man may see, that the utter Ruin of
this Trade, and its entire Loss to England will be compassed, unless the King,
assisted by the Legislative Power, out of His Fatherly Love to His People,
interpose, with His Wisdom, in the matter.

One of the principal Dangers now, of taking New Councils about it, is, That in
a time of War, if by any false Steps and Measures, we should lose Ground in
India, neither our Condition, nor the Nature of our Present Alliance with the
Dutch, will permit us to assert our Right in those Parts by Force of Arms.

And if we should come so to lose our Hold in India, as not to Trade thither at
all, or but weakly and precariously, I will venture to affirm (and I hope Your
Lordship will remember hereafter this Prediction of mine) that England will
thereby lose half its Foreign Business.

For all Trades have a Mutual Dependence one upon the other, and one begets
another, and the loss of one, frequently loses half the rest. By carrying to
other Places the Commodities brought from India, We every where enlarged our
Commerce, and brought Home a great overbalance, either in Foreign Goods, or
in Bullion. In Holland we Exchanged our Wrought Silks, Callicoes, etc. for
their Spices: By Indian Goods, we could Purchase at a better Rate, in Germany,
the Linnens of Silesia, Saxony, and Bohemia. In times of Peace we did, and may
again Traffic with France, for our India Goods against the things of Luxury,
which will always be brought from thence; and thereby we may bring the
Balance more of our side, between us and that Kingdom.

And, My Lord, there being a Peace now in agitation between Us and France, the
Wisdom of the State perhaps may think fit to insist, as an Article, that the
Prohibition of our East India Goods may be taken off in France, and if that can
be obtained, it will put the Trade of England with that Kingdom, upon much a
more equal Foot.

As to Spain, and the Streights, and Parts within the Streights, etc. it is
apparent that a large Share of the Bullion returned hither, from thence, did
proceed from the Sale there, of Callicoes, Pepper, and other East India Goods
consumed in those Parts, and also bought up by the Spaniards for their own, and
the Consumption of their Plantations in America.

It Is hoped, My Lord, the foregoing Arguments have sufficiently proved, That
this Traffic in General is beneficial to the Nation.

I shall now proceed to deliver my Opinion concerning the Bill for Prohibiting
the Wearing all East India and Persia Wrought Silks, Bengals, and Dyed,
Printed, or Stained Callicoes, which was the Second Point I proposed to handle.

They who promote this Bill do it, as is presumed, upon the following Grounds,
and Reasons.

First, They believe such a Prohibition will advance the Consumption of Wool,
and the Woollen Manufactures. Secondly, They think it will advance the Silk and
Linen Manufactures of England. Thirdly, They Imagine such a Prohibition may be
made by Act of Parliament, without Ruin to the Traffic in General.
These Three Points, My Lord, I shall Endeavor to Examine and State fairly
before Your Lordship: And I shall discourse of the East India Trade First, as
it has Relation to the Woollen Manufacture. Secondly as it has Relation to the
Silk and Linen Manufactures. And Thirdly, I shall show how this Prohibition
will affect the East India Trade in General.

And First as to the Woollen Manufacture.
TRade is the General Concern of this Nation, but every distinct Trade has a
distinct Interest. The Wisdom of the Legislative Power consists, in keeping an
even hand, to promote all, and chiefly to Encourage such Trades, as increase
the Public Stock, and add to the Kingdoms Wealth, consider d as a Collective
Body.

Trade is in its Nature Free, finds its own Channel, and best directs its own
Course: and all Laws to give it Rules, and Directions, and to Limit, and
Circumscribe it, may serve the Particular Ends of Private Men, but are seldom
Advantageous to the Public.

Governments, in Relation to it, are to take a Providential Care of the Whole,
but generally to let Second Causes work their own way; And considering all the
Links, and Chains, by which they hang together, peradventure it may be
affirmed, That, in the Main, all Trafficks whatsoever are beneficial to a
Country.

They say few Laws in a State are an Indication of Wisdom in a People, but it
may be more truly said, that few Laws relating to Trade, are the Mark of a
Nation that thrives by Traffic.

Laws to Compel the Consumption of some Commodities, and prohibit the use of
others, may do well enough, where Trade is forced, and only Artificial, as in
France; But in Countries inclined by Genius, and adapted to it by Situation,
such Laws are needless, unnatural, and can have no Effect conducive to the
Public Good.

I have often wondered upon what Grounds the Parliament proceeded in the Act
for Burying in Woollen: It Occasions indeed a Consumption of Wool, but such a
Consumption, as produces no advantage to the Kingdom.

For were it not plainly better, that this Wool made into Cloth, were
Exported, paid for, and worn by the Living abroad, than laid in the Earth here
at home.

And were it not better, That the Common People (who make up the Bulk and are
the great Consumers) should be buried in an Old Sheet, fit for nothing else, as
formerly, than in so much New Wool, which is thereby utterly lost.

The Natural Way of promoting the Woollen Manufacture, is not to force its
Consumption at home, but by wholesome Laws to contrive, That it may be wrought
cheaply in England, which consequently will enable us to command the Markets
abroad.

The only Beneficial way to England, of making Wool yield a good Price, is to
have it Manufactur'd cheaply.

No Country in Europe, Manufactures all kind of Goods so dearly as this
Kingdom; And the Dutch at this very day buy up Our Clothes here, which they
carry home, and Nap and Dye so Cheaply, that by this means they are able to
under-sell us, in our own Native Commodity.

The Act for maintenance of the Poor, is the true Bane, and Destruction to all
the English Manufactures in General. For it apparently Encourages Sloth, and
Beggary; Whereas if the Legislative Power would make some good Provision, that
Workhouses might in every Parish be Erected, and the Poor, such as are Able,
compelled to Work, So many new Hands might thereby be brought in, as would
indeed make the English Manufactures Flourish.

I have reason to think, that the People receiving Alms in this Kingdom, are
Twelve Hundred Thousand; if but half could be brought to Work, besides their
own Nourishment, their Labor one with another might produce to the Public at
20 s. per Head, at least per Annum 600,000 l.

If this could be compassed, the Woollen Manufacture would advance without any
Unnatural Driving or Compulsion. For we want Hands, not Manufactures in
England, and Laws to Compel the Poor to Work, not Work wherewithal to give them
Employment.

To make England a true Gainer by the Woollen Manufacture, we should be able to
work the Commodity so Cheap, as to under-sell all Comers to the Markets abroad.

I shall, My Lord, advance Two Propositions which may sound very strangely, and
yet perhaps will be thought very right, and true, upon a Mature Examination.

First, That it is not the Benefit, nor Interest of England in General, that
Wool should bear a high Price in Our Markets at home.

Secondly, That by a great Consumption of the VVoollen Manufactures within this
Kingdom, the Public will not reap such an advantage as some imagine.

Fine broad Cloth, was the Ancient Drapery of England, and which first
recommended this Manufacture to the Use of Foreign Countries, This is the
Natural Issue and Product of the Kingdom, inimitable abroad, and it must be
very great Carelessness, and want of Conduct, that can make us lose this Trade
so Beneficial to the Nation.

But though the Wool of Other Places is not so fit for workmanship as Ours, yet
the Commodity is abounding almost in all Countries of Europe; and if the Cloth
of England be brought any way to bear too high a Price, it may put some of Our
Neighbors either upon the Industry of Manufacturing their own better: Or upon
the Frugality to content themselves with what they can make at home; And it may
reduce other Parts, to set up new Manufactures in their own Countries, which
will be very detrimental to the Vent, especially, of Our Narrow and Courser
Clothes.

Nothing can make this Commodity Beneficial, so as to Enrich England, but to
have the VVoollen Manufacture so Cheap, as that great quantities of our Cloth
may be Exported, and at such a Rate, as that we may be able to under-sell all
Nations, and discourage all People from setting it up.

But this can never be, if by Arts, and Inventions, we endeavor to give Wool
an Unnatural Price here at Home, Upon which Score, I have advanced the Second
Proposition, That England reaps no such Advantage by a large Consumption of the
Woollen Manufacture within this Kingdom.

For it is the Interest of all Trading Nations, whatsoever, that their Home
Consumption should be little, of a Cheap and Foreign Growth, and that their own
Manufactures, should be Sold, at the highest Markets, and spent Abroad; Since
by what is Consumed at Home, one loses only what another gets, and the Nation
in General is not at all the Richer; But all Foreign Consumption is a Clear,
and Certain Profit. So that in the Woollen Manufacture, England does not get by
what is Spent here by the People, but by what is Sold Abroad in other Countries.

If the People of England are willing, and pleased to Wear Indian Silks, and
Stuffs, of which the Prime Cost in India, is not above a Fourth part of what
their own Commodities would stand them in here; and if they are thereby thus
enabled to Export so much of their own Product, whatever is so saved, is clear
Gain to the Kingdom in general. But to set this Matter in a clearer Light.

Suppose 200,000 l. per Annum of the Prime Sum sent to India, is returned in
Commodities for our own Consumption: And,

Suppose half this Sum, viz. 100,000 l. to be Returned in such Goods as are
Worn here in the stead and room of the Woollen Manufactures.

l. From 100,000 l. Prime Cost to India, there may Reasonably be expected Goods
that sell here for -- 400,000 So that by sending to India -- 100,000 We Gain
for our own Consumption clear -- 300,000

Now this must be Clear Profit to the Kingdom, Because this Sum would be
otherwise laid out and Consumed in our own Product; which Product we are by
this Means enabled to Export. For when we come to Examine into the True Reason
of the Great Wealth of Holland, we shall find it chiefly to arise from this
Frugality of Consuming at Home what is Cheap, or comes Cheaply, and carrying
Abroad what is Rich, and will yield most Money.

It Is granted That Bengals and Stained Callicoes, and other East India Goods,
do hinder the Consumption of Norwich Stuffs, Crapes, English Ratines, Shaloons,
Says, Perpetuanas, and Antherines: But the same Objection will lie against the
Use of any thing that is of Foreign Growth; For the Importation of Wine,
undoubtedly hinders the Consumption of Barley; and England could subsist, and
the Poor perhaps would have fuller Employment, if Foreign Trade were quite laid
aside; But this would ill Consist with our being Great at Sea, upon which
(under the Present Posture of Affairs in Europe) all our Safety does certainly
depend.

That the East India Goods do something interfere with the Woollen Manufacture,
must undoubtedly be granted, but the Principal Matter to be Considered, is,
Which way the Nation in General is more Cheaply supplied.

If 100,000 l. Prime Cost to India, brings Home so many Goods as stand in the
stead, and supply the room of 400,000 l. of our own Manufactures, It must
certainly be Advisable not to Prohibit such a Trade, but rather to divert the
Wool used in these our Home Manufactures, and the Craft, Labor and Industry
employed about 'em, to the Making Fine Broad Cloth, Course and Narrow Cloths,
Stuffs and other Commodities, fit for Sale in Foreign Markets; Since it is an
undoubted Truth, that 400,000 l. worth of our Native Goods Sold Abroad, does
add more to the Nations General Stock, and Wealth, than Four Millions worth of
our Home Product Consumed within the Kingdom.

But, besides, suppose the Wearing East India Wrought Silks, etc. in England
were Prohibited, and that their whole Importation were Interdicted, I do not
see how such Prohibitions would at all Advance the Vent of our Home Product.
For in one Case, If they hinder the Consumption of the Woollen Manufacture at
Home, will they not when Exported, hinder its Consumption, and the Sale of
Clothes in Foreign Parts? And in the other Case, If the English were forbid to
bring Indian Goods into Europe, will not the Dutch Import them, and thereby in
the same manner, hurt Abroad, the Vent and Consumption of our English Cloths?

Upon the whole Matter, My Lord, it is my Opinion, (which I submit to better
Judgments) That the Importation of East India and Persia Wrought Silks, Stained
Callicoes, etc. though it may somewhat interfere with the Manufactures of
Norwich, Bristol, and other particular Places; yet, that such Importation adds
to the Kingdoms main Stock, and Wealth, and is not prejudicial to the General
Woollen Manufacture of England.

And Secondly as to the Silk and Linen Manufactures.
WIsdom is most commonly in the Wrong, when it pretends to direct Nature. The
various Products of different Soiles, and Countries, is an Indication, that
Providence intended they should be helpful to each other, and mutually supply
the Necessities of one another.

And as it is great Folly to Compel a Youth to that sort of Study, to which he
is not adapted by Genius, and Inclination: So it can never be Wise, to
endeavor the introducing into a Country, either the Growth of any Commodity,
or any Manufacture, for which, nor the Soil, nor the General Bent of the People
is proper: And as forced Fruits (though they may look fair to the Eye) are
notwithstanding Tastless, and Unwholesome; So a Trade forced in this manner,
brings no National Profit, but is Prejudicial to the Public.

We have such Advantages by Situation, and in several Commodities, and
Materials, Natural, and almost peculiar to us, that if the Improvement of them
were sufficiently looked after, and encouraged by the State, we might increase
in Wealth, Greatness, and Power, peradventure beyond all Nations in Europe.

It is our Fault, if we do not enjoy the Woollen Manufacture without any
Rivalship; but undoubtedly it might be very much advanced* If Workhouses were
set up, If the Laws did Provide, and the Magistracy in the Execution did take
Care, to set the Poor to work.

Such an Increase of Hands would likewise produce more Tin, and Lead, and
enable us to afford Leather Cheaper: And it is a large Exportation, and being
able to undersell all others, in Foreign Markets, that brings National Profit.

More Hands would quicken Industry, and improve waste Ground, which would
enable us to carry out Corn, at a Cheap Rate.

And generally speaking all Laws restraining Idleness, and that will invite
People hither, must better the Manufactures, and make 'em more gainful to the
Nation.

There is no Trade so Advantageous, especially to an Island, as that of Buying
Goods in one Country, to sell them in another; and it is the Original and chief
Article of the Great Wealth in Holland. There is Gain by the Freight: It
occasions Consumption of our Home Product: It breeds Seamen, Increases
Shipping, and improves Navigation: And any Home Manufacture that hinders this
kind of Traffic, or that indeed interferes with it, is pernicious, and ought
in Wisdom, and by all Rules of Policy, to be discouraged by the Public. This
kind of Commerce England was formerly in a large possession of, and it may be
retrieved, and in the best of Times was capable of great Improvement.

Our Plantations (if we take Care to preserve them from Foreign Insults and
Invasions) as they Increase in People, will Consume more of our Home
Manufactures than we have Hands to make: They produce Commodities indispensably
necessary to this part of the World, and not to be produced elsewhere, and with
Industry and Conduct, may be made an inexhaustible Mine of Treasure to their
Mother Kingdom.

If there be such a Multitude of Hands that want Work in England, the Herring
Fishery would employ many Thousands of Men, and one Million of Money; and, the
Advantages our Situation gives us for it considered, we might at least come in
for a Share, with the Dutch, in that Trade, which brings them so immense a
Profit.

Some of the foregoing Materials are Peculiar Gifts and Blessings to this Soil;
Our Inclinations to the Sea, fit us as well as the Dutch, for the Traffic of
carrying Goods from one Country to another (the most certain Gain a Nation can
make) Our Ports are safer and fitter than theirs for this Purpose. Our
Plantation Trade, to carry it on to its Height, would require a greater Stock
than we are Masters of at present, and would Consume more of Our Manufactures,
and home Product, than we can make and furnish at Reasonable Rates. As to the
Fishery, if we are not entirely in Possession of it, and if other Nations have
been suffered to make such a Profit upon Our Coast, it has proceeded from want
of Industry in the English People, and through the Negligence of former
Governments.

In the forementioned Particulars, an unforced and a Natural Improvement may be
made in our Wealth and Substance, and it is here the Legislative Power may, to
good effect, interpose with its Care and Wisdom.

Most Countries have a certain Number of their People, who addict themselves to
Trade and Manufactures, and most Nations have limited Stock to be employed in
those Uses, which they cannot well exceed; And it is the Prudence of a State, to
see, that this Industry, and Stock, be not diverted from things profitable to
the whole, and turned upon Objects unprofitable, and perhaps dangerous to the
Public.

The Stock England formerly had running in Trade and Manufactures, was very
considerable, and I am sorry, upon a careful Inquiry, to find it so much
decreased: What remains, and more than can be gathered in many Years of Peace,
will be sufficiently employed in that Business, where the Nation is a certain
and known Gainer; and therefore should not be diverted upon uncertain Objects,
and turned upon new Inventions, in which it cannot be determined, in many
Years, whither we get or loose, and how the Balance stands: And of this
nature, and kind, are the Silk, and Linen Manufactures in England.

Silk is a Manufacture of a Foreign Extract, and not the Genuine Product of
this Country; It Employs indeed the Poor, but is not composed from a Material
of our own Growth. Whatever Encouragement it meets with, it cannot thrive with
us, being not Calculated for our Meridian: It Is fit only for frugal Nations,
where Parsimony renders Craft and Workmanship not dear, upon which score the
French, Italians, and Dutch, will always be able to under-sell us in that
Commodity, and hinder any Success we can propose. And as an Example of this,
Did not the Hollanders, lately, bring hither French Lustring, under their Seal,
which they could afford so Cheap, as to under-sell the Projectors of it here,
though they were at the Charge of Freight and Custom.

The Stock and Industry laid out on the Silk Manufacture, would be more
usefully employed, in such as are made from Materials of Our own Growth.

If the Luxury of wearing Silk could be quite Abolished, such a Reformation
would undoubtedly be beneficial to the Kingdom; but since this is not easily to
be Compassed, a wise State must consider which Way the Folly of their People
can be supplied at the cheapest rate, For, Frugality of this Nature, as
certainly enriches the whole, as it does any private Person.

There are brought from India Two sorts of Silks.

The one is of such a sort as is not made in England, and consequently only
hinders the Importation of the like kind, at a dearer Rate, from Holland,
Italy, France, Turkey and other Places.

The other is of the like sort with those made here, notwithstanding which, it
must certainly be prejudicial to the Interest of England, to forbid their
Importation from India, unless those, and all other kinds of Silk applicable to
the same Uses, could be Prohibited to be brought from Foreign Countries: since
by such Prohibition (unless the vanity it self can be cured) we only enrich
the Neighboring Nations at Our Expense.

The East India Goods since they were in use, have apparently lowered the Price
of Silks from France, Spain, and Italy, at least 25 per Cent: and if their
Importation should be prohibited, will it not follow Naturally that the
European Countries will again advance upon us?

And the French, Italians, and Dutch, who upon several Accounts are able to
underwork us, will undoubtedly fall to making and sending hither such
Commodities, as may stand in the Room here of Indian Goods, and at the low
Rates they can afford 'em, they will quickly ruin Our Silk Manufactures: And
when the Fabric is distroy'd, and the Stock and Hands employed in it, are
diverted to other Uses, they may put what Fine they please upon our Vanity.

The Dutch have such a Silk Manufacture in their Country, that by Computation,
there is Imported hither, from thence, more of that Commodity, one Year with
another than we bring from India. Most of the Velvets used here, come from
thence, and are purchased by us at a dearer rate, than could be afford'd from
India, or made here at home, if we were skilled in the Workmanship.

And notwithstanding the Dutch have so considerable a Silk Manufacture of their
own, instead of Prohibiting, they encourage the Importation of all East India
Silks: well knowing, That it is the Interest of every Nation, to go to their
own, or Foreign Markets, with Goods as cheap as they can, thereby to beat out
all others. And that the Cheapness of any Commodity, will force a way into
those Countries where it is prohibited, if any of the like sort and kind is
indulged and permitted to be worn there; Nothing being able to render the
Prohibition of Goods entirely Effectual in any Nation, but a Capacity in the
Inhabitants of such Country, to afford them at Cheaper Rates, which can hardly
be the Case of England.

As to the Linen Manufacture, it is no more the Genuine Offspring of this
Kingdom, than that of Silk.

It Is true that some of the Materials for it, may be had from our own Soil, but
not enough to supply our whole Consumption, and we can never pretend to make
the finer sort.

And if the now intended Prohibition should so Operate, as utterly to lose us
the East India Trade (which peradventure may be the Case) the Dutch may put
what rate they please upon their Callicoes; And the Dutch and French, and other
Nations, will Impose any Price upon their Fine Linnens (which Our Callicoes for
some Years have kept down) So that, Our necessary Consumption in this
Commodity, will stand us in above 40 per Cent. more than it does at present.

This Manufacture is proper only for Countries where they can have Flax and
Hemp Cheap, and where the Common People work at very easy Rates.

But though with forcing Nature, and by Art, and Industry, we could bring it to
greater Perfection, yet upon other Accounts it is perhaps not advisable, nor
for the Nations Interest, to promote it.

First, Our Soil and the Labor of the People may be employed about Materials
more Advantageous, and wherein we cannot be undersold by other Countries.

Secondly, The growth of this Manufacture would obstruct Trade, and other
Business more Important to the Nation: For*

1. Our Noble Staple of Wool is undoubtedly capable of a great Improvement, to
which the Increase of Wages (that must happen upon an Increase in the Linen
Manufacture) will be a considerable hindrance. And one cannot rise, but to the
prejudice of the other, Because we really want People and Hands to carry on
both to their full perfection. And,

2. It is more the General Interest of England to Export Woollen Manufacture in
Exchange Abroad for Linen, than to make it here at Home; which Trade has been
set afoot, and prosper'd very much, to the great Benefit of this Kingdom, since
the Prohibition of French Goods during this War.

But if we provide our selves at Home with Linen sufficient for our
Consumption, and do not want that which is brought from Silesia, Saxony,
Bohemia, and Poland, this Trade must cease; For these Northern Countries have
neither Money, nor other Commodities; and if we deal with them, we must be
contented, in a manner, to barter our Clothes, for their Linen; And it is
obvious enough, to any Considering Man, that by such a Traffic, We are not
Losers in the Balance.

In Process of Time, when England shall come to be more Peopled; And when a
long Peace shall have increased our Wealth and Stock, perhaps we may be able
not only to carry on our old Manufactures to their full height, but to embrace
new Ones, Such as are that of Silk and Linen; but as our Case stands, it seems
sufficient to let them take their own Natural Course, and not to drive them on;
For too many sorts of Businesses may be as well hurtful in the Public, as they
are often to Private Persons.

If the Nation finds a General Profit from them, their own Weight will bear
them on; but in the mean while, it cannot be Advisable, in their Favor, to
exercise any extraordinary Act of Power; and for their sake, by Prohibitions,
to distress, embroil, and disturb any settled Trade, by which, beyond all
Contradiction, the Nation, before the War, was so great a Gainer.

My Lord, After much Thought upon this Subject, I am come to these Conclusions,
within my self, which I submit to Your better Judgment.

First, That our Silk and Linen Manufactures obstruct Trades more Important,
and more profitable. Secondly, That, though a Prohibition of East India Goods,
may advance their present Interest, who are engaged in the Silk and Linen
Manufactures here, yet That it will bring no future advantage to the Kingdom.
Thirdly, That Luxury is so deeply rooted in this Nation, that should this
Prohibition pass, it will only carry us to European Markets, where, we shall
pay perhaps 50 per Cent. dearer, may be, for the same, or for Vanities of the
like Nature. So that
UPON the whole Matter, My Lord, I am humbly of Opinion, that the Importation
of wrought Silks, Bengals, Stained Callicoes, etc. does not so interfere with
Our Silk and Linen Manufactures, as to hurt the Public, and bring damage to
the Collective Body of England.

And Thirdly, As to the Effect such a Prohibition will have upon the East India
Trade in General.
IN all Argumentations, it is requisite to settle, and agree upon Principles;
for which Reason, in the beginning of this Discourse, I did endeavor to prove,
That in general the East India Trade was Profitable to this Kingdom. And I
dwelt the longer upon that Head, because some People are quite of a Contrary
Opinion, and believe it hurtful to England.

And I am satisfied that many (without Doors) promote the Bill in Question, in
hopes thereby utterly to destroy the Traffic.

And, truly My Lord, it seems plain to me, that the intended Prohibitions must
prove, though not a sudden, yet a certain destruction to it. And that it is a
lopping from this Trade, the Branches, and taking away some of the Bark, and
part of the Root: The Trunk indeed is left, but so maimed, and injured, that it
can never spread and flourish.

If it can be made appear this Prohibition is no ways to be rendered effectual:
And if it can be shown, that the said Prohibitions will utterly disable the
Present East India Company, or any other, to be hereafter Erected, from
Supporting, and Carrying on the Trade, to the Advantage of England, Your
Lordship will certainly think the Bill, now a foot, of dangerous Consequence,
and not fit to receive a Sanction in the House of Peers.

No Prohibitions of a Foreign or Domestic Commodity, can have any Effect,
without Sumptuary Laws strictly penned, and rigorously put in Execution.

For, the Importation of French Wines, and Linen, has been forbidden under
high Penalties during this War, yet the Consumption of those sort of
Commodities, is not much lessened, and they are brought in upon us, from other
Countries, at much a dearer Rate. For these Three Years last past, French Wines
have been conveyed hither by the way of Spain and Portugal, and the French
Silks, and Linnens, have been all along secretly brought, and smuggled upon our
own Coast.

Perhaps if severe Sumptuary Laws had Imposed a High Duty, or Penalty, upon the
Consumers of French Wine, Silks, and Linen, the Prohibition might have had its
designed Effect: But how such Laws could have been made Practicable, I shall
not pretend to determine.

In the same manner, if a severe Mulct, or a High Duty, can be laid on such as
shall Wear or Use any India, or Persia Wrought Silks, Bengals, etc. and if this
were superadded to the Prohibition, peradventure it might be rendered Effectual.

But, otherwise, notwithstanding the Prohibition, of Wearing such Goods, and
the Penalties upon the Retailers that shall vend them, their Consumption will
be little lessened in this Kingdom, for they will be brought in upon us from
other Countries, Scotland and Holland more especially.

However, though such a Method is peradventure the only way of keeping down
this Luxury, I am very far, My Lord, from thinking it Advisable.

For the Laws of all Countries must be suited to the Bent and Inclinations of
the People: And (which I am loath to say) there is sometimes a Necessity, they
should be a little accommodated to their depraved Manners, and Corruptions.

The People of England, who have been long accustomed to Mild Laws, and a loose
Administration, can never endure that Severity, which is needful to make such a
Prohibition have Effect: Nor can they suffer High Duties, or Penalties to be
imposed upon their Pleasures, or bear a strict Inquisition into their Furniture
and Apparel.

There is no Country without a multitude of Sumptuary Laws, but hardly a Place
can be instanced, where they are Observed, or produce any Public Good. They
were somewhat regarded in the Infancy of the Roman Commonwealth, before Riches
and Pomp, had banished Virtue, and Obedience: But their chiefest Strength was
always derived from the Sanctity, and Veneration, in which was held the Office
of Censor. And in England, they would be immediately contemned, and derided;
and any Magistrate must become the Public Scorn, that should think to put them
in Execution.

And yet without Strict Sumptuary Laws, well Observed, the Wisdom of the
Parliament will find it self eluded, when it endeavors to banish Foreign
Vanities and Luxury, in favor of our own Product and Manufactures.

For in all probability, the Consequence of such a Prohibition will be, That
Goods of the same kind, or Goods applicable to the like use, instead of those
Imported from India, will be brought hither from Abroad; and the Consumption
will not be less, but at a much dearer Rate. It may indeed somewhat better our
Manufactures, but will more Advance those of France, Italy and Holland, who can
afford to work Cheaper: And, in all appearance, will thereby prove such a drein
of this Kingdoms Treasure, as may bring utter destruction upon us.

But the principal Question is, Whether, under such Prohibitions, any Body of
Men can find their Account in carrying on this Trade?

To make this Traffic an Addition of Strength, as well as Riches to the
Kingdom, Encouragement should be given to send thither Large, and Strong Ships,
which will be Expensive to the Undertakers.

Their Business in India cannot be Managed without frequent Gifts and Presents,
to the Rajahs and Governors, according to the Practice in all the Eastern
Countries.

Forts, and Castles, with good Garrisons, are there indispensably necessary,
for the preservation of the Pepper Trade, and indeed, needful upon many other
Accounts, As Magazines for Naval Provision, and as Store Houses, in which to
lay Goods, bought in the Country, at proper Seasons: Besides they are a Safety
to Our People, from any Insults of the Natives, And a Refuge, upon any
Disorder, Revolution, or other Emergency in the Mogul's State and Empire*

A Trade Limited and Circumscribed in the Manner proposed, cannot well undergo
these Expenses, which notwithstanding are necessary for its Preservation.

I have before divided the 400,000 l. prime Cost sent to India, into two parts,
viz. Half for Foreign Exportation, and, the Other half, for home Consumption.

l. The Returns of 200,000 l. in Time of Peace might probably yield abroad --
800,000 The Returns of 200,000 l. in Time of Peace, might probably yield at
home -- 800,000 Total -- 1,600,000

But we must take Notice, that the 1,200,000 l. Profit, supposed in time of
Peace to arise from this Trade, did not, all of it, accrue to the Adventurers
in the Company, but was National, and divided among many Thousands of the
People. The Merchants, who at the Companies Sales bought Goods for Exportation,
had their Share, and the Retailers here had their Proportion, in the Gain,
which this Traffic, in the whole, might be Computed to produce.

And particularly for their Share in the 600,000 l. supposed to be gained by
our own Consumption, in time of Peace, by this Traffic: There came in, The
King for His Customs; Owners of Ships; Such as got by Victualling them; Seamen
for Wages: And, lastly, Factors and Servants, both Abroad, and at Home.

The Gain made Abstractedly by the Company, has never been Invidious: For if
their whole Stock be Computed from their Beginning, to this Day, it will be
found, by their Dividends, That they have not one Year, with another, divided
20 per Cent. which, considering the Length and Hazard of their Voyages, is not
a Profit to be envied.

But since this War, the Company have without doubt been great Losers, and
nothing but the Invincible Courage, which has been always observed in English
Merchants, could have hindered the Trade from being entirely Lost.

Notwithstanding all the Companies late Losses at Sea, and their former Ill
Conduct in India, they have not lost footing there, but have, hitherto,
preserved the Trade, indeed at their own Expense.

However, if any thing should be done that will Interrupt any great part of
their Commerce, they must apparently give it over, or sink under the Burden;
For the Charge and Expense Abroad must be full as much to support a Little, as
a more Extended Traffic.

l. If this Trade be so Restrained, by Prohibitions, as that there can be sent
to India, not above per Annum -- 200,000 The National Profit from thence
arising cannot Reasonably exceed -- 600,000 The Companies Charge, and Expense,
to Support and Carry on their Affairs Abroad, may be Modestly Computed, at per
Annum -- 100,000 Which Sum will be a great weight upon per Annum -- 600,000
But will fall lightly upon per An. 1,200,000

According to the best and most Impartial Accounts I can receive, the Bill in
Agitation, must lose England half the Trade to India in General, all the
Traffic to the Coast and Bay of Bengal, and half the Business to Surrat.

And, particularly, as to the Coast and Bay, The Company did usually send
thither Yearly Five or Six Ships, of between Six and Seven Hundred Tons each:
The Fifth part of which, returns Freighted with Saltpeter; One other Fifth
part with Fine Muslins, Floretta Yarn, and Raw Silks; The other Three parts,
with Goods by the Bill Prohibited: The Consequence of which must be, That the
Trade to the Coast and Bay, will prove so inconsiderable, that it must be
abandoned, and England reduced to buy all its Saltpeter from the Scots, Danes
or Hollanders.

I take Our home Consumption, which is half of the returns of the Prime Cost
sent to India, to be the main Foundation upon which the Trade stands,
especially, in a Time of War.

It Is that alone can bear the Incident Charges at home, and Expenses abroad,
necessary for the Support of so large a Traffic; And it is that only, can
enable any Company to endure Losses at Sea, by Storm, or a Foreign Enemy.

What Encouragement can there be to go on with so vast a Business, if our
Merchants must singly depend upon the Markets abroad? One Country, to advance
their Own Manufactures, may prohibit Our Goods, The Hollanders will buy 'em up
at their own Rates, when their Use is forbidden here, And they will be a Drug,
and blown upon, all Over Europe.

There is great difference between a Merchants having a Choice, or a Necessity
to sell his Ware. In one Case he may in some Measure make his own Price, In the
Other he must take what is offered.

To speak generally, the East India Trade is profitable to the Adventurers in
time of Peace; but rarely so in seasons of War and Trouble. In time of Peace
They enrich their Country by a Foreign Vent and Exportation of their Goods, and
in time of War, the home Consumption chiefly enables 'em to support and carry
on their Traffic.

Your Lordships may see all along in this Discourse, that it is my Opinion, They
do not interfere with such Manufactures as it is the Interest of England to
promote and encourage: But though the prohibited East India Goods did greatly
prejudice our own Product and Manufacture; yet I do not think a Prohibition of
'em at all advisable, during the War, for these Reasons:

First, Our Condition is so weak, that we cannot struggle with any the bad
Events, with which a new Council may be attended.

Secondly, If to their Losses at Sea, their Misfortunes in India on the Score
of Every's Pyracy, and their want of Money, arising from the general Want of
Species in the Nation, A Prohibition of the Consumption of so many of their
Goods be likewise added; It Is to be apprehended, That upon such a
discouragement, the Traders to those Parts, will by degrees withdraw from
thence, their Effects, and Stock, and quite abandon the whole Traffic.

Thirdly, If this should happen, and, that either through Sullenness, Or
because the Prohibition does really bring insuperable difficulties, Our
Merchants should actually quit the Trade; The Dutch, Our Rivals in all other
Traffic, will certainly seize the Derelict. And such an Addition to their
Riches and Power at Sea, can by no means be consistent with the Welfare, and
Safety of this Nation.

My Lord,

In this Discourse (which proves much longer than I intended) I have
endeavored to show your Lordship, First, That this Trade is Beneficial to the
Kingdom. Secondly, That it is not prejudicial to the General Woollen Manufacture
of England. Thirdly, That it does not so interfere with Our Silk and Linen
Manufactures, as to hurt the Public. Fourthly, That the intended Prohibitions
may probably occasion an utter Loss of the whole Traffic.

No Alteration in so considerable a Branch of our Foreign Commerce should be
attempted, unless the whole matter had been for many Months considered
maturely, by a Council of Trade, composed of the ablest Men in the Kingdom. And
I will venture to affirm, That no sound Judgment can be made in things of this
Nature, without contemplating the universal Posture and Business of the Nation:
And when so important Deliberations are a-foot, the Number of the People should
be examined, Their annual Consumption both of Home and Foreign Materials should
be well stated, The ready Money and other Stock of the Kingdom should be
inquired into, The Sum of Money and Hands employed in every distinct Trade,
should be duly contemplated; And upon such a general Inspection and View of the
whole, we might be Ripe to deliberate on any single Point.

Any false Measures and rash Councils in Affairs so important, are hardly
capable of a future Remedy.

The Hollanders have in their Possession all the Spice Islands, which they have
strongly fortified, and by this means they lay a kind of Excise upon those
necessary Commodities, which all Europe is forced to pay.

By the seizing of Bantam they have got almost Three Parts in Four of the
Pepper-Trade.

Tuns Brought into Europe since the Loss of Bantam, and before the present War
(Communibus Annis) of Pepper about -- 5000 Of which Imported by the French and
Danes about -- 500 By the English about -- 900 By the Dutch about -- 3600 Total
-- 5000

The Hollanders, at this time are very Powerful in India: They have many Good
Forts and Castles well provided, and large Colonies of Men; And They can, upon
any Occasion, call together there 40 strong Frigates: So that if it agreed with
the present Circumstances of their Affairs in Europe, or with the Nature of the
Alliance they are engaged in, It Is undoubtedly in their Power, to Engross this
rich Traffic wholly to themselves, and to expel us for ever from those
Countries.

Perhaps they may not think it a safe advice, to attempt doing this by Force,
but we shall have no reason to complain, If they take in hand, what we give
over and abandon.

But suppose they should drive us from thence by force of Arms, Or that we
should quit the Trade to them through Negligence and Folly, It will be worth
while to consider, what addition of Wealth and Strength, an entire Monopoly of
East India Goods may prove to that Commonwealth.

And, My Lord, if I am not much deceived in Political Arithmetic, It would
bring Yearly a much greater Mass of Treasure to the United Provinces than is
brought into Europe from the Mines of Peru and Mexico.

This side of the World is so fond of those Vanities, that if they could be had
but at One Market, such a Market might, by their Means, draw from the rest of
Europe, continually per Annum, at least Six Millions.

To prove this Assertion, will take up more time than consists with the Brevity
intended in this Discourse, I shall therefore only give one Instance, and that
is of Pepper, by which some Judgment may be made of all the other Commodities.

l. s. d. Pepper 5000 Tuns at 2 d. per l. as it may Cost the Dutch in India
amounts to -- 74,666 13 4 Add to this 3 d. per l. for Freight into Holland,
then it costs 5 d. per l. which amounts to -- 186,666 13 4 Ditto 5000 Tons sold
in Holland at 12 d. per l. the profit being 7 d. per l. will amount to --
261,333 6 8

But this Commodity is grown so necessary, and has so obtained, and is of such
general Use, that it may be sold in Holland at Six Shillings per l. which is
less than any of the other Spices, as Cheap in India as Pepper.

l. s. d. Then 5000 Tons sold in Holland at 6 s. per l. the profit being 5 s. 7
d. per l. will amount to -- 2,498,836 13 4

If from the Single Article of Pepper, such a Sum as 2,498,836 l. may be
raised, It will not be difficult to conceive, That by raising the Price of
other Spices, Wrought Silks, Callicoes, Raw Silks, Salt Petre, and other Indian
Goods, the Hollanders by an entire Monopoly of this Trade, may drein the rest
of Europe, every Year, of, at least, Six Millions.

Considering their Naval Force, and their Competition with us in Trade, Such an
addition of Wealth must make them a very Formidable People.

And though they may not peradventure turn their Strength to hurt the Traffic
or Peace of England, yet, it is no very remote fear, to apprehend That
notwithstanding all their Riches, they may at last become a Prey to France.

And if the French, with the Dutch Shipping in their right, and as their Lords,
should once become Masters of this Rich Trade, such an Accession to that Wise,
Well Peopled, and Large Empire, must prove our Ruin.

And I must here take Notice, That (as I am informed) all the Saltpeter,
produced in this side of the World, is not sufficient to take such a Place of
Strength as Dunkirk. If the Fact be so, as War is made now, must not whatever
Country can obtain the sole Trade to India, and the Monopoly of that Commodity,
give Laws to the rest of Europe?

The principal Care, My Lord, incumbent upon Persons in Your Station, is very
Cautiously to weigh New Councils, to which You are adapted by Nature and
Practice.

Wise Men will never engage in Rash Advices; from whence, if they succeed not,
there is no good Retreat: And, Empericks of State only, will be tampering at
every turn, with the Body Politic, and venturing upon bold and unsafe Remedies.

That the Common People want Work, That there is a general deadness of Trade,
And that our Home Manufactures are in an ill Condition, must certainly be
granted; But these Mischiefs proceed not from the Importation of East India
Goods, and may be plainly assigned to other Causes.

UPON the Whole Matter, My Lord, I am of Opinion (with Submission to better
Judgments) that the intended Prohibitions of East India and Persia Wrought
Silks, etc. will be destructive to the Trade in General, and hazard its being
utterly lost to the Kingdom.

FINIS.

